<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos013)  [Next](joe000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 14:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA 14

This chapter concludes the book, with gracious promises to repenting
sinners, to returning backsliders. It begins with an exhortation to
Israel to return to the Lord, seeing he was their God, and they had
fallen by sin from prosperity into adversity, temporal and spiritual,
[Hos 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001); and they are directed what
to say to the Lord, upon their return to him, both by way of petition,
and of promise and of resolution how to behave for the future,
encouraged by his grace and mercy, [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002); and they are told what the Lord,
by way of answer, would say to them, [Hos
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004); and what he would be to them;
and what blessings of grace he would bestow on them; and in what
flourishing and fruitful circumstances they should be, [Hos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005); and the chapter ends with a
character of such that attend to and understand those things; and with a
recommendation of the ways of the Lord, which are differently regarded
by men, [Hos 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009).

[Hosea 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 14:1</span></span>

O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God,.... From whom they had revolted
and backslidden; whose worship and service they had forsaken, and whose
word and ordinances they had slighted and neglected, and had served
idols, and had given into idolatry, superstition, and will worship; and
are here exhorted to turn again to the Lord by repentance and
reformation, to abandon their idols, and every false way, and cleave to
the Lord with full purpose of heart; and the rather, since he was their
God; not only their Creator, Preserver, and kind Benefactor, but their
God, by his special choice of them above all people; by his covenant
with them; by his redemption of them; and by their profession of him;
and who was still their God, and ready to receive them, upon their
return to him: and a thorough return is here meant, a returning "even
unto" (w), or quite up to the Lord thy God; it is not a going to him
halfway, but a going quite up to his seat; falling down before him,
acknowledging sin and backslidings, and having hold upon him by faith as
their God, Redeemer, and Saviour: hence, from the way of speaking here
used, the Jews (x) have a saying, as Kimchi observes,

"great is repentance, for it brings a man to the throne of glory;''

the imperative may be here used for the future, as some take it; and
then it is a prediction of the conversion of Israel, "thou shalt return,
O Israel" (y); and which was in part fulfilled in the first times of the
Gospel, which met with many of the Israelites dispersed among the
Gentiles, and was the means of their conversion; and will have a greater
accomplishment when all Israel shall be converted and saved:

for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity; or "though thou art fallen" (z);
into sin, and by it into ruin, temporal and spiritual; from a state of
great prosperity and happiness, both in things civil and religious, into
great adversity, and calamities of every sort; yet return, repent,
consider from whence thou art fallen, and by what; or thou shall return,
be recovered and restored, notwithstanding thy fall, and the low estate
in which thou art. The Targum is,

"return to the fear of the Lord.''

\(w\) "asque ad Dominum", Montanus, Tigurine version, Oecolampadius,
Schmidt, Burkius. (x) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 86. 1. (y) "revertere", i. e.
"reverteris", Schmidt. (z) "etsi corruisti", Luther apud Tarnovium.

[Hosea 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 14:2</span></span>

Take with you words, and turn to the Lord,.... Not mere words without
the heart, but such as come from it, and express the true sense of it;
words of confession, as the Targum; by which sin is acknowledged, and
repentance declared, and forgiveness asked. Kimchi's note is a very good
one;

"he (that is, God) does not require of you, upon return, neither gold
nor silver, nor burnt offerings, but good works; therewith confessing
your sins with your whole hearts, and not with your lips only;''

and which best agrees with evangelical repentance and Gospel times, in
which ceremonial sacrifices are no more; and not any words neither; not
tautologies and multiplicity of words, or words of man's prescribing,
but of the Lord's directing to and dictating; the taught words of the
Holy Ghost, which he suggests and helps men to, who otherwise know not
how to pray, or what to pray for; and these expressed under a sense of
sin, and sorrow for it, and in the strength of faith, and are as follow:

say unto him, take away all iniquity; which is to be understood, not of
the taking away of the being of sin; which, though very desirable, is
not to be expected in this life: nor of the expiation of sin by the
sacrifice of Christ, which is done already; he has taken the sins of his
people from them to himself, and has bore them, and carried them away,
and removed them out of the sight of divine justice, which is satisfied
for them: nor of the taking away of the power and dominion of sin; which
is done by the Spirit of God, and the efficacy of his grace on the
hearts of converted persons: nor of an extinguishing all sense of sin in
men; for none have a quicker sense of it than pardoned sinners, or are
more humble on the account of it, or more loath it; but of the taking of
it away from the conscience of a sensible truly penitent sinner or
backslider, by a fresh application of pardoning grace and mercy: sin is
a burden, a heavy one, when the guilt of it is charged and lies upon the
conscience; pardon of sin applied is a lifting up, as the word here used
signifies, a taking off of this burden from it, a causing it to pass
away; which is done by the fresh sprinkling of the blood of Jesus, which
purges the conscience from sin, and clears it from the guilt of it, and
speaks peace and comfort; and which is the blessing here prayed for, and
every backslider, sensible of his case, sees he stands in need of, and
even to have "all" taken away; for, if but one sin remains, and the
guilt of it continues, he can have no peace, nor stand up under it; but,
when God forgives sin, he forgives "all" sin;

and receive us graciously; receive into grace and favour, that is,
openly and manifestly; the free love and favour of God is always the
same, but the manifestations of it are different; sometimes more or
less, and sometimes scarce any, if any at all, and is the ease here; and
therefore a petition is made for the remembrance of it, for a renewed
discovery and application of it: or accept us in a gracious manner;
acceptance with God is not on account of the merits of men, but his own
grace and mercy; not through any works of righteousness done by them,
which are impure and imperfect; but through Christ the Beloved, in whom
God is well pleased with the persons, and services, and sacrifices of
his people, and receives all for his sake, and which is here asked for;
as well as that he would take them into his protection, and open
affection. It is, in the original text, only, "receive good" (a);
meaning either their good hearts, made so by the grace of God; their
broken hearts and contrite spirits, which are sacrifices not despised by
him, but acceptable to him through Christ: or their good words they were
bid to take, and did take, nod use; their good prayers offered up
through Christ, in his name, and in the exercise of faith, which are the
Lord's delight: or their good works, done from a principle of love, in
faith, to the glory of God, and with which sacrifices he is well
pleased: or rather, as the same word signifies, to give as well as
receive; see [Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018). It may be
rendered, "give good" (b); take good, and give it to us, even all good
things, temporal and spiritual, especially all spiritual blessings in
Christ; all which good things come from God, and are his gifts;
particularly the good Spirit of God, and his grace, which the Lord gives
to them that ask; and all supplies of grace from Christ; and more
especially, as some interpreters of note explain it, the righteousness
of Christ imputed and applied; which goes along with pardoning grace, or
the taking away of sin, [Zac 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004); and
is the good, the better, the best robe; a gift, the gift of grace; a
blessing received from the Lord, and to be asked for of him:

so will we render the calves of our lips; not calves, bullocks, and
oxen, for sacrifice, as under the law; but the sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving for pardoning grace, for a justifying righteousness, and
for all good things: these are the fruit of the lips, as the apostle
interprets it, [Heb 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015); and which
are sacrifices more acceptable to God than calves of a year old, or an
ox or bullock that has horns and hoofs, [Psa
69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030). This shows that the text and
context refer to Gospel times, to the times of the Messiah; in which the
Jews themselves say all sacrifices will cease but the sacrifice of
praise. The Targum is,

"turn to the worship of the Lord, and say, let it he with thee to
forgive sins, and may we be received as good, and the words of our lips
be accepted with thee as bullocks for good pleasure upon the altar.''

\(a\) "accipe bonum", Pagninus, Montanus: Munster, Cocceius, Schmidt,
Burkius. (b) "Acceptum confer bonum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Drusius.

[Hosea 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 14:3</span></span>

Ashur shall not save us,.... This is still a continuation of the words
repenting and returning Israel are directed to make use of before the
Lord, declaring they would not do any more as they had done; to Assyria,
or the kings of Assyria, as the Targum, for help, and desire assistance,
and expect deliverance and salvation from thence; see [Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013);

we will not ride upon horses; to seek for help elsewhere; or go to Egypt
for them, as they had done; or put their trust in them for safety, in a
time of war; or think to make their escape by them when in danger; see
[Psa 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008);

neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods;
that is, say so to, or concerning, their idols, which were made by their
hands, or by their orders, as they had formerly done to the golden calf
in the wilderness, and to the calves at Dan and Bethel; see [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004); now, by all these expressions is
meant, that they would determine not to put any confidence in any
creature, or in any creature performance; that they would not trust in
their own merits, but in the mercy of God through Christ for the of
their sins; nor in any works of righteousness for their justification
before God, and acceptance with him; nor expect salvation in any other
way than by the free grace of God, and his abundant mercy in Christ:

for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy; and in thee only; hereby
declaring that the Lord was the only Saviour; that there was salvation
in Christ, and in no other; and that they would have no other saviour
but him; that they would look to the mercy of God proclaimed in him, and
communicated from and through him, the mercy seat, and to his mercy
alone for eternal life; in whom the most destitute persons, as the
fatherless, who are destitute of friends, of help and assistance, of
counsel and advice, find favour, kindness, and mercy, even such as are
most hopeless and helpless; which is a great encouragement to look to
the Lord, to trust in him, and hope in his mercy.

[Hosea 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 14:4</span></span>

I will heal their backslidings,.... This and what follows is the Lord's
answer to the above prayer; and this clause particularly is an answer to
that petition, "take away all iniquity", [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002); sins are diseases, natural and
hereditary, nauseous and loathsome, mortal, and incurable but by the
grace of God, and blood of Christ; backslidings are relapses, which are
dangerous things; Christ is the only Physician, who heals all the
diseases of sin, and these relapses also; he will do it, he has promised
it, and never turns away any that apply to him for it; and which he does
by a fresh application of his blood, whereby he takes away sin, heals
the conscience wounded with it, and restores peace and comfort; which is
a great encouragement to take words, and return unto him; see [Hos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001);

I will love them freely; this is in answer to that petition, "receive
us, graciously"; or "receive good", or rather "give good", [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002); not that the love of God or
Christ begins when sinners repent and turn to him, or he applies his
pardoning grace, since his love is from everlasting; but that in so
doing he manifests his love, and will continue in it, nor shall anything
separate from it: and this love, as it is freely set upon the objects of
it, without any merits of theirs, or any motives in them, but flows from
the free sovereign will and pleasure of God in Christ; so it is as
freely manifested, and continues upon the same bottom, and is displayed
in a most liberal and profuse donation of blessings of grace to them:
this love is free in its original, and is liberal and bountiful in the
effects of it; and makes the objects of it a free, willing, and
bountiful people too:

for mine anger is turned away from him: from Israel, which, under former
dispensations of Providence, seemed to be towards him, at least when
under his frowns, resentment, and displeasure, as is the case of that
people at this day; but when they shall return to the Lord, and he shall
manifest and apply his pardoning grace to them, his anger will appear no
more, and they shall be in a very happy and comfortable condition, as
Israel or the church declares, [Isa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001); which refers to the same times
as these words do; see [Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026); and
compare [Psa 85:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#002); where a
manifestation of pardoning grace is called the Lord's turning himself
from the fierceness of his anger; and especially this suits with Gospel
times, satisfaction being made for sin by the sacrifice of Christ.

[Hosea 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 14:5</span></span>

I will be as the dew unto Israel,.... To spiritual Israel, to those that
return to the Lord, take with them words, and pray unto him, whose
backslidings are healed, and they are freely loved; otherwise it is said
of apostate Israel or Ephraim, that they were "smitten, and their root
dried up, and bore no fruit", [Hos
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#016). These words, and the whole,
context, respect future times, as Kimchi observes; even the conversion
of Israel in the latter day, when they shall partake of all the
blessings of grace, signified by the metaphors used in this and the
following verses. These words are a continuation of the answer to the
petitions put into the mouths of converted ones, promising them many
favours, expressed in figurative terms; and first by "the dew", which
comes from heaven, is a great blessing of God, and is quickening, very
refreshing and fruitful to the earth: and the Lord is that unto his
people as the dew is to herbs, plants, and trees of the earth; he is
like unto it in his free love and layout, and the discoveries of it to
them; which, like the dew, is of and from himself alone; is an
invaluable blessing; better than life itself; and is not only the cause
of quickening dead sinners, but of reviving, cheering, and refreshing
the drooping spirits of his people; and is abundance, never fails, but
always continues, [Pro 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012); and so
he is in the blessings of his grace, and the application of them; which
are in heavenly places, in Christ, and come down from thence, and in
great abundance, like the drops of dew; and fall silently, insensibly,
and unawares, particularly regenerating grace; and are very cheering and
exhilarating, as forgiveness of sin, a justifying righteousness,
adoption, &c. [Deu 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013); and also in
the Gospel, and the doctrines of it, which distil as dew; these are of
God, and come down from heaven; seem little in themselves, but of great
importance to the conversion of sinners, and comfort of saints; bring
many blessings in them, and cause great joy and fruitfulness wherever
they come with power, [Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002). The
Targum is,

"my Word shall be as dew to Israel;''

the essential Word of God, the Messiah; of whose incarnation of a virgin
some interpret this; having, like the dew, no father but God, either in
his divine or human nature; but rather it is to be understood of the
blessings of grace he is to his people as Mediator; being to them
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and every other,
even their all it, all:

he shall grow as the lily; to which the church and people of God are
sometimes compared, especially for their beauty and comeliness in
Christ, Solomon in all his glory not being arrayed like one of these;
particularly for their unspotted purity, being clothed with fine linen,
clean and white, the white raiment of Christ's righteousness, and having
their garments washed and made white in his blood; see [Sol
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001); and here for its growth. The root
of the lily lies buried in the earth a long time, when it seems as if it
was dead; but on a sudden it springs out of the earth, and runs up to a
great height, and becomes very flourishing; which is not owing to
itself, it "toils not"; but to the dew of heaven: so God's elect in a
state of nature are dead, but, being quickened by the grace of God,
spring up on a sudden, and grow very fast; which is not owing to
themselves, but to the dews of divine grace, the bright shining of the
sun of righteousness upon them, and to the influences of the blessed
Spirit; and so they grow up on high, into their Head Christ Jesus, and
rise up in their affections, desires, faith and hope to heavenly things,
to the high calling of God in Christ, and become fruitful in grace, and
in good works. The Targum is,

"they shall shine as the lily;''

see [Mat 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029);

and cast forth his roots as Lebanon; as the tree, or trees, of Lebanon,
as the Targum; and so Kimchi, who adds, which are large, and their roots
many; or as the roots of the trees of Lebanon, so Jarchi; like the
cedars there, which, as the word here used signifies, "struck" (c) their
roots firm in that mountain, and stood strong and stable, let what winds
and tempests soever blow: thus, as in the following, what one metaphor
is deficient in, another makes up. The lily has but a weak root, and is
easily up; but the cedars in Lebanon had roots firm and strong, to which
the saints are sometimes compared, as here; see [Psa
92:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012); and this denotes their
permanency and final perseverance; who are rooted in the love of God,
which is like a root underground from all eternity, and sprouts forth in
regeneration, and is the source of all grace; is itself immovable, and
in it the people of God are secured, and can never be rooted out; and
they may be said to "strike" their roots in it, as the phrase here, when
they exercise: a strong faith in it, and are firmly persuaded of their
interest in it; see [Eph 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017); they
are also rooted in Christ, who is the root of Jesse, of David, and of
all the saints; from whom they have their life, their nourishment and
fruitfulness, and where they remain unmoved, and strike their roots in
him, by renewed acts of faith on him, claiming their interest in him;
and are herein so strongly rooted and grounded, that all the winds and
storms of sin, Satan, and the world, cannot eradicate them; nay, as
trees are more firmly rooted by being shaken, so are they; see [Col
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007). The Targum is,

"they shall dwell in the strength of their land, as a tree of Lebanon,
which sends forth its branch.''

\(c\) "percutiet", Montanus, Tarnovius, Rivet, Cocceius; "figet",
Calvin, Pareus; "defiget"; Zanchius; "et infiget", Schmidt; "incutiet",
Drusius.

[Hosea 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 14:6</span></span>

His branches shall spread,.... As the well rooted cedars in Lebanon; see
[Num 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006). This respects the
propagation of the church of God, and the interest of Christ in the
world, as in the first times of the Gospel, and will be in the latter
day; when the Gospel shall be spread everywhere; churches set up in all
places; the Jews converted, and the fulness of the Gentiles brought in;
and these like spreading branches, and fruitful boughs, abounding in
grace and good works. The Targum is,

"they shall multiply or increase with sons and daughters:''

and his beauty shall be as the olive tree; which lies in its being laden
with excellent fruit, and being always green; for which reasons
particular believers, and the whole church of God, are sometimes
compared to it; having that fatness in them, with which God and men are
honoured; and that true grace, which is signified by oil in the vessels
of the heart, and is called the unction and anointing of the Holy One;
and they persevering in this grace to the end, which is evergreen and
durable, immortal, and dies not; see [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008). Here again it may be observed,
that the trees of Lebanon, though they had strong roots, and spreading
branches, yet were not fruitful; and the deficiency of that metaphor is
supplied by this of the olive:

and his smell as Lebanon; as the trees of Lebanon, the cedars, trees of
frankincense, and other odoriferous trees and plants, which grew upon
it; here what is wanting in the olive tree, whose smell is not so
grateful, is made up by this simile of the trees of Lebanon, and the
smell of them; which may denote the sweet and grateful smell the Lord
smells in his people, or his gracious acceptance of them in Christ;
whose garments of righteousness and salvation on them are as the smell
of Lebanon; and whose graces in them exceed the smell of all spices; and
whose prayers are odours, and their praises a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savour to God; see [Sol 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010).
Some render it, "as incense" (d) called "lebonah" in Hebrew, from whence
the mountain is thought to have its name, frankincense growing upon it.
So the Targum,

"and their smell as the smell of the incense of spices.''

Jarchi says, as the sanctuary, which was made of the cedars of Lebanon.

\(d\) "Ut thuris", Grotius.

[Hosea 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 14:7</span></span>

They that dwell under his shadow shall return,.... Either under the
shadow of Lebanon, as Japhet and Jarchi; the shadow of that mountain, or
of the trees that grew upon it; or under the shadow of Israel, the
church, to which young converts have recourse, and under which they sit
with pleasure; or rather under the shadow of the Lord Israel was called
to return unto, and now return, [Hos
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001); as the Israelites will in the
latter day. So the Targum,

"and they shall be gathered out of the midst of their captivity, they
shall dwell under the shadow of their Messiah;''

thus truly gracious persons sit under the shadow of Christ, who come to
themselves, and return unto the Lord; even under the shadow of his word
and ordinances, where they desire to sit, and do sit with delight and
pleasure, as well as in the greatest safety; and find it a very
refreshing and comfortable shadow to them; even a shadow from the heat
of avenging justice, a fiery law, the fiery darts of Satan, and the fury
of the world; and, like the shadow of a great rock in a weary land,
exceeding pleasing and cheering to weary travellers; see [Sol
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003) [Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004);

they shall revive as the corn: which first dies, and then is quickened;
or which, after a cold nipping winter, at spring revives again: thus do
believers under the dews of divine grace, under the shadow of Christ,
and the influences of his Spirit: or, "shall revive with corn" (e); by
means of it; by which may be signified the corn of heaven, angels' food,
the hidden manna, the Gospel of Christ, and Christ himself, the bread of
life; by which the spirits of his people are revived, their souls upheld
in life, and their graces quickened; which they find and eat, and it is
the joy and rejoicing of their hearts:

and grow as the vine: which, though weak, and needs support, and its
wood unprofitable; yet grows and spreads very much, and brings forth
rich fruit in clusters: so the saints, though they are weak in
themselves, and need divine supports, and when they have done all they
can are unprofitable servants; yet through the power of divine grace,
which is like the dew, they grow in every grace, and are filled with the
blessings of it, and bring forth much fruit to the glory of God:

and the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon; like the wine of
those vines which grow on Mount Lebanon, and judged to be the best. On
Mount Lebanon, about the midway between the top and the bottom of it,
there is now a convent called Canobine, situated in a very pleasant
place; and Le Bruyn in his travels relates, that it is preferable to all
other places on account of its wines, which are the richest and finest
in the world; they are very sweet, of a red colour, and so oily that
they stick to the glass. At Lebanon was a city called by the Greeks
Ampeloessa, from the excellency of its wine, as Grotius from Pliny (f)
observes. Gabriel Sionita (g) assures us, that even to this day the
wines of Libanus are in good reputation. Kimchi relates from Asaph, a
physician, that the wines of Lebanon, Hermon, and Carmel, and of the
mountains of Israel and Jerusalem, and of the mountains of Samaria, and
of the mountains of Caphtor Mizraim, were the best of wines, and
exceeded all others for scent, taste, and medicine. Japhet interprets
it, the smell of their vine afar off was as the wine of Lebanon; and so
Kimchi, the smell of the wine of the vine, to which Israel is compared,
is like the smell of the wine of Lebanon. This may denote the
savouriness of truly converted gracious souls, of their graces,
doctrines, life, and conversation. Some choose to render it, "their
memory (h) shall be as the wine of Lebanon"; so the Targum interprets it
of

"the memory of their goodness;''

the saints obtain a good report through faith, and have a good name,
better than precious ointment; their memory is blessed; they, are had in
everlasting remembrance; the memory of them is not only dear to the
people of God in after ages; but the memory of their persons, and of
their works, is exceeding grateful to God and Christ.

\(e\) , Sept. "vivent tritico", V. L. "vivificabunt frumento", Munster,
Castalio; so Syr. & Ar. (f) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 18. (g) Apud Calmet,
Dictionary, on the word "Wine". (h) "memoria ejus", Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Tarnovius, Cocceius, Castalio, Schmidt, Burkius.

[Hosea 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 14:8</span></span>

Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with idols?.... This is to
be understood, not of apostate Ephraim, as in the times of the prophet,
who was so wedded and glued to the idols, that there was no hope of
getting him from them; and therefore is bid to let him alone, [Hos
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#017); but of Ephraim Israel returning
to God at his call, under the influence of his grace, in the latter day,
[Hos 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001). Idols are the same with the
works of their hands, [Hos 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003); and
to be interpreted, not of graven or molten images, to the worship of
which the Jews have not been addicted since their captivity to this day;
see [Hos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004); but of the idols of
their hearts, their impiety, their unbelief, their rejection of the
Messiah, which, at the time of their conversion, they will loath, abhor,
and mourn over; likewise the traditions of their elders, they are now
zealous and tenacious of, and prefer even to the written word; but will
now relinquish them, and embrace the Gospel of Christ; as well as the
idol of their own righteousness they have always endeavoured to
establish; but shall now renounce, and receive Christ as the Lord their
righteousness. The like to this is to be found in common in all truly
penitent and converted sinners; who, being made sensible of the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, detest and abhor it, and declare they will
have nothing to do with it; not but that it continues in them, and has
to do with them, and they with that; yet not so as to live and walk in
it; to yield their members as instruments of it; to serve and obey it as
their master; to make provision for it, and to have the course of their
lives under the direction and power of it; and so likewise, being
convinced of the imperfection and insufficiency of their own
righteousness to justify them, they will have nothing to do with that in
the business of justification before God, and acceptance with him: now
these are the words of the Lord, affirming what Ephraim should say, as
Kimchi rightly observes; he promises for him, as he well might, since it
is he that gives repentance to Israel, and works in his people
principles of grace, and enables them both to will and to do, to make
such holy resolutions, and perform them. Some render the words, "O
Ephraim, what have I to do" (i)? &c. and take them to be words of God
concerning himself, declaring he would have nothing to do with idols,
nor suffer them in his service, nor should they; for "what concord hath
Christ with Belial?" or "what agreement hath the temple of God with
idols?" [Co2 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015); but the former
sense is much best; rather what Schmidt suggests is more agreeable, who,
rendering the words in the same way, makes them to be the words of a
believing Gentile returning and dwelling under the shadow of Israel; so
he interprets [Hos 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#007), and takes
this to be the language of such an one throughout. The Targum is,

"they of the house of Israel shall say, what is it to us to serve idols
any more?''

I have heard him; says the Lord; Ephraim bemoaning himself, repenting of
his sins, and confessing them; his prayers for pardon and acceptance,
and the resolutions made by him in the strength of divine grace, [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002); see [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018); and this is what his idols he
once served could not do, who had ears, but heard not; but the Lord not
only heard, but answered, and granted his request. So the Targum,

"I by my Word will receive the prayer of Israel, and will have mercy on
him:''

and observed him; looked at him, and on him; with an eye of pity and
compassion; with a favourable and propitious look, as the Lord does
towards those that are poor, and of a contrite spirit; observed the ways
and steps he took in returning to him; marked his tears and
humiliations, groans and moans, and took notice of his wants in order to
supply them;

I am like a green fir tree: these are the words of the Lord continued;
though some take them to be the words of Ephraim; or, as Schmidt, of the
Gentile believer, like those of David, [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008); but they best agree with Christ,
who may be compared to such a tree, as he is to many others in
Scripture; because a choice one, as he is to his Father, and to all
believers, chosen and precious, lovely and beloved; a tall tree, so
Christ is highly exalted as Mediator, higher than the kings of the
earth, above the angels in heaven, yea, higher than the heavens. The
boughs of this tree, as Jarchi and Kimchi observe, bend downward so low
as to be laid hold on; Christ, though the high and lofty One, dwells
with humble souls, and suffers himself to be laid hold upon by the faith
of everyone that comes to him. Pliny says (k), that this tree is of a
cheerful aspect, smooth, and scarce any knots upon it; and its leaves so
thick that a shower of rain will not pass through it: Christ is most
amiable, and altogether lovely to look at in his person and fulness; and
he looks in a loving smiling manner upon his people; he is without any
knot of sin or corruption in him, as to principle or practice; and is a
delightful shade from the wrath of God, or rage of man, from the heat of
a fiery law, and the darts of Satan: and as this tree, as here, is ever
green, so he is always the same; he ever lives, and his people in him,
and by him; his fulness always continues to supply them. Once more, the
fir tree is the habitation of the stork, an unclean creature by the law
of God; so Christ is the dwelling place of sinners, he receives them,
and converses with them, [Psa 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017).
The Septuagint version renders it, "as a thick juniper tree": which
naturalists say (l) has such a virtue in it, as by the smell to drive
away serpents. So the old serpent the devil was drove away by Christ in
the wilderness, in the garden, and on the cross; and resisting by faith,
holding out his blood and righteousness, causes him to flee from the
saints, The Arabic version is, "as the fruitful cypress tree"; which is
of a good smell, and its wood very durable; and so may be expressive of
the savour of Christ, his righteousness and sacrifice, the graces of his
Spirit, and of his duration. Some take this to be a promise that Ephraim
should be as a green fir tree, so Aben Ezra; with which agrees the
Targum,

"I by my word will make him as the beautiful fir tree;''

and to which sometimes the saints are compared; see [Isa
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019); and this being a tree that
bears no fruit, it follows, to make up that defect in the metaphor,

from me is thy fruit found; from Christ are all the spiritual blessings
of grace, peace, pardon, righteousness, adoption, a right and meetness
for eternal life, and that itself; all the fruits and graces of the
Spirit, as faith, hope, love, &c. and all good works, which spring from
union with him, are done in his strength, and influenced by his grace
and example; see [Phi 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#011).

\(i\) "Ephraim, vel O quid mihi amplius", &c. Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Tigurine version, Castalio, Cocceius, Schmidt, Burkius. (k)
Nat. Hist. l. 16. c. 10. (l) Varinus apud Rivet. in loc.

[Hosea 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 14:9</span></span>

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent,

and he shall know them?.... Contained in this book, and particularly in
this chapter; which expresses so much of the goodness of God and grace
of Christ to Israel; though it may be applied to the whole Scripture,
and to all the mysteries and doctrines of the Gospel, respecting Christ
and his grace; and be a recommendation of these to the consideration of
every wise and prudent man; where he will find enough to exercise his
wisdom and understanding; though he need not be discouraged in his
search and inquiry into them. It suggests as if there were but few such
wise persons, and that they are the only wise men that do know and
understand these things; and all others are but fools, let them be
thought as wise as they will:

for the ways of the Lord are right; straight, plain, even, according to
the rules of, justice and equity; there is no unrighteousness in them;
none in the ways in which he himself walks; either in his ways and
methods of grace, his decrees and purposes, his counsels and covenant;
or in his providential dispensations; nor in those he directs others to
walk in, the paths of faith and doctrine; or the ways of his
commandments:

and the just shall walk in them; such as are, justified by the
righteousness of Christ, and have ills grace wrought in them, and live
righteously; these walk, and continue to walk, in the ways of God; which
shows that the doctrine of justification by Christ's implored
righteousness is no licentious doctrine:

but the transgressors shall fall therein; the transgressors of the law
of God, not being used to his ways, as Kimchi's father observes, stumble
in them and fall; or rather, as Jarchi and the Targum, they fall into
hell, into ruin and destruction, because they walk not in them; though
the sense seems to be, that as Christ himself, so his ways and his word,
his doctrines and his ordinances, are stumbling blocks to wicked men, at
which they stumble, and fall, and perish; see [Luk
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034) [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Introduction](joe000)

</div>
