<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos002)  [Next](hos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA 3

In this chapter is an order to the prophet to love an adulterous woman
beloved of her friend, and by this parable to express the love of God to
Israel, and their ingratitude to him, [Hos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001), the prophet's execution of that
order, making a purchase of her, and a covenant with her, which set
forth the captive, servile, mean, and abject state of that people, [Hos
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002), which is explained of their being
deprived for a long time of civil and ecclesiastic government, [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004), and the chapter is concluded with
a prophecy and promise of their conversion to Christ in the latter day,
[Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005).

[Hosea 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 3:1</span></span>

Then said the Lord unto me,.... Or, as the Targum,

"the Lord said unto me again'';

for the word yet or again is to be joined to this, and not the following
clause; and shows that this is a new vision, prophecy, or parable,
though respecting the same persons and things:

go, love a woman beloved of her friend, yet an adulteress; not the
prophet's wife, not Gomer, but some other feigned person; beloved either
of her own husband, as the Targum and Jarchi, notwithstanding her
unchastity and unfaithfulness to him; or of another man, as Aben Ezra,
who had a very great respect for her, courted her, and perhaps had
betrothed her, but had not yet consummated the marriage; and, though a
harlot, loved her dearly, and could not get off his affections from her,
but hankered after her; or of the prophet, as Kimchi, who paraphrases
it,

"thou shall love her, and be to her a friend;''

to protect and defend her, as harlots used to have one in particular
they called their friend, by whose name they were called, and was a
cover to them. The sense is, that the prophet was to go to the people of
Israel, and deliver this parable to them, setting forth their state and
condition, and their behaviour towards God, and his great love to them,
notwithstanding all their baseness and ingratitude; it was as if a woman
that was either married or betrothed, or that either had a husband or a
suitor that so dearly loved her, that though she was guilty of
uncleanness, and continued in it, yet would not leave her; and which is
thus expressed by the Targum,

"go, deliver a prophecy against the house of Israel, who are like a
woman dear to her husband; and though she commits fornication against
him, yet he so loves her that he will not put her away:''

according to the love of the Lord toward the children of Israel; or such
is the love of the Lord to them; for though they were guilty of
idolatry, intemperance, and other immoralities, yet still he loved them,
and formed designs of grace and goodness for them. And thus, though God
does not love sinners as such; yet he loves them, though they are
sinners, and when and while they are such; as appears by his choice of
them, and covenant with them, by Christ's dying for them while sinners,
and by his quickening them when dead in trespasses and sins:

who look to other gods; or "though they look to other gods" (c); look to
them and worship them, pray unto them, put their trust in them, and
expect good things from them:

and love flagons of wine, or "tubs of grapes" (d); or of wine made of
them; or lumps of raisins, cakes or junkets made of them and other
things, as the Septuagint; and may respect either the drunkenness and
intemperance of the ten tribes; see [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001), they loved, as Kimchi says, the
delights of the world, and not the law and commandments of God; or the
feasts that were made in the temples of their idols they loved good
eating and drinking, and that made them like idolatry the better for the
sake of those things; see [Exo 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006),
for the Heathens used to eat and drink to excess at their sacrifices:
hence Diogenes (e) the philosopher was very angry with those who
sacrificed to the gods for their health, yet in their sacrifices feasted
to the prejudice of their health.

\(c\) "quamvis respiciant", Piscator. (d) "dolia uvarum", Pagninus,
Montanus, Zanchius; "soa", some in Drusius. (e) Laertius in Vit.
Diogenis, p. 382.

[Hosea 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 3:2</span></span>

So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver,.... Or, "fifteen
shekels", which was about one pound seventeen shillings and six pence of
our money, reckoning a shekel at two shillings and six pence; though
some make it to be but two shillings and four pence; this was but half
the price of a servant, [Exo 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032),
and alludes to the dowry which men used to give to women at their
marriage; see [Sa1 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025). The word
here used has the signification of digging; hence the Vulgate Latin
version renders it, "I dug her"; and the abettors and defenders of it
think it refers to the digging, or boring the ears of a servant that
chose to continue with his master, [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006), but the word is used in the
sense of buying, [Gen 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005), and so
Jarchi says it has the sense of merchandise or bargaining; and in the
sea coasts he observes, that they call a purchase, Perhaps the word is
better rendered by the Septuagint and Arabic versions, "hired"; and
"cara" in the Arabic language signifies "to hire"; so it is used in [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030). So with the Turks, as Monsieur
Thevenot (f) observes, a letter out of beasts to hire is called "moucre"
or "moukir", which comes from the Arabic word "kira", he says, which
signifies to let or hire; and is here fitly used of a harlot. The Jews
have many whims and fancies about these fifteen pieces of silver. The
Targum, and Pesikta in Jarchi, take them to respect the fifteenth day of
Nisan, on which the Israelites were redeemed out of Egypt; according to
Aben Ezra, they design the fifteen kings of Judah, from Rehoboam to the
captivity, reckoning the sons of Josiah as one, being brethren;
according to others, in Kimchi, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the
twelve tribes; and, according to Abarbinel, the fifteen prophets that
prophesied of the redemption:

and for an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley; a "homer" held
ten "ephahs", and a "lethec", or "half homer", five "ephahs", or so many
bushels, these making the number fifteen: again, according to Saadiah,
they design Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, and the twelve tribes; and,
according to Aben Ezra, the number of the high priests in the kingdom of
Judah and Jerusalem, a homer making thirty seahs, and a half homer
fifteen, in all forty five; but according to others, in Kimchi, these
design the forty five days between the coming of the Israelites out of
Egypt and their receiving the law: but, leaving these fancies, as the
number of shekels given for her was but a low price, and shows what an
estimate was made of her; and barley being the coarsest of grain, and
bread made of it, that of the worst sort, which the poorer people eat;
may be expressive of the captive, servile, mean, and abject state of the
people of Israel, from the time of their captivity to their conversion
to Christ, as is after more fully explained.

\(f\) Travels, part 2. B. 1. ch. 3. p. 11.

[Hosea 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 3:3</span></span>

And I said unto her,.... Having bought or hired her; this was the
covenant or agreement he made with her,

thou shall abide for me many days; dwell alone in some solitary and
separate place, and have no conversation with any, especially with men;
live like a widow that has lost her husband, and so wait for a long time
till the prophet should think fit to take her to his house and bed:

thou shall not play the harlot, and thou shall not be for another man;
neither prostitute herself, as she had done to her lovers; nor marry
another, but keep herself chaste and single:

so will I also be for thee; wait for thee, and not take another wife; or
will be thy husband, after having made proper trial and full proof of
thy conduct and behaviour: the Targum paraphrases it thus;

"say, O prophet, to her, O congregation of Israel, your sins are the
cause that you are carried captive many days; ye shall give yourselves
to my worship and not err, nor serve idols, and even I will have mercy
on you.''

The whole is explained in the following words:

[Hosea 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 3:4</span></span>

For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and
without a prince,.... Without any form of civil government, either regal
or without any civil magistrate, either superior or subordinate, of
their own; being subject to the kings and princes of other nations, as
the ten tribes were from their captivity by Shalmaneser, to the coming
of Christ, which was about seven hundred years; and from that time the
tribes of Judah and Benjamin have had no kings and princes among them,
for the space of nineteen hundred years, which may very well be called
"many days". This answers to the harlot's abiding for the prophet many
days, in the parable:

and without a sacrifice; the daily sacrifice, which has ceased as long
as before observed; and any other sacrifice of slain beasts, as the
passover lamb, &c.; the Jews not thinking it lawful to offer sacrifice
in a strange land, or any where but upon the altar in Jerusalem; and to
this day have no such sacrifices among them, though they have no notion
of the abrogation of them, as the Christians have; but so it is ordered
in Providence, that they should be without them, being kept out of their
own land, that this and other prophecies might be fulfilled:

and without an image, or "statue": such as were made for Baal, or as
were the calves at Dan and Bethel; and though the people of Israel were
very subject to idolatry, and set up images and statues for worship
before their captivities, yet since have nothing of image worship among
them, but strictly observe the command.

And without an ephod; a linen garment wore by the high priests under the
law, to which the breastplate was fastened, which had in it the Urim and
Thummim; and which were wanting in the second temple, and have been ever
since; so that these people have been so long without this way and means
of inquiry of God about future things, see [Ezr
2:63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#063), this may be put for the whole
priesthood, now ceased in a proper sense; and so the Septuagint render
it, "without a priesthood"; so that the Jews are without any form of
government, civil or ecclesiastical; they have neither princely nor
priestly power: "and without teraphim"; which some understand to be the
same with the Urim and Thummim; and so the Septuagint render it,
"without manifestations"; by which they are thought to mean the Urim,
which according to them so signifies: but the word is generally thought
to design some little images or idols, like the penates or household
gods of the Romans, which were consulted about future things; and so the
Jews commonly understand it, and some describe them thus (g),

"what are the "teraphim?" they slay the firstborn of a man, cut off his
head, and pickle it with salt and oil, and inscribe on a plate of gold
the name of an unclean spirit, and put that under his tongue; then they
place it in a wall, and light candles before it, and pray unto it, and
it talks with them.''

But now, according to this prophecy, the Jews in their captivity should
have no way and means of knowing future things, either in a lawful or
unlawful manner; see [Psa 74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009). How
the whole of this prophecy is now fulfilled in them, hear what they
themselves say, particularly Kimchi;

"these are the days of the captivity in which we now are at this day; we
have no king nor prince out of Israel; for we are in the power of the
nations, and of their kings and princes; and have no sacrifice for God,
nor image for idols; no "ephod" for God, that declares future things;
and no "teraphim" for idolatry, which show things to come, according to
the mind of those that believe in them;''

and so Jarchi

"without a sacrifice in the sanctuary in Judah; without an image of Baal
in Samaria, for the kings of Israel; without an ephod of Urim and
Thummim, that declares hidden things; and "teraphim" made for a time to
speak of, and show things that are secret;''

and to the same purpose Aben Ezra. The Targum is,

"without a king of the house of David, and without a ruler over Israel;
without sacrifice for acceptance in Jerusalem; and without a high place
in Samaria; and without an ephod, and him that shows;''

i.e. what shall come to pass. The Syriac version renders the last
clause, "without one that offers incense"; and the Arabic version,
"without one that teaches".

\(g\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 36. fol. 40. 1.

[Hosea 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 3:5</span></span>

Afterward shall the children of Israel return,.... The ten tribes of
Israel, and also the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which are
included in the name of Israel, as Aben Ezra interprets it; and these
are joined together in parallel places; see [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003) for though they did not go into
captivity together, yet their return and conversion will be at the same
time; and they are all spoken of under the name of Israel by the Apostle
Paul, when he foretells their conversion and salvation, [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026). The "return" of them, here
prophesied of, does not barely mean their return to their own land,
which will be at this time; see [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003), but their return to the Lord by
repentance; when they shall repent of, and turn from, their sinful
course of life, and particularly of their unbelief and rejection of the
true Messiah, and embrace him; and of their traditions and false ways of
worship, which they shall discard; and of their own righteousness they
shall now renounce; and shall turn to the Lord Jesus Christ, and believe
in him for righteousness, life, and salvation:

and seek the Lord their God, and David their King; these may be
considered either as two distinct persons, Jehovah the Father, and the
Messiah, as in [Eze 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023) and so the
Targum,

"and seek the worship of the Lord their God, and obey Messiah the Son of
David their King;''

who will be both equally sought after, and unto, by them; and which is a
proof of the divinity of the Messiah, and of his equality with God his
Father; as well as points out the right way in which Jehovah is to be
sought, namely, with Christ, or in him, in whom he is a God gracious and
merciful; and to seek and know both the one and the other is eternal
life, [Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003) or else all this is to
be understood of the Messiah, rendering the words, "and seek the Lord
their God, even David their King" as also [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009), may be rendered; and so these
are all epithets, titles, and characters of him: he is Jehovah, the
everlasting I AM; the true God, and eternal life; Immanuel, God with us;
God in our nature, manifest in the flesh; the Son of David, and his
antitype, often called David in Scripture. [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003), King of kings, King of the
saints, of his church, and will be owned as such by the Jews at the time
of their conversion, though they have rejected him; but now they will
receive him, and be subject to him; they will seek to him for salvation,
for the pardon of their sins, for righteousness, for rest, for food, for
protection and safety, and to serve and obey him: and this seeking will
not be out of curiosity, or in a carnal way, or for selfish ends; nor
hypocritically; but with their whole hearts, and diligently, and in
earnest. Not only the Targum interprets this of Messiah the Son of
David, but Aben Ezra on the place says, this is the Messiah; and it is
applied to him, and his times, by other Jewish writers, both ancient and
modern. In an ancient book (h) of theirs, speaking of David, it is said,
the holy blessed God is well pleased with him in this world, and in the
world to come; in this world, as it is written, "and I will defend this
city for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake", [Kg2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006), and in the world to come, as it
is written,

they shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King, &c.; David was
King in this world, and David shall be King in the time to come. And in
both Talmuds the words are applied to the Messiah; in one of them (i),
after quoting this text, it is added, the Rabbins say this is the King
Messiah; if of the living, David is his name; if of the dead, David is
his name. And in the other (k), it is said, when Jerusalem is built,
David comes; that is, the Son of David, the Messiah; which is proved by
this passage, "afterwards the children of Israel shall return, and seek
the Lord their God, and David their King"; that is, as the gloss
interprets it, after they shall return to the house of the sanctuary, or
the temple: so Abarbinel, both in his commentary upon this place, and
elsewhere (l), as he interprets the "one head" in [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011), of Messiah ben Ephraim, whom he,
with the rest of his tribe, feign shall perish in war; so he observes,
that then Israel shall seek David their King, the rod out of the root of
Jesse, whom the Lord shall choose, and cause to reign over them. And
another of their later writers (m) interprets the passage of the
Messiah, and produces it to prove against the Christians that he should
come in the end of days, or in the latter days; as it is plain and
certain that our Jesus, the true Messiah, came at the end of the Jewish
world, in the last days of their civil and church state; see [Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001),

and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter day; not man, but
the Lord; not his wrath and vengeance, but his goodness; not with a
servile, but with a godly filial fear; a fear influenced by the
blessings of goodness they shall now be partakers of, particularly
pardoning grace and mercy, [Psa 130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003),
they shall fear the Lord, who is good, and goodness itself, and Christ,
in whom the goodness of God is displayed, and who is prevented with the
blessings of goodness for his people: it may be rendered, they "shall
fear", or "come fearing to the Lord, and his goodness" (n), being
sensible of their sin, danger, and misery; they shall flee to the Lord
as to their city of refuge, and to the blessings of his goodness they
see their need of; and this they shall do in haste, as Aben Ezra
interprets it, comparing it with [Hos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011). The Septuagint version is,
"they shall be amazed at the Lord, and his good things"; the Syriac
version, "they shall know the Lord, and his goodness": the Arabic
version, they shall confess the Lord, and his benefits; the Targum,

"they shall give themselves to the service of the Lord, and his goodness
shall be multiplied, which shall come to them in the end of days;''

or, as Aben Ezra, in the end of the prophecy of the prophets, in future
time, in the times of the Messiah; which, as Kimchi serves, are always
meant by the last days; and here it signifies the latter day of the last
days, or of the Gospel dispensation.

\(h\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 93. 3. (i) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 5. 1. (k)
T. Bab Megillah, fol. 18. 1. (l) Mashmiah Jeshuah, fol. 55. 4. (m) R.
Isaac Chizzuk Emunah, par. 1. p. 44. (n) "pavebunt ad Dominum",
Montanus; "providi accedent ad Jehovam, et ad bonitatem ejus", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius; "et cum timore venient ad Jehovam, et ad
bonum ejus", Schmidt; so Ben Melech interprets it, "they shall fear, and
be afraid of him, flow to him, and to his goodness"; and which, he says,
Saadiah explains of his glory, agreeably to Exod. xxxiii. 19.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 4](hos004)

</div>
