<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos005)  [Next](hos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA 6

This chapter gives an account of some who were truly penitent, and
stirred up one another to return to the Lord, encouraged by his power,
grace, and goodness, [Hos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001); and of
others, who had only a form of religion, were very unstable in it;
regarded more the ceremonial law, and the external sacrifices of it,
than the moral law; either that part of it which respects the love of
the neighbour, or that which concerns the knowledge of God; and dealt
treacherously with the Lord, transgressing the covenant, [Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004); particularly the city of Gilead
is represented as full of the workers of iniquity, and is charged with
bloodshed, [Hos 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#008); yea, even the
priests were guilty of murder and lewdness, [Hos
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009); and Israel, or the ten tribes in
general, are accused of whoredom, both corporeal and spiritual, with
which they were defiled, [Hos 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#010);
nor was Judah clear of these crimes, and therefore a reckoning day is
set for them, [Hos 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011).

[Hosea 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 6:1</span></span>

Come, and let us return unto the Lord,.... The Septuagint and Arabic
versions connect these words with the last clause of the preceding
chapter, adding the word, "saying"; and so the Targum and Syriac
version, "they shall say"; and very rightly as to the sense; for they
are the words of those persons under the afflicting hand of God; and,
being brought thereby to a sense of their sins, acknowledge them, and
seek to the Lord for pardon, and encourage one another so to do; as
Israel and Judah will in the latter day, when the veil shall be taken
off their minds, the hardness of their heart removed, and they shall be
converted, and turn to the Lord, and seek him together, weeping as they
go; having both faith in Christ, and repentance towards God, by which
they will return unto him; see [Co2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016); so all sinners sensible of their
departure from God by sin, and of the evil and danger of it, repent of
it, and loath it, confess and acknowledge it, depart from it, and
forsake it; and return to the Lord, having some view and apprehension of
him as a God, gracious and merciful in Christ; imploring the forgiveness
of their sins, with some degree of faith and confidence in him; and not
having only love to their own souls, and the welfare of them, but also
to the souls of others, exhort and encourage them to join with them in
the same acts of faith, repentance, and obedience. The Targum is,

"let us return to the worship of the Lord;''

from which they have sadly departed. The arguments or reasons follow,

for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind
us up; the same hand that has torn will heal and that has smitten will
bind up, and none else can; and therefore there is a necessity of
returning to him for healing and a cure, [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039); and his tearing is in order to
heal, and his smiting in order to bind up; and, as sure as he has done
the one, he will do the other, and therefore there is great
encouragement to apply to him; all which the Jews will be sensible of in
the last day; and then the Lord, who is now tearing them in his wrath,
and smiting them in his sore displeasure, both in their civil and church
state, dispersing them among the nations, and has been so doing for many
hundred years, will "bind up the breach of his people, and heal the
stroke of their wound", [Isa 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026);
and so the Lord deals with all his people, who are truly and really
converted by him; he rends their heart, tears the caul of it; pricks and
cuts them to the heart; smites them with the hammer of his word; wounds
their consciences with a sense of sin; lets in the law into them, which
works wrath, whereby they become broken and contrite; and all this in
order to their turning to him that smites them, and be healed, and in
love to their souls, though for the present grievous to bear: and then
the great Physician heals them by his stripes and wounds; by the
application of his blood; by means of his word, the Gospel of peace and
pardon; by a look to him, and a touch of him by faith; by discoveries of
his love, and particularly his pardoning grace and mercy, which as oil
and wine he pours into the wounds made by sin, and binds them up; and
which he heals universally, both with respect to persons and diseases,
for which he is applied unto, and infallibly, thoroughly, and perfectly,
and all freely.

[Hosea 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 6:2</span></span>

After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us
up,.... The Jews, in their present state, are as dead men, both in a
civil and spiritual sense, and their conversion and restoration will be
as life from the dead; they are like persons buried, and, when they are
restored, they will be raised out of their graves, both of sin and
misery; see [Rom 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015); the time of
which is here fixed, after two days, and on the third; which Jarchi
interprets of the two temples that have been destroyed, and of the third
temple to be built, which the Jews expect, but in vain, and when they
hope for good times: Kimchi explains it of their three captivities, in
Egypt, Babylon, and the present one, and so Ben Melech, from which they
hope to be raised, and live comfortably; which sense is much better than
the former: and with it may be compared Vitringa's (s) notion of the
text, that the first day was between Israel's coming out of Egypt and
the Babylonish captivity; the second day between that and the times of
Antiochus, which was the third night; then the third day followed, which
is the times of the Messiah: but the Targum comes nearer the truth,
which paraphrases the words thus,

"he will quicken us in the days of consolation which are to come, and in
the day of the resurrection of the dead he will raise us up;''

where by days of consolation are meant the days of the Messiah, with
which the Jews generally connect the resurrection of the dead; and if we
understand them of the last days of the Messiah, it is not much amiss;
for the words respect the quickening and raising up of the Jews in the
latter day, the times of Christ's spiritual coming and reign: and these
two and three days may be expressive of a long and short time, as
interpreters differently explain them; of a long time, as the third day
is a long time for a man to lie dead, when there can be little or no
hope of his reviving, [Luk 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021); or
of a short time, for which two or three days is a common phrase; and
both true in this case: it is a long time Israel and Judah have been in
captivity, and there may seem little hope of their restoration; but it
will be a short time with the Lord, with whom a thousand years are as
one day, and one day as a thousand years: and this I take to be the
sense of the words, that after the second Millennium, or the Lord's two
days, and at the beginning of the third, will be the time of their
conversion and restoration, reckoning from the last destruction of them
by the Romans; for not till then were Israel and Judah wholly in a state
of death: many of Israel were mixed among those of Judah before the
Babylonish captivity, and many returned with them from it; but, when
destroyed by the Romans, there was an end of their civil and church
state; which will both be revived on a better foundation at this period
of time: but if this conjecture is not agreeable (for I only propose it
as such), the sense may be taken thus, that in a short time after the
repentance of Israel, and their conversion to the Lord, they will be
brought into a very comfortable and happy state and condition, both with
respect to things temporal and spiritual;

and we shall live in his sight; comfortably, in a civil sense, in their
own land, and in the possession of all their privileges and liberties;
and in a spiritual sense, by faith on Jesus Christ, whom they shall now
embrace, and in the enjoyment of the Gospel and Gospel ordinances; and
the prophet represents the penitents and faithful among them as
believing and hoping for these things. This may be applied to the case
of sensible sinners, who, as they are in their natural state dead in
sin, and dead in law, so they see themselves to be such when awakened;
and yet entertain a secret hope that sooner or later they shall be
revived and refreshed, and raised up to a more comfortable state, and
live in the presence of God, and the enjoyment of his favour. The
ancient fathers generally understood these words of Christ, who was
buried on the sixth day, lay in the grave the whole seventh day, and
after these two days, on the third, rose again from the dead; and to
this passage the apostle is thought to have respect, [Co1
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003); and also of the resurrection of
his people in and with him, and by virtue of his: and true it is that
Christ rose from the dead on the third day, and all his redeemed ones
were quickened and raised up together with him as their head and
representative, [Eph 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005); and his in
virtue of his being quickened that they are regenerated and quickened,
and made alive, in a spiritual sense; he is the author of their
spiritual life, and their life itself; see [Pe1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003); and not only in virtue of his
resurrection is their spiritual resurrection from the death of sin to a
life of grace, but even their corporeal resurrection at the last day;
and as, in consequence of their spiritual resurrection, they live in the
sight of God a life of grace and holiness by faith in Christ, and in a
comfortable view and enjoyment of the divine favour; so they shall live
eternally in the presence of God, where are fulness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore: but the first sense is best, and most agreeable
to the context and scope of it.

\(s\) Comment. in Isa. viii. 20.

[Hosea 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 6:3</span></span>

Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord,.... The word "if"
is not in the original text, and the passage is not conditional, but
absolute; for as persons, when converted, know Christ, and not before,
when he is revealed to them, and in them, as the only Saviour and
Redeemer, so they continue and increase in the knowledge of him; they
earnestly desire to know more of him, and eagerly pursue those means and
methods by which they attain to a greater degree of it; for so the words
are, "and we shall know, we shall follow on to know the Lord" (t); that
grace, which has given the first measure of spiritual and experimental
knowledge of him, will influence and engage them to seek after more. The
Jews, when they are quickened, and turn to the Lord, will know him, own
and acknowledge him, as the Messiah, the only Redeemer and Saviour; and
will be so delighted with the knowledge of him, that they will be
desirous of, and seek after, a larger measure of it; and indeed they
shall all know him, from the least to the greatest, when the covenant of
grace shall be renewed with them, manifested and applied to them. The
words may be considered as a continuation of their exhortation to one
another from [Hos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001); thus, "and let
us acknowledge, let us follow on to know him" (u); let us own him as the
true Messiah, whom we and our fathers have rejected; and let us make use
of all means to gain more knowledge of him: or let us follow after him,
to serve and obey him, which is the practical knowledge of him; let us
imitate him, and follow him the Lamb of God, embrace his Gospel, and
submit to his ordinances. So Kimchi interprets it, "to know him"; that
is, to serve him; first know him, then serve him;

his going forth is prepared as the morning; that is, the Lord's going
forth, who is known, and followed after to be more known; and is to be
understood, not of his going forth in the council and covenant of grace
from everlasting; nor of his incarnation in time, or of his resurrection
from the dead; but of his spiritual coming in the latter day, with the
brightness of which he will destroy antichrist; or of his going forth in
the ministration of the Gospel, to the conversion of Jews and Gentiles,
the light of which dispensation will be very great; it will be like a
morning after a long night of darkness with the Jewish and Pagan
nations; and be as grateful and delightful, beautiful and cheerful, as
the morning light; and move as swiftly and irresistibly as that, and be
alike growing and increasing: and so the words are a reason of the
increasing knowledge of the Lord's people in those times, because he
shall go forth in the ministration of the word like the morning light,
which increases more and more till noon; and of the evidence and
clearness of it, it being like a morning without clouds; with which
agrees the note of Joseph Kimchi,

"we shall know him, and it will be as clear to us as the light of the
morning without clouds:''

and also of the firmness and certainty of it; for both the increasing
knowledge of the saints, and the going forth of Christ in a spiritual
manner, is "firm" and "sure" (which may be the sense of the word (w)) as
the morning; for, as sure as the night cometh, so also the morning;

and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain
unto the earth; in the land of Israel they had usually two rains in a
year; the one in autumn, or quickly after the seed was sown; the other
in the spring, when the corn was ripe, and harvest near, and which was
very reviving and refreshing to the earth, and the fruits of it; and
such will be the coming of Christ unto his people, in the ministration
of the Gospel in the latter day, which will drop as the rain, and distil
as the dew, as the small rain on the tender herb, and as showers upon
the grass; and in the discoveries of his favour and love to them, and in
the distribution of the blessings of his grace among them. Much the like
phrases are used of the spiritual coming of Christ in the latter day,
[Psa 72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006). The Targum is,

"and we shall learn, and we shall follow on, to know the fear of the
Lord, as the morning light, which darts in its going out; and blessings
will come to us as a prevailing rain, and as the latter rain which
waters the earth.''

\(t\) "sciemusque, sequemur ad sciendum Dominum", Montanus; "et
cognoscemus, et persequemur ad cognoscendum Jehovam", Zanchius; "sciemus
persequemur", Liveleus. (u) "Cognoscamus, sive agnoscamus, et
persequautur scientiam Dominis", Schmidt. (w) "firmum certum notat", sic
quidam in Schmidt; "firmatus ac stabilitus", Tarnovius.

[Hosea 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 6:4</span></span>

O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto
thee?.... Or, "for thee" (x)? The Lord having observed the effect and
consequence of his going and returning to his place, of his leaving his
people for a long time under afflictions and in distress; namely, their
thorough conversion to him in the latter day, and the blessings
attending it; returns to the then present times again, and to the state
and condition in which Ephraim and Judah, the ten and two tribes, were;
and speaks as one at a loss, and under difficulties, to know what to do
with them and for them; how as it were to give them up to ruin and
destruction; and yet, having tried all ways with them, and in vain, asks
what further was to be done, or could be done, to bring them to a sense
of their sins, to reform them, and cause them to return to him;

for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth
way; meaning not the goodness of God bestowed upon them, and the mercy
he showed to them; but the goodness that appeared in them, and all the
good things done by them, their repentance, reformation, holiness, and
righteousness; these, which were only in show, did not last long, came
to nothing, and disappeared; like a light cloud in the morning, which
vanishes away when the sun rises; or like the dew that falls in the
night, which is quickly dried up and gone, after the sun has been up a
small time. Thus it was with Ephraim, or the ten tribes, in the time of
Jehu; there was a show of zeal for religion, and a reformation from
idolatry; but it did not go on, nor last long; and with the two tribes
of Judah and Benjamin in the times of Hezekiah and Josiah, who did that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord; but then the Jews, in the times
of their successors, returned to their former evil ways. And so the best
works, holiness and righteousness of men, can no more stand before the
justice of God, and the strict examination of it, than a thin light
morning cloud, or the small drops of dew, before the light, force, and
heat of the sun; nor do formal and carnal professors continue in these
things; they may run well for a while, and then drop their profession
and religion, and turn from the holy commandment. And this being the
case, what can they expect from the Lord?

\(x\) "in tuum commodum", Schmidt.

[Hosea 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 6:5</span></span>

Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets; I have slain them by the
words of my mouth,.... Sharply reproved them for their sins by the
prophets, who were as lapidaries that cut stone, or us hewers of timber
that cut off the knotty parts; so these by preaching the terrors of the
law, which is a killing letter, and by delivering out the threatenings
of the Lord, and denouncing his judgments upon them for their sins, cut
them to the heart, and killed them; for their foretelling and
prophesying of their being slain, ruined, and destroyed, was a slaying
of them; see [Jer 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010). The Targum is,

"because I admonished them by the message of my prophets, and they
returned not, I will bring upon them those that slay, because they have
transgressed the word of my will.''

But the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, and so Aben Ezra and
Joseph Kimchi, understand these words, not of hewing, and cutting, and
slaying of the people by the prophets, but of the cutting and slaying
the prophets themselves, and read the words, "therefore have I cut off
the prophets, and slain them &c.", either the false prophets, some of
them that caused the people to err, that they might not repent, as Aben
Ezra; as the prophets of Baal in the times of Elijah, and the Scribes
and Pharisees in Christ's time, who were in the way of the people's
repentance, reformation, and reception of Christ; these he cut off, and
their doctrine, and condemned by his own, and the doctrine of his
apostles, the words of the Lord's mouth; see [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008); and this he did for the good of
his people, in answer to the question put by himself in [Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004); so Schmidt interprets it: or else
the true prophets of God, who were exposed to death, to be cut off and
slain, for the messages they were sent with: or those messages were such
as were killing to them to carry them, and deliver them; and they were
so constantly employed, early and late, in such service, that for the
work of the Lord they were often nigh unto death: but our version, and
the sense agreeable to it, scent best;

and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth; that is, their
judgments, the people's, a sudden change of person: meaning either the
statutes and judgments prescribed them by the Lord, and to be observed
by them; which were clear and plain as the light at noon day, and
therefore could not plead any excuse of ignorance of them, that they did
not observe them: or the judgments of God upon them for their sins;
which were open and manifest to all, and increasing like the light, more
and more, and no more to be resisted than that; and the righteousness of
God in them was very conspicuous; his judgments were manifest, and the
justice of them. Some understand this of the judgments or
righteousnesses of the saints, both imputed and inherent, [Rom
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016); which appear light and clear,
the darkness of pharisaism being removed by Christ. The Targum is,

"my judgment goes forth as the light.''

[Hosea 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 6:6</span></span>

For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice,.... That is, the one rather than
the other, as the next clause explains it. Sacrifices were of early use,
even before the law of Moses; they were of divine appointment, and were
approved and accepted of by the Lord; they were types of Christ, and led
to him, and were continued unto his death; but in comparison of moral
duties, which respect love to God, and to our neighbour, the Lord did
not will them, desire them, and delight in them; or he had more regard
for the former than the latter; see [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022); nor did he will or accept at
all of the sacrifices ordered to the calves at Dan and Bethel; nor
others, when they were not such as the law required, or were not offered
up in the faith of Christ, attended with repentance for sin, and in
sincerity, and were brought as real expiatory sacrifices for sin, and
especially as now abrogated by the sacrifice of Christ. And as these
words are twice quoted by our Lord, at one time to justify his mercy,
pity, and compassion, to the souls of poor sinners, by conversing with
them, [Mat 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013); and at another time
to justify the disciples in an act of mercy to their bodies when hungry,
by plucking ears of corn on the sabbath day, [Mat
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007); "mercy" may here respect both
acts of mercy shown by the Lord, and acts of mercy done by men; both
which the Lord wills, desires, and delights in: he takes pleasure in
showing mercy himself, as appears by his free and open declarations of
it; by the throne of grace and mercy he has set up; by the encouragement
he gives to souls to hope in his mercy; by the objects of it, the chief
of sinners; by the various ways he has taken to display it, in election,
in the covenant of grace, in the mission of Christ, in the pardon of sin
by him, and in regeneration; and by his opposing it to everything else,
in the affair of salvation. And he likewise has a very great regard to
mercy as exercised by men; as this is one of the weightier matters of
the law, and may be put for the whole of it, or however the second table
of it, which is love to our neighbours, and takes in all kind offices
done to them; and especially designs acts of liberality to necessitous
persons; which are sacrifices God is well pleased with, even more than
with the ceremonious ones; these being such in which men resemble him
the merciful God, who is kind to the unthankful, and to the evil;

and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings; which were reckoned
the greatest and most excellent sacrifices, the whole being the Lord's;
but knowledge of God is preferred to them; by which is meant, not the
knowledge of God, the light of nature, which men might have, and not
him; nor by the law of Moses, as a lawgiver, judge, and consuming fire;
but a knowledge of him in Christ, as the God and Father of Christ, as
the God of all grace, gracious and merciful in him; as a covenant God
and Father in him, which is through the Gospel by the Spirit, and is
eternal life, [Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003); this includes
in it faith and hope in God, love to him, fear of him and his goodness,
and the whole worship of him, both internal and external. These words
seem designed to expose and remove the false ground of trust and
confidence in sacrifices the people of Israel were prone unto; as we
find they were in the times of Isaiah, who was contemporary with Hoses;
see [Isa 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012). The Targum interprets
them of those that exercise mercy, and do the law of the Lord.

[Hosea 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 6:7</span></span>

But they, like men, have transgressed the covenant,.... The false
prophets, as Aben Ezra, whom he threatened to cut off and slay, [Hos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005); or rather Ephraim and Judah,
whose goodness was so fickle and unstable; and who, instead of doing
acts of mercy, and seeking after the true knowledge of God and his
worship, which are preferable to all sacrifices, they transgressed the
law of God, which they promised at Mount Sinai to obey; the precepts of
the moral law, even of both tables, which concern both God and man; and
also the ceremonial law, by appointing priests to sacrifice who were not
of the tribe of Levi, as did Ephraim or the ten tribes under Jeroboam;
and by offering sacrifices to their calves, and by not observing the
solemn feasts; and the precepts relating to both these laws constitute
the covenant made with the children of Israel at Sinai, [Exo
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003); which they transgressed, either
"like Adam" (y) the first man, as Jarchi; who transgressed the covenant
of works in paradise God made with him, and all mankind in him: or like
the men of old, the former generations, as the Targum; meaning either
the old inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites; or the men of the old
world at the time of the flood, who were a very wicked and abandoned
generation of men; or like men in common, depraved and degenerated,
fickle and inconstant, vain and deceitful, and not at all to be depended
upon; especially like the lower sort of men, the common people, who have
no regard to their word, covenant, and agreement; or particularly like
such men that are given to penury, and make no conscience of oaths and
covenants ever so solemnly made: or, as others read the words, "but they
have transgressed the covenant like man's" (z); making no more account
of it than if it was a man's covenant;

there have they dealt treacherously against me; in the covenant they
entered into, by breaking it, not performing their promises; and eve in
the very sacrifices they offered, and were so fond of, and put their
confidence in; either by offering such sacrifices as were not legal, or
by offering them to idols, under a pretence of offering them to God,
which was dealing treacherously against him; and in all other acts of
religion, in which they would be thought to have regard to the covenant
of God, his laws and precepts, and to be very serious and devout, yet
acted the hypocritical part, were false and deceitful, and devoid of all
sincerity: or there, in the promised land, where the Lord had so largely
bestowed his favours on them; so Jarchi, Kimchi, and Abarbinel,
agreeably to the Targum, which paraphrases it thus,

"and in the good land, which I gave unto them to do my will, they have
dealt falsely with my word.''

\(y\) "sicut Adam", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version,
Castilio, Grotius, Cocceius. (z) "Tanquam hominis, sub. pectum",
Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Zanchius.

[Hosea 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 6:8</span></span>

Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity,.... The chief city in the
land of Gilead, which lay beyond Jordan, inhabited by Gad and Reuben,
and the half tribe of Manasseh; and so belonged to the ten tribes, whose
sins are here particularly observed. It had its name from the country,
or the country from that, or both from the mountain of the same name. It
is thought to be Ramothgilead, a city of refuge, and put for all the
cities of refuge in those parts, which were inhabited by priests and
Levites; and who ought to have had knowledge of the laws, and instructed
the people in them, and observed them themselves, and set a good example
to others; but, instead of this, the whole course of their lives, was
vicious; they made a trade of sinning, did nothing else but work
iniquity; and this was general among them, the city or cities of them
consisted of none else; and all manner of iniquity was committed by
them, particularly idolatry; for so the words may be rendered, "a city
of them that serve an idol" (a); not only at Dan and Bethel, but in the
cities of the priests, idols were set up and worshipped; this shows the
state to be very corrupt:

and is polluted with blood; with the blood of murderers harboured there,
who ought not to have been admitted; or with the blood of such who were
delivered up to the avenger of blood, that ought to have been sheltered,
and both for the sake of money; or with the blood of children,
sacrificed to Mo: the word used has the signification of supplanting,
lying in wait, and so is understood of a private, secret, shedding of
blood, in a deceitful and insidious way: hence some render it, "cunning
for blood" (b); to which the Targum seems to agree, calling it a city

"of them that secretly or deceitfully shed innocent blood.''

It has also the signification of the heel of a man's foot, and is by
some rendered, "trodden by blood" (c); that is, by bloody men: or
"footed" or "heeled by blood" (d); that is, such an abundance of it was
shed, that a man could not set his foot or his heel any where but in
blood.

\(a\) "civitas operantium idolum", V. L. (b) "callida et astuta
sanguine", so some in Vatablus; "callida sanguine", Castslio. (c)
"Calcata a sanguine", Piscator. (d) "Vestigiata a sanguine", Capellus,
Tarnovius; "vestigis sanguinolentis", Juuius & Tremellius.

[Hosea 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 6:9</span></span>

And as troops of robbers wait for a man,.... As a gang of highwaymen or
footpads lie in wait in a ditch, or under a hedge, or in a cave of a
rock or mountain, for a man they know will come by that way, who is full
of money, in order to rob him; or, as Saadiah interprets it, as
fishermen stand upon the banks of a river, and cast in their hooks to
draw out the fish; and to the same purpose is Jarchi's note from R.
Meir:

so the company of priests murder in the way by consent; not only
encourage murderers, and commit murders within the city, but go out in a
body together upon the highway, and there commit murders and robberies,
and divide the spoil among them; all which they did unanimously, and
were well agreed, being brethren in iniquity, as well as in office: or,
"in the way of Shechem" (e); as good people passed by Gilead to Shechem,
and so to Jerusalem, to worship there at the solemn feasts, they lay in
wait for them, and murdered them; because they did not give into the
idolatrous worship of the calves at Dan and Bethel: or, "in the manner
of Shechem" (f); that is, they murdered men in a deceitful treacherous
manner, as the Shechemites were murdered by Simeon and Levi: Joseph
Kimchi interprets this of the princes and great men, so the word
"cohanim" is sometimes used; but the context seems to carry it to the
priests:

for they commit lewdness; or "enormity"; the most enormous crimes, and
that purposely, with deliberation devising and contriving them.

\(e\) "Sichemam versus", Gussetius, Schmidt; approved by Reinbeck. De
Accent. Heb. p. 442. "qua itur Sichem", Tigurine version; "qua via ad
Shechemum factum occidunt", Junius & Tremellius; "quae ducit ad
Sichermum", Piscator. So Abendana. (f) "Sicemice", so some in Drusius.

[Hosea 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 6:10</span></span>

I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel,.... Idolatry, the
calves set up at Dan and Bethel, which God saw with abhorrence and
detestation; or the prophet saw it, and it made his hair stand on end as
it were, as the word (g) signifies, that such wickedness should be
committed by a professing people:

there is the whoredom of Ephraim; in the house of Israel is the whoredom
of Jeroboam, who was of the tribe of Ephraim, and caused Israel to sin,
to go a whoring after idols; or the whoredom of the tribe of Ephraim,
which belonged to the house of Israel, and even of all the ten tribes;
both corporeal and spiritual whoredom, or idolatry, are here meant:

Israel is defiled; with whoredom of both kinds; it had spread itself all
over the ten tribes; they were all infected with it, and polluted by it;
see [Hos 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#003).

\(g\) a "pilus".

[Hosea 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 6:11</span></span>

Also, O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee,.... That is, God hath
set and appointed a time of wrath and vengeance for thee, which is
sometimes signified by a harvest, [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015); because thou hast been guilty
of idolatry also, as well as Ephraim or the ten tribes: or rather it may
be rendered, "but, O Judah" (h), he, that is, God, hath set an harvest
for thee; appointed a time of joy and gladness, as a time of harvest is:

when I returned, or "return" (i),

the captivity of my people; the people of Judah from the Babylonish
captivity; so that here is a prophecy both of their captivity, and of
their return from it: and it may be applied unto their return from their
spiritual captivity to sin, Satan, and the law, through the Gospel of
Christ and his apostles, first published in Judea, by means of which
there was a large harvest of souls gathered in, and was an occasion of
great joy.

\(h\) "sed", V. L. Munster, Grotius. (i) "cum ego reduco", Calvin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 7](hos007)

</div>
