<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa022)  [Next](isa024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 23:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 23

This chapter gives an account both of the desolation and restoration of
Tyre, an ancient city of Phoenicia. Its desolation is described as so
complete, that a house was not left in it, [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001) and by the fewness and stillness
of the inhabitants of it, with which it had been replenished, it having
been a mart of nations, [Isa 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002) and
by the shame and pain Zidon, a neighbouring city, was put into, on
account of it, [Isa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004) and by the
removal of its inhabitants to other places, [Isa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#006) all which is attributed to the
counsel, purpose, and commandment of God, to destroy it; whose view was
to stain their pride, and bring them into contempt, [Isa
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008) the means and instruments made
use of to this purpose were the Assyrians or Chaldeans, [Isa
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013) and its desolation is further
aggravated by the loss of its trade; hence the merchants of other
countries are called to mourning, [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001) the date and duration of this
desolation were seventy years, [Isa
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015) after which it should be
restored, and its merchandise and commerce with all the nations of the
earth be revived again, [Isa 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015).

[Isaiah 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 23:1</span></span>

The burden of Tyre,.... Or a prophecy concerning the destruction of it.
The Targum is,

"the burden of the cup of cursing, to give Tyre to drink.''

This was a famous city in Phoenicia, which exceeded in renown and
grandeur all the cities of Syria and Phoenicia (h), and was much known
for its trade and navigation, for which it was well situated by the sea;
and indeed new Tyre stood in it, about half a mile from the shore,
before it was joined to the continent by Alexander the great: but this
seems to be old Tyre, and, was upon the continent, which was built by
the Phoenicians before the Trojan war (i), and two hundred and forty
years before the temple of Solomon (k). It had its name "Tzur", in the
Hebrew language, from whence it is called Tyre, from the rock on which
it was built, that word so signifying. It is written here without a vau;
and it is a rule with the Jews (l), that whenever this word is written
full, with all its letters, it is to be understood of the city of Tyre;
but if wanting, it designs Rome; and Cocceius interprets the whole
prophecy of the antichristian city.

Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; not of Carthage, as the Septuagint version;
but of Tartessus in Spain, which traded with Tyre, and from whence the
Phoenicians are said to have large quantities of gold and silver. Some
interpret it Tarsus, a seaport in Cilicia, which lay nearer to Tyre, the
same place the Apostle Paul was of, [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003) though by Tarshish may be meant
the sea, as it sometimes is, and as the Targum and Jarchi here interpret
it, and so designs ships in general; or, as the Targum, those that go
down in the ships of the sea; or all sorts of persons, from every
quarter, that sailed in ships to Tyre, and traded with it; these are now
called to mourning and lamentation, because their commerce with it was
now over:

for it is laid waste; not Tarshish, but Tyre; and this was done, not by
Shalmaneser king of Assyria, who indeed besieged it for the space of
five years, but took it not; the Tyrians with twelve ships scattered his
fleet, and took five hundred of his men, this was when Elulaeus was king
of Tyre (m); nor by Alexander the great; for though it was besieged and
taken by him, yet before his time it had been besieged by Nebuchadnezzar
thirteen years, and at last was taken by him, when Ithobalus was king of
it (n): and this seems rather intended here, since seventy years after
this it was to be restored again, which best accords with those times,
as will be seen hereafter:

so that there is no house, no entering in; no port or haven open to go
in at, no shops to vend their goods in, no warehouses to lay them up in,
nor inns to lodge at, as well as no private houses for the inhabitants
to dwell in, all being destroyed by the enemy:

from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them; Chittim was one of the
sons of Javan, as was also Tarshish, by whom the isles of the Gentiles
were divided, [Gen 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004) from whom the
Ionians or Grecians descended; so that Chittim seems to design some part
of Greece, or isles belonging to it. The Macedonians are called by this
name; and Alexander the Macedonian is said to come out of the land of
Chittim, as in the Apocrypha:

"And it happened, after that Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian,
who came out of the land of Chettiim, had smitten Darius king of the
Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his stead, the first over
Greece,'' (1 Maccabees 1:1)

"Beside this, how they had discomfited in battle Philip, and Perseus,
king of the Citims, with others that lifted up themselves against them,
and had overcome them:'' (1 Maccabees 8:5)

hence some think he is designed here, and the destruction of Tyre by
him; and the words may be rendered, "from the land of Chittim he is
revealed", or "appears unto them"; that is, as Jarchi glosses it, the
destroyer to the men of Tyre, though he by Chittim understands the
Cuthites. Josephus says (o) Chittim the son of Javan possessed the
island Chethima, now called Cyprus, and from hence all islands, and most
maritime places, are called Chittim by the Hebrews; and observes, that
one of the cities of Cyprus is called Citium. And in the lamentation for
Tyre, [Eze 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006), we read of the isles
of Chittim; by which are meant perhaps the isles in the Aegean and
Ionian seas, who traded with Tyre, and from these first came the tidings
of Tyre's destruction to the ships or merchants of Tarshish; which
agrees with a Hebrew exposition mentioned by Jarchi,

"from the land of Chittim is revealed to the men of Tarshish the
destruction of Tyre; for the inhabitants of Tyre fled to Chittim, and
from thence the rumour was heard.''

The sense which R. Joseph Kimchi gives of the passage, as his son David
relates, is this,

"Chittim were merchants that went to Babylon, and told them that they
might go to Tyre, and would be able to take it, and they would help
them, and carry them there by sea.''

But it seems more likely that those trading people, by going from one
country to another, got knowledge of the design of the Babylonians
against Tyre, and acquainted that city with it. Some join the words,
"from the land of Chittim", to the preceding, thus, "no entering in from
the land of Chittim, it is revealed", or made known; that is, it is some
way or other made known to the merchants of Chittim (p) that there is no
entrance into Tyre, the city being laid waste and its port ruined, so
that it is in vain for them to send their ships; to which the Septuagint
in some measure agrees,

"because it perishes, and there are none come from the land of Chittim,
it is carried captive.''

The Targum is,

"they shall come from the land of Chittim against them;''

which seems to favour the first sense.

\(h\) Curt. l. 4. sect. 2. (i) Justin, l. 18. c. 3. (k) Joseph. Antiqu.
I. 8. c. 3. sect. 1. (l) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 61. fol. 54. 2. (m)
Joseph. Antiqu. l. 9. c. 14. sect. 2. (n) Ib. l. 10. c. 11. sect. 1. &
contr. Apion, I. 1. sect. 21. (o) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 1. (p) So
some in Vatablus.

[Isaiah 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 23:2</span></span>

Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle,.... Either the isles of Chittim,
or other islands that traded with Tyre, the singular being put for the
plural, called upon to grieve and mourn, because the city of their
merchandise was destroyed, as Kimchi; or of Tyre itself, which being
situated at some distance from the shore, was an island itself, until it
was joined to the continent by Alexander (q); and even old Tyre might be
so called, it being usual in Scripture to call places by the seashore
isles; and besides, old Tyre included in it new Tyre, the island, as
Pliny (r) suggests; who are instructed to be silent as mourners, and to
cease from the hurries of business, which they would be obliged to, and
not boast of their power and wealth, as they had formerly done, or
attempt to defend themselves, which would be in vain:

thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have
replenished; Zidon was a very ancient city of Phoenicia, more ancient
than Tyre; for Tyre was a colony of the Zidonians, and built by them,
and so might be said to be replenished by them with men from the first,
as it also was with mariners, [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008) and likewise with merchants and
wares, they being a trading and seafaring people; wherefore they are
spoken of as merchants, and as passing over the sea: or this may be
understood of the isles replenished with goods by the merchants of Tyre
and Zidon, but now no more, and therefore called to mourning.

\(q\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 19. (r) Ibid.

[Isaiah 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 23:3</span></span>

And by great waters the seed of Sihor,.... Sihor is the river Nile in
Egypt; it had its name from the black colour of its waters, as in [Jer
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018) hence called by the Greeks Melas,
and by the Latins Melo: the "seed" of it intends what was sown and grew
upon the banks of it, or was nourished by the overflow of this river
throughout the land, and includes corn, flax, paper, &c. with which
Egypt abounded; and when this is said to be "by great waters", the
meaning either is, that it grew by great waters, the waters of the Nile,
and through the influence of them; or that it came by great waters to
Tyre; that is, by the waters of the sea, the Mediterranean Sea:

the harvest of the river is her revenue; this clause is the same with
the former, and serves to explain it; the river is the river Nile, the
harvest is the seed that was sown and grew by it, and which at the
proper season, when ripe, was gathered from it, and carried in ships to
Tyre, with which that city was supplied and enriched, as if it had been
its own produce:

and she is a mart of nations; Tyre was a city to which all nations
traded, it was a mart for them all, and where they brought their wares
to sell, and always found a market for them, here they had vent. The
twenty seventh chapter of Ezekiel [Eze
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001) is a proper commentary on this
clause.

[Isaiah 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 23:4</span></span>

Be thou ashamed, O Zidon,.... A city near to Tyre, about twenty five
miles from it; Jarchi says it was within a day's walk of it; these two
cities, as they were near to each other, so they were closely allied
together, and traded much with one another, so that the fall of Tyre
must be distressing and confounding to Zidon; and besides, Tyre was a
colony of the Zidonians, and therefore, [Isa
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012), is called the daughter of
Zidon, and could not but be affected with its ruin, and the more, as it
might fear the same would soon be its case:

for the sea hath spoken; which washed the city of Tyre; or those that
sailed in it; or rather Tyre itself, so called because its situation was
by the sea, the island was encompassed with it:

even the strength of the sea; which was enriched by what was brought by
sea to it, and was strengthened by it, being surrounded with the waters
of it as with a wall, and had the sovereignty over it:

saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up
young men, nor bring up virgins; either the sea itself, which now no
more brought great numbers of young people to Tyre, children to be
educated, young men to be instructed in trade and business, and virgins
to be given in marriage, the city being destroyed; or Tyre, which before
was very populous, full of children, young men, and maidens, but now
desolate; and which formerly sent out colonies abroad, and was a mother
city to many, as Pliny says (s); it was famous for the birth of many
cities, as Lepti, Utica, Carthage, and Gades or Cales; but now it was
all over with her. Some render it as a wish, "O that I had never
travailed", &c. and so the Targum.

\(s\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 19.

[Isaiah 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 23:5</span></span>

As at the report concerning Egypt,.... Its future destruction prophesied
of, [Isa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001) or what had in times
past befallen it when the ten plagues were inflicted on it, and Pharaoh
and his host were drowned in the Red Sea; the report of which filled the
neighbouring nations with fear and trembling, and put them into a panic;
so the Targum,

"as they heard the plague with which the Egyptians were smitten:''

so shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre; of the destruction
of that; this should have the like effect upon the nations round about
them, especially such as traded with them, as the judgments on Egypt had
upon their neighbours; for, as for what was to come, the destruction of
Tyre was before the destruction of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar: though some
read the words, and they will bear to be read thus, "when the report"
was made, or came "to the Egyptians, they will be in pain at", or
"according to the report of Tyre" (t);

"when it was heard in Egypt, pain shall take them for Tyre;''

as soon as the Egyptians heard of the taking and ruin of Tyre, they were
in pain, as a woman in travail, partly fearing their own turn would be
next, Tyre lying in the way of the Chaldeans unto them; and partly
because of the loss of trade they sustained through the destruction of
that city. In like pain will be the kings or merchants of the earth, at
the destruction of Rome, [Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)
and, according to an exposition mentioned by Jarchi, Tyre here is Edom;
that is, Rome, for that with the Jews is commonly meant by Edom.

\(t\) So the Septuagint, Vatbalus, and others.

[Isaiah 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 23:6</span></span>

Pass ye over to Tarshish,.... Either to Tartessus in Spain, or to Tarsus
in Cilicia, which lay over against them, and to which they might
transport themselves, families, and substance, with greater ease; or "to
a province of the sea", as the Targum, any other seaport; the Septuagint
says to Carthage, which was a colony of the Tyrians; and hither the
Assyrian (u) historians say they did transport themselves; though Kimchi
thinks this is spoken, not to the Tyrians, but to the merchants that
traded with them, to go elsewhere with their merchandise, since their
goods could no more be disposed of in that city as usual.

Howl, ye inhabitants of the isle: of Tyre, as in [Isa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002) or of every isle, as Aben Ezra,
which traded here, because now their commerce was at an end; so Kimchi.

\(u\) Apud Hieron. in loc.

[Isaiah 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 23:7</span></span>

Is this your joyous city?.... Which the other day looked so gay, brisk,
and cheerful, through the number of its inhabitants, largeness of trade,
fullness of provisions, and pleasures of every kind; and now distressed
and desolate, and no voice of joy and gladness heard in it:

whose antiquity is of ancient days; the most ancient city in Phoenicia,
excepting Zidon, as Strabo (w) says; and it was in being in the days of
Joshua, [Jos 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029) if the words there
are rightly rendered; and if so, Josephus must be mistaken, unless he
speaks of insular Tyre, when he says (x), that from the building of Tyre
to the building of the temple (of Solomon) were two hundred and forty
years, which must fall very short of the times of Joshua; such (y) seem
to be nearer the truth, who make Agenor, the father of Cadmus, to be the
builder of this city, who lived about the times of Joshua. The Tyrians
indeed boasted of a still greater antiquity, and to which boasts perhaps
reference is here had; for one of the priests of Tyre told Herodotus (z)
that their city had been inhabited two thousand three hundred years; and
Herodotus lived in the times of Artaxerxes and Xerxes, about the year of
the world 3500. According to Sanchoniatho (a), it was inhabited by
Hypsuranius, who first built cottages of rushes, &c. in it; but these
things are beyond all credit; however, certain it is that it was a very
ancient city; it had the name of Palaetyrus, or old Tyre:

her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn; the sense is, that
though the Tyrians had lived very delicately, and in great affluence,
while their city was flourishing, yet now they should be very coarsely
and roughly used; they should not ride on horses, or be drawn in
carriages, but should be obliged to walk on foot, and be led or driven
into a foreign country, Assyria or Chaldea, or to some province or
provinces belonging to that empire; where they should be, not as
inhabitants, but as sojourners and strangers; and should be used, not as
freemen, but as captives and slaves. Grotius, by "her feet", understands
the feet of her ships, sails and oars, and mariners themselves, by means
of which she got into distant places, for safety; and so it is reported
in history (b), that the Tyrians being long besieged by Nebuchadnezzar,
and having no hopes of being delivered, prepared a convenient number of
ships, abandoned their city, transported themselves, wives, children,
and riches, and sailed from thence to Cyprus, Carthage, and other
maritime cities of their tributaries, or confederates; so that the
Babylonians, when they took the city, found little or nothing in it; see
[Eze 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#018) though the words will bear
another sense, being, according to the accents, to be read in connection
with the preceding clauses, thus, "Is this the joyous city? from the
first days of her antiquity her feet brought unto her inhabitants from
afar to sojourn"; that is, by her labour and pains, by her journeys and
voyages for the sake of merchandise, which may be meant by her feet, she
brought a great number of persons to sojourn in her (c).

\(w\) Geograph. l. 16. p. 520. (x) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 1. (y)
Curtius, l. 4. c. 4. (z) Herodot. l. 2. c. 44. (a) Apud Euseb. Prepar.
Evangel. l. 1. p. 35. (b) See Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World:
l. 2. c. 7. sect. 3. p. 198. (c) Reinbeck. de Accent. Heb. p. 399.

[Isaiah 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 23:8</span></span>

Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city,.... Which
had a king over it, to whom it gave a crown; and which crowned its
inhabitants with riches and plenty, and even enriched the kings of the
earth, [Eze 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#033) this is said as
wondering who could lay a scheme to destroy such a city, or ever think
of succeeding in it; who could take it into his head, or how could it
enter into his heart, or who could have a heart to go about it, and
still less power to effect the ruin of such a city, which was the queen
of cities, and gave laws and crowns, riches and wealth, to others;
surely no mere mortal could be concerned in this; see [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003),

whose merchants are princes; either really such, for even princes and
kings of the earth traded with her, [Eze
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#021) or they were as rich as princes
in other countries were:

whose traffickers are the honourable of the earth; made rich by
trafficking with her, and so attained great honour and glory in the
world; see [Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003).

[Isaiah 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 23:9</span></span>

The Lord of hosts hath purposed it,.... To destroy Tyre; who is
wonderful in counsel, capable of forming a wise scheme, and able to put
it in execution; being the Lord of armies in heaven and in earth: and
his end in it was,

to stain the pride of all glory; Tyre being proud of its riches, the
extent of its commerce, and the multitude of its inhabitants, God was
resolved, who sets himself against the proud, to abase them; to pollute
the glorious things they were proud of; to deal with them as with
polluted things; to trample upon them:

and to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth: or, "to make
light all the heavy ones of the earth" (d); all such, who are top heavy
with riches and honour, God can, and sometimes does, make as light as
feathers, which the wind carries away, and they fall into contempt and
disgrace with their fellow creatures; and the Lord's thus dealing with
Tyre was not merely on their account, to stain their pride and glory,
and disgrace their honourable ones; but for the sake of others also,
that the great ones of the earth might see and learn, by this instance
of Tyre, how displeasing to the Lord is the sin of pride; what a poor,
vain, and perishing thing, worldly honour and glory is; and what poor,
weak, feeble creatures, the princes and potentates of the earth are,
when the Lord takes them in hand.

\(d\) .

[Isaiah 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 23:10</span></span>

Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish,.... Or, "of
the sea", as the Vulgate Latin; meaning Tyre, which was situated in the
sea, and did, as it were, spring from it, and was fortified by it, and
supported by ships of merchandise on it, from various places; but now,
being about to be destroyed, the inhabitants of it are called upon to
pass through it, and get out of it as fast as they could, even as
swiftly as a river runs, and in great abundance or multitudes. Kimchi
thinks the Tyrians are bid to pass to the daughter of Tarshish, that is,
to Tarshish itself, to make their escape out of their own land, and flee
thither for safety; this the accents will not admit of, there being an
"athnach" upon the word "river"; rather the merchants of Tarshish, that
were in Tyre, are exhorted to depart to their own land with all possible
haste, lest they should be involved in its ruin; though the Targum
inclines to the other sense,

"pass out of thy land, as the waters of a river flee to a province of
the sea:''

there is no more strength; in Tyre, to defend themselves against the
enemy, to protect their trade, and the merchants that traded with them;
or, "no more girdle" (e); about it; no more girt about with walls,
ramparts, and other fortifications, or with soldiers and shipping, or
with the sea, with which it was encompassed, while an island, but now no
more, being joined to the continent by the enemy. Some think, because
girdles were a part of merchandise, [Pro
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#024), that this is said to express
the meanness and poverty of the place, that there was not so much as a
girdle left in it; rather that it was stripped of its power and
authority, of which the girdle was a sign; see [Isa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#021).

\(e\) "nulla est zona amplius", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "non est
cingulum amplius", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 23:11</span></span>

He stretched out his hand over the sea,.... That is, the Lord of hosts,
who had purposed to destroy Tyre, stretched out his hand of power over
it, called the sea, as in [Isa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004)
because situated in it, supported by it, and had the sovereignty of it;
in like manner as he stretched out his hand on the Red Sea, and
destroyed Pharaoh and the Egyptians in it; to which the allusion may be:

he shook the kingdoms; of Tyre and Zidon, which were both kingdoms, and
distinct ones; and also made other neighbouring kingdoms shake and
tremble when these fell, fearing it would be their case next. Some
understand this of the moving of Nebuchadnezzar, and of the kings of the
provinces under him, to come against Tyre:

the Lord hath given a commandment against the merchant city; the city of
Tyre, so famous for merchandise, that it was the mart of nations, as in
[Isa 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#003) or "against Canaan", in
which country Tyre and Zidon were, being originally built and inhabited
by the posterity of Canaan, [Gen
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015),

to destroy the strong holds thereof; either of the merchant city Tyre,
whose fortifications were strong, both by nature and art; or "of
Canaan", whose strong holds, or fortified cities, the principal of them
were Tyre and Zidon; so Jarchi: and if the Lord of hosts gives a
commandment to destroy it and its strong holds, as he did to
Nebuchadnezzar and his army, and afterwards to Alexander and his, who
could save them? that is, God said it, who gave commandment to destroy
it.

[Isaiah 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 23:12</span></span>

And he said, thou shalt no more rejoice,.... Not meaning that she should
never more rejoice, but not for a long time, as Kimchi interprets it;
when her calamity should come upon her, her jovial time, her time of
mirth, jollity, and revelling, would be over for a time; for, at the end
of seventy years, she should take her harp, and sing again, [Isa
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015) for the words seem to be spoken
of Tyre, concerning whom the whole prophecy is; though some think Zidon
is here meant, which, being near, suffered at the same time with Tyre,
or quickly after:

O thou oppressed virgin! Tyre is called a "virgin", because of her
beauty, pride, and lasciviousness, and because never before subdued and
taken: and "oppressed", because now deflowered, ransacked, plundered,
and ruined, by Nebuchadnezzar:

daughter of Zidon: some think Zidon itself is meant, just as daughter of
Zion means Zion herself, &c.; but it may be also observed, that such
cities that have sprung from others, or have their dependence on them,
are called their daughters; so we read of Samaria and her daughters, and
Sodom and her daughters, [Eze 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046)
and so Tyre is called the daughter of Zidon, because it was a colony of
the Zidonians (f); and at first built and supported by them, though now
grown greater than its mother:

arise, pass over to Chittim; to the isle of Cyprus, which was near them,
and in which was a city called Citium; or to Macedonia, which was called
the land of Chittim, as in the Apocrypha:

"And it happened, after that Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian,
who came out of the land of Chettiim, had smitten Darius king of the
Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his stead, the first over
Greece,'' (1 Maccabees 1:1)

or to the isles of the Aegean and Ionian seas; or to Greece and Italy;
which latter sense is approved by Vitringa, who thinks the islands of
Corsica, and Sardinia, and Sicily, are meant, which were colonies of the
Tyrians; and so in [Isa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001),

there also shalt thou have no rest; since those countries would also
fall into the enemy's hands, either the Babylonians, or the Medes and
Persians, or the Romans; into whose hands Macedonia, Carthage, and other
colonies of the Tyrians fell, so that they had no rest in any of them.

\(f\) Justin ex Trogo, l. 18. c. 3.

[Isaiah 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 23:13</span></span>

Behold the land of the Chaldeans,.... Not Tyre, as some think, so
called, because founded by the Chaldeans, who finding it a proper place
for "ships", so they render the word "tziim", afterward used, and which
is so interpreted by Jarchi, built the city of Tyre; but the country
called Chaldea is here meant, and the Babylonish empire and monarchy,
particularly Babylon, the head of it:

this people was not; a people, or of any great note and figure:

till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness;
Nimrod was the first builder of Babel, in the land of Shinar, and from
that land went forth Ashur, and built Nineveh, the city Rehoboth, and
Calah, which were built for people that lived scattered up and down in
fields and desert places; so that the Assyrians were the first founders
of Chaldea; and after it had been inhabited by the Chaldeans, it was
seized upon by the Assyrians, and became a province of theirs:

they set up the towers thereof; the towers of Babylon, not of Tyre.
Jarchi interprets it of building bulwarks against Tyre:

they raised up the palaces thereof; the stately buildings of Babylon; or
razed them; so Jarchi; also the Targum,

"they destroyed the palaces thereof:''

and he brought it to ruin: or he will do it; the past tense for the
future, i.e. God will bring Babylon to ruin; and therefore it need not
seem strange that Tyre should be destroyed, since this would be the case
of Babylon. Sir John Marsham (g) interprets the words thus,

"look upon Babylon, the famous metropolis of the Chaldeans; the people,
that possess that city, not along ago dwelt in deserts, having no
certain habitation; Nabonassar the Assyrian brought men thither, the
Scenites (the inhabitants of Arabia Deserta, so called from their
dwelling in tents); he fortified the city, he raised up towers, and
built palaces; such now was this city, founded by the Assyrian; yet God
hath brought it to ruin; Babylon shall be destroyed as Tyre;''

and this instance is brought to show that a city and a people, more
ancient and powerful than Tyre, either had been or would be destroyed;
and therefore need not call in question the truth or credibility of the
prophecy relating to Tyre; but the sense of the whole, according to
Vitringa, seems rather to be this: "behold the land of the Chaldeans";
the country they now inhabit; take notice of what is now about to be
said; it may seem strange and marvellous: "this people was not"; not
that they were of a late original, for they were an ancient people, who
descended from Chesed, the son of Nahor, but for a long time of no
account, that lived scattered up and down in desert places: till "the
Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness"; he drove out
the Arabians from Mesopotamia, and translated the Chaldeans thither, who
before inhabited the wilderness: "they set up the towers thereof, they
raised up the palaces"; that is, the Assyrians fortified and adorned the
city of Babylon, the metropolis of the country; so Herodotus (h) says
the Assyrian kings adorned the walls and temples of Babylon; now behold
this land of the Chaldeans, or the people that inhabit it, as poor and
as low as they have been, who owe their all to the Assyrians, even these
"shall bring" Tyre "to ruin"; so that the instruments of the ruin of
Tyre are here described; which, when this prophecy was delivered, might
seem improbable, the Assyrians being possessors of monarchy.

\(g\) Canon. Chronic. Egypt, &c. p. 509. Ed. 4to. (h) Clio, sive l. 1.
c. 184.

[Isaiah 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 23:14</span></span>

Howl, ye ships of Tarshish,.... As in [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001). See Gill on [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001),

for your strength is laid waste; meaning Tyre, a strong seaport, where
their ships were safe, and always found vent for their goods and
merchandise; and so it was the strength and support of their country;
but was now destroyed, and therefore was matter of lamentation and
mourning.

[Isaiah 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 23:15</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day,.... When Tyre is destroyed, from
that time forward:

that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years; shall so long lie in its
ruin, and not be rebuilt; it shall be without inhabitants, and
unfrequented by men; there shall be no merchandise in it during that
time; no merchants will come nigh it; she will be like a harlot cast off
and forgotten by her lover: the term of time is the same with that of
the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and great part of it at least run
out along with it; for Tyre was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, as
Jerusalem was, though some time after it, and was restored when the
Babylonish empire was destroyed, at the expiration of seventy years:

according to the days of one king; or kingdom, the Babylonish kingdom,
which lasted so long in Nebuchadnezzar's family; whose family, he
himself, his son, and son's son, are here meant, as Aben Ezra thinks;
and seems to be the more commonly received sense; though Kimchi and
others understand it of the days of a man, which are seventy years, [Psa
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010) and so it is added in the
Septuagint version, "as the time of a man"; which perhaps was a marginal
note, way of explanation, and crept into the text. Jarchi is of opinion
King David is meant, whose age was seventy years, though he is at a loss
to give a reason for this his opinion; but Kimchi suggests one, and that
is, the covenant which was between Hiram king of Tyre and David; and
this is mentioned to put the Tyrians in mind of the breach of it, which
had brought desolation upon them; some understand this of the King
Messiah (i):

after the end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as an harlot; being
rebuilt and restored to its former state; as a harlot who has been cast
off by her lovers, on account of some disease she has laboured under,
and through a dislike of her; but, having recovered her health, makes
use of her arts, and this among others, to sing a song, in order to
draw, by her melodious voice, her lovers to her again; and so Tyre being
built again, and out of the hands of its oppressors, and restored to its
former liberty, should make use of all arts and methods to recover her
trade, and draw merchants from all parts to her again.

\(i\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 99. 1. Yalkut Simeoni in Psal. lxxii. fol.
112. 2.

[Isaiah 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 23:16</span></span>

Take a harp, go about the city,.... As harlots used to do, that by their
music, both vocal and instrumental, they might allure men into their
company to commit fornication with them; so Tyre is directed to, or
rather this is a prophecy that she should take very artful and ensnaring
methods to restore her commerce and merchandise:

thou harlot that hast been forgotten; See Gill on [Isa
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015),

make sweet melody; or, "do well by striking" (k); that is, the harp in
her hand; strike it well with art and skill, so as to make melody, and
give pleasure:

sing many songs; or, "multiply a song" (l); sing one after another, till
the point is carried aimed at:

that thou mayest be remembered; men may took at thee again, and trade
with thee as formerly, who had been so long forgotten and neglected.

\(k\) "benefac pulsando", Junius; "belle pulsa", Piscator. (l)
"multiplica cantum", Piscator.

[Isaiah 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 23:17</span></span>

And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years,.... When the
seventy years before mentioned are ended:

that the Lord will visit Tyre; not in judgment, as before, but in mercy:

and she shall return to her hire; trade and merchandise; that shall
revive, and be as in times past:

and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world, upon
the face of the earth; be a mart of nations again, as in [Isa
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#003) that is, trade and traffic with
all nations of the earth, in the most ample and public manner; this is
called committing fornication, in agreement with the simile of a harlot
before used, whereunto Tyre is compared; as well as to observe the
illicit ways and methods used in her commerce. The Targum is,

"and her merchandise shall be sufficient to all the kingdoms of the
people, which are upon the face of the earth;''

and so the Septuagint,

"and shall be a mart to all the kingdoms of the world, upon the face of
the earth.''

The phrase is used of mystical Tyre or Babylon, and of her merchants, in
[Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003).

[Isaiah 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 23:18</span></span>

And her merchandise, and her hire,.... Or, "but her merchandise", &c.
not the same as before; or, however, not as carried on at the same time,
but many ages after, even in the times of the Gospel; for this part of
the prophecy respects the conversion of the Tyrians, in the first ages
of Christianity; this is prophesied of elsewhere, [Psa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012) and was fulfilled in the times
of the apostles, [Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019) and so
Kimchi and Jarchi say this is a prophecy to be fulfilled in the days of
the Messiah (m); and then the trade of this people, and what they got by
it,

should be holiness to the Lord; that is, devoted, at least, great part
of it, to holy uses and service; that is, in defraying of all expenses
in carrying on the worship of God, for the maintenance of Gospel
ministers, and for the supply and support of the poor saints:

it shall not be treasured, nor laid up: in order to be laid out in pride
and luxury; or to be kept as useless, to gratify a covetous disposition;
or for posterity to come:

for her merchandise shall be laid up for them, that dwell before the
Lord; part of what should be gained by trading, at least, should be laid
by for religious uses, as is directed, [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001) even for the relief of poor
saints in general, who assemble together before the Lord, for the sake
of his worship; and particularly for the support of the ministers of the
Gospel, who stand before the Lord, and minister in holy things, in his
name, to the people:

to eat sufficiently; that they may have food convenient for them, and
enough of it; or, in other words, have a sufficient maintenance, a
comfortable supply of food for themselves and families, and raiment
also; as follows:

and for durable clothing; that they may have a supply of clothing, and
never want a coat to put upon their backs. This prophecy, as it belongs
to Gospel times, is a proof of the maintenance of Gospel ministers, that
they ought to be liberally provided for; and care should be taken that
they want not food and raiment, but have a fulness and sufficiency of
both, and that which is convenient for them.

\(m\) So in Midrash, Kohelet, fol. 62. 3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 24](isa024)

</div>
