<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa000)  [Next](isa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 1

This chapter, after the inscription, contains a charge of aggravated sin
against the Jews; God's rejection of their ceremonial sacrifices and
service; an exhortation to repentance and obedience, with a promise of
pardon; a restoration from their sad estate; a prophecy of their
restoration to a better; and of the destruction of idolatrous sinners.
The inscription is in [Isa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001) in
which are the title of the prophecy, a vision; the writer of it
described by his name, his descent, and the times in which he
prophesied; and the subject of the prophecy is Judah and Jerusalem. The
charge against the Jews is rebellion against the Lord, and the heavens
and earth are called as witnesses of it; which is aggravated by the
relation they stood in to God, and by the favours bestowed upon them,
[Isa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002) by their more than brutish
stupidity, [Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003) by the multitude
of their sins, which were of a provoking nature, [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004) by the uselessness of
chastisements, the whole body of the people, from the highest to the
lowest, being afflicted without being the better for it, and so
generally depraved, that no regard was had to any means of reformation,
[Isa 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005) and by the desolation it
brought upon them, which is illustrated by several similes, [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007) and by the grace and goodness of
God in reserving a few, or otherwise they must have been for their
punishment, as they were for their sins, like Sodom and Gomorrah, [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) wherefore both rulers and people
are called upon under those names to hearken to the law of God, and not
trust in and depend upon their sacrifices and other rites of the
ceremonial law, together with their hypocritical prayers; all which were
abominable to the Lord, since they were guilty of such dreadful
immoralities, [Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011) when they are
exhorted to repentance for sin, to the obedience of faith, and washing
in the blood of Christ, whereby their crimson and scarlet sins would
become as white as wool and snow, otherwise destruction must be
expected, [Isa 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016) and then a
lamentation is taken up concerning the deplorable state of Jerusalem,
representing the difference between what it was now, and what it was
formerly, and the sad degeneracy of the people, rulers, and judges, [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021) upon which the Lord foretells
what he thought to do: to avenge himself of his enemies; to purge his
church and people; to restore them to their former uprightness and
integrity; and to redeem them with judgment and righteousness, [Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024) and the chapter is concluded with
a denunciation of utter destruction upon wicked men, who are described
and pointed at as idolaters; which will cover them with shame and
confusion, [Isa 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028) and which is
illustrated by the fading of the leaves of an oak, and by a garden
parched with drought, [Isa 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030) and it
is suggested that it will be by burning with fire unquenchable, [Isa
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031).

[Isaiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 1:1</span></span>

The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz,.... This is either the particular
title of the prophecy contained in this single chapter, as Jarchi and
Abarbinel think; seeing the second chapter [Isa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001) begins with another title, "the
word that Isaiah saw", &c. or rather it is the common title of the whole
book; since it is the vision which Isaiah saw in the reign of four
kings, as is later affirmed; and so is no other than in general "the
prophecy of Isaiah", as the Targum renders it; called a "vision",
because it was delivered to him, at least the greatest part of it, in a
vision; and because he had a clear perception of the things he
prophesied of, as well as delivered them in a clear and perspicuous
manner to others: hence the Jews say (m), that Moses and Isaiah excelled
the other prophets, seeing they understood what they prophesied of. The
name of Isaiah, the penman of this book, signifies either "the Lord
shall save", according to Hilleras (n); or "the salvation of the Lord",
as Abarbinel, Jerom, and others; and is very suitable to the message he
was sent with to the people of God; to acquaint them that the Lord had
provided a Saviour for them, and that he would come and save them. He is
said to be "the son of Amoz"; not of Amos the prophet; the names differ;
the name of the prophet that stands among the twelve lesser prophets is
"Amos"; the name of Isaiah's parent is "Amoz". It is a tradition with
the Jews (o), that Amoz, the father of Isaiah, was brother to Amaziah,
king of Judah, so that Isaiah was of the royal family. Abarbinei
endeavours to confirm it from that greatness of mind, freedom and
boldness, he used in reproofs, and from his polite and courtly way of
speaking; and this is mentioned by Aben Ezra as a reason why the Jews
did not harm him, as they did Jeremiah: but this tradition is not
equally regarded by the Jewish writers; and though Kimchi takes notice
of it, yet he says the genealogy of Isaiah is not known, nor of what
tribe he was. If he was of the seed royal, this is an instance of God's
calling some that are noble, not only by his grace, but to office in his
church; and it is with a view to this tradition, no doubt, that Jerom
(p) calls him "vir nobilis", a "nobleman". It is also a rule with the
Jews (q), that where the name of a prophet's father is mentioned, it is
a sign that his father was a prophet; and so they say this Amoz was,
though the king's brother; and that he is the same with the man of God
that came to Amaziah (r), [Ch2 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#007)
but Aben Ezra suggests, that this rule does not always hold good.

Which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem; that is, chiefly and
principally; for though Ephraim, or the ten tribes of Israel, are
mentioned, yet very rarely; and though there are prophecies concerning
other nations in it, yet these relate to the deliverance of the Jews
from them, or to God's vengeance on them for their sake. Judah is put
for the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and is particularly mentioned,
because the Messiah, so much spoken of in this book, was to spring from
thence, whose title is the Lion of the tribe of Judah; and though
Jerusalem was in it, yet that is also particularly taken notice of,
because not only the temple, the place of divine worship, was in it, and
it was the metropolis of the land; but because the Messiah, when he
came, was often to appear here, and from thence the Gospel was to go
forth into all the world; and this was a figure of the Gospel church
state to the end of the world, which often bears this name: and many
things are said in this prophecy not only concerning the coming of
Christ, but of the Gospel dispensation, and of various things that
should come to pass in it; concerning the glory of the church in the
latter day, the calling of the Gentiles, the conversion of the Jews, the
destruction of antichrist, and the new heavens and new earth.

In the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah: if
Isaiah began to prophesy in the first year of Uzziah's reign, as Kimchi
and Abarbinel think, relying pretty much on [Ch2
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#022) and lived out the reign of
Hezekiah, as he must, if he was put to death by Manasseh, according to
the tradition of the Jews, he must prophesy a hundred and twelve or
thirteen years; for Uzziah reigned fifty two years, Jotham sixteen, Ahaz
sixteen, and Hezekiah twenty nine; but as this seems to begin his
prophecy too soon, since so small a part of it was in or concerns
Uzziah's reign; so it seems too late to fix the date of his prophecy
from the year that King Uzziah died, when he had the vision in [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) and desired to be sent of the
Lord; which is the opinion of Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and others; but Dr.
Lightfoot's opinion is more probable, who places the beginning of his
prophecy in the twenty third year of Uzziah; though perhaps it may be
sufficient to allow him only ten years of Uzziah's reign: and as he
lived through the two reigns of Jotham and Ahaz, so it is certain that
he lived through more than half of the reign of Hezekiah; his whole
reign was twenty nine years; and therefore it was when he had reigned
fourteen years that he was taken sick, and then fifteen years more were
added to his days; and the year after this came the messengers from
Babylon to congratulate him on his recovery; all which Isaiah gives an
account of [Isa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001) but how long he
lived and prophesied after this cannot be said: had his days been
prolonged to the times of Manasseh, it would have been written, as Aben
Ezra observes, and who pays but little regard to the tradition of the
Jews concerning Isaiah's being put to death by Manasseh; if the thing,
says he, is "cabala", a tradition, it is truth; but he seems to call in
question its reality; however, it is not to be depended on.

\(m\) R. Eleazar in Yalkut, pars 2. fol. 118. 2. (n) Onomastic. Sacr. p.
319. (o) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 10. 2. & Sota, fol. 10. 2. & Seder Olam
Zuta, p. 104. Juchasin, fol. 12. 1. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 11. 2. (p)
Ad Paulam, fol. 8. M. tom. 3. (q) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 15. 1. (r)
Kimchi in 2 Chron. xxv. 7.

[Isaiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 1:2</span></span>

Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth,.... To what the Lord was about
to say of his controversy with his people, which was to be managed
openly and publicly before them as spectators and witnesses; this
designs either strictly and properly the heavens and the earth, or
figuratively the inhabitants of them, angels and men. The address is
solemn, and denotes something of moment and importance to be done and
attended to: see [Deu 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001). The Targum
is,

"hear, O ye heavens, that were moved when I gave my law to my people;
and hearken, O earth, that trembleth before my word.''

For the Lord hath spoken: not only by Moses, and the prophets that were
before Isaiah, but he had spoken to him the words he was now about to
deliver; for they were not his own words, but the Lord's: he spoke by
the inspiration of God, and as moved by the Holy Ghost; and therefore
what he said was to be received, not as the word of man, but as the word
of God:

I have nourished and brought up children; meaning the Jews;

"my people, the house of Israel, whom I have called children,''

as the Targum paraphrases it; see [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022) to these, as a nation, belonged
the adoption; they were reckoned the children of God; the Lord took
notice and care of them in their infant state, brought them out of
Egypt, led them through the wilderness, and fed them in it; brought them
into Canaan's land, drove out the nations before them, and settled them
there; gave them his laws and ordinances, distinguished them from all
other nations by his favours, and raised them to a high estate, to much
greatness and prosperity, especially in the days of David and Solomon.
The words may be rendered, "I have magnified", or "made great, and have
exalted children" (s); not only brought them up, but brought them to
great honour and dignity; and even unto man's estate, unto the time
appointed of the Father, when they should have been under tutors and
governors no longer, but under the King Messiah; but they were
rebellious, as follows:

and they have rebelled against me, their Lord and King; for the Jews
were under a theocracy; God, who was their Father, was their King, and
they rebelled against him by breaking his laws, which rebellion is
aggravated by its being not only of subjects against their king, but of
children against their father; the law concerning a rebellious son, see
in [Deu 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018). The Targum paraphrases
it, "they have rebelled against my Word"; the essential Word, the
Messiah; the Septuagint version is, "but they have rejected me" (t); and
the Vulgate Latin version (u), "but they have despised me": so the Jews
rejected and despised the true Messiah when he came, would not have him
to reign over them, would not receive his yoke, though easy, but
rebelled against him. The Jews were a rebellious people from the
beginning, in Moses's time, and in the prophets, and so quite down to
the times of the Messiah.

\(s\) "magnificavi", Montanus, Vatablus; "exaltavi", Munster; "extuli",
Jun. & Tremel. Sept. (t) . (u) "Spreverunt me".

[Isaiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 1:3</span></span>

The ox knoweth his owner,.... Knows his voice, when he calls him, and
follows him where he leads him, whether to plough in the field, or feed
in the meadows;

and the ass his masters crib, or "manger"; where he is fed, and to which
he goes when he wants food, and at the usual times. Gussetius (w)
interprets the words; the ass knows the floor where he treads out the
corn, and willingly goes to it, though it is to labour, as well as to
eat; and so puts Israel to shame, who were weary of the worship of God
in the temple, where spiritual food was provided for them, but chose not
to go for it, because of labour there.

But Israel doth not know; his Maker and Owner, his King, Lord, and
Master, his Father, Saviour, and Redeemer; he does not own and
acknowledge him, but rejects him; see [Joh
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010).

My people doth not consider; the Jews, who were the people of God by
profession, did not stir themselves up to consider, nor make use of
means of knowing and understanding, divine and spiritual things, as the
word used (x) signifies; they would not attend to the word and
ordinances, which answer to the crib or manger; they would not hear nor
regard the ministry of the word by Christ and his apostles, nor suffer
others, but hindered them as much as in them lay; see [Mat
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013). The Targum is,

"Israel does not learn to know my fear, my people do not understand to
turn to my law.''

In like manner the more than brutal stupidity of this people is exposed
in [Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007).

\(w\) Comment. Ling. Ebr. p. 13, 14. (x) a "intellexit". So Gussetius
says it signifies a spontaneous application, by which you stir up
yourself to understand; which is an action leading to wisdom, and
without which no man can be wise, Comment. Ling. Ebr. p. 121.

[Isaiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 1:4</span></span>

Ah sinful nation,..... Or "sinning nation" (y); that was continually
sinning, doing nothing else but sin, the reverse of what they were
chosen to be, [Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006). These words
are said, either as calling and crying to them, to cause them to hear
and hearken to what is said, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi observe, and as is
used in [Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001) or by way of
complaint and lamentation, as Jarchi thinks, because of their general
and continued wickedness, see [Kg1
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030), or by way of threatening, as in
[Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024) and so the Targum
paraphrases it,

"woe to them who are called a holy people, and have sinned:''

and so the Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions render it, "woe to the
sinning nation"; their ruin is at hand:

a people laden with iniquity; full of sin; they multiplied offences, as
in the Chaldee paraphrase: they were "heavy" with them, as the word (z)
signifies, yet felt not, nor complained of, the burden of them:

a seed of evil doers; this is not said of their fathers, but of
themselves, as Jarchi observes; they had been planted a right seed, but
now were degenerate, a wicked generation of men.

Children that are corrupters; of themselves and others, by their words
and actions; who had corrupted their ways, as the Targum adds; and so
Kimchi and Aben Ezra.

They have forsaken the Lord; the worship of the Lord, as the Targum
interprets it; the ways and ordinances of God, forsook the assembling of
themselves together, neglected the hearing of the word, and attendance
on the worship of the Lord's house:

they have provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger; by their numerous
sins, both of omission and commission:

they are gone away backward; were become backsliders and revolters, had
apostatized from God and his worship, turned their backs on him, and
cast his law behind them. The characters here given not only agree with
the Jews in the times of Isaiah, but also with those in the times of
Christ and his apostles, [Mat 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039).

\(y\) "gens peccatrix", Sept. V. L. Syr. Ar. (z) "gravi iniquitate", V.
L.

[Isaiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 1:5</span></span>

Why should ye be stricken any more? .... Or "for what are ye stricken
again" (a)? with afflictions and chastisements, with which God smites
his people by way of correction for their sins, [Isa
57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017) and the sense is, either that
they did not consider what they were afflicted for, that it was for
their sins and transgressions; they thought they came by chance, or
imputed them to second causes, and so went on in sin, and added sin to
sin; to which sense the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, incline: or the
meaning is, that the chastisements that were laid upon them were to no
purpose; had produced no good effect, were of no avail, and unprofitable
to them; and which is mentioned as an aggravation of their sins,
obstinacy, and impenitence; see [Jer
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003).

Ye will revolt more and more, or "add defection" (b); go on in sin, and
apostatize more and more, and grow more obdurate and resolute in it;
unless afflictions are sanctified, men become more hardened by them:

the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint; which may be
understood either of their chastisements, which were universal, and had
reached all sorts and ranks of men among them, without any reformation,
and therefore it was in vain to use more; or of their sins and
transgressions which abounded among them, even among the principal of
them; their civil rulers and governors, meant by the "head"; and the
priests, who should feed the people with knowledge and understanding,
designed by the "heart"; but both were corrupted, and in a bad
condition.

\(a\) "super quo", V. L. "ad quid", Ar. (b) "addentes prevaricationem",
Sept. V. L.

[Isaiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 1:6</span></span>

From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in
it,.... Every member of the body politic was afflicted in one way or
another, or sadly infected with the disease of sin; see [Psa
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003). So the Targum,

"from the rest of the people, even unto the princes, there is none among
them who is perfect in my fear;''

see [Dan 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#008).

but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; to which either public
calamities on a city or nation may be compared, [Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013) or the sins and transgressions
both of single persons, and of whole bodies of men, [Psa
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005). The Targum is,

"they are all stubborn and rebellious, they are defiled with sins as an
ulcerous plaster.''

They have not been closed; that is, the wounds and sores have not been
healed; or "they have not been pressed" or "squeezed" (c), in order to
get the purulent matter out of them:

neither bound up; with bands, after the matter is squeezed out, and a
plaster laid on:

neither mollified with ointment; which is used for the supplying and
healing of wounds; see [Luk 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034). The
sense either is, that they were not reformed by their afflictions; or
that they did not repent of their sins, nor seek to God for healing and
pardon, nor make use of any means for their more healthful state and
condition. The Targum paraphrases the words thus,

"they do not leave their haughtinesses, nor are they desirous of
repentance, nor have they any righteousness to protect them.''

\(c\) "non expessa fuere a" "exprimere humorem, hoc significari clarum
est ex" Jud. vi. 38. Gusset. Comment. Ling. Ebr. p. 227. So Vatablus,
Junius & Tremellius.

[Isaiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 1:7</span></span>

Your country is desolate,.... Or "shall be"; this is either a
declaration in proper terms of what is before figuratively expressed, or
rather a prophecy of what would be their case on account of
transgressions; and which had its accomplishment partly in the
Babylonish captivity, and fully in the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans; when not only their city and temple, called their house, [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038), were left unto them desolate,
but the whole land; and they were carried captive, and scattered among
the nations, where they have been ever since:

your cities are, or shall be,

burned with fire; as, Jerusalem has been, and other cities in Judea,
[Mat 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007).

your land, strangers devour it in your presence; before their eyes, and
it would not be in their power to prevent it; meaning either the
Babylonians or the Romans, or both, and especially the latter, who were
strangers and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel:

and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers; who ravage, plunder, and
destroy all they meet with, and spare nothing, not intending to settle
there, as those who are near do, when they conquer a neighbouring
nation. Some think this prophecy was delivered in the times of Ahaz, and
refers to the desolation in his time, [Ch2
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017) but rather, as Joel and Amos
prophesied before Isaiah, he may refer to those desolating judgments,
they speak of, by the locusts, caterpillars, and fire, [Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004) but to consider the words as a
prediction of what should be in after times seems best; and so the
Arabic version reads the words, "your land shall be desolate, your
cities shall be burnt with fire, and your country strangers shall devour
before you"; or shall be as overthrown by strangers, being overflown
with a flood or storm of rain; so Abendana (d).

\(d\) As if it was which signifies a flood, or overflowing of water,
Hab. iii. 10. to which sense Aben Ezra inclines; so Schultens in Job
xxiv. 8.

[Isaiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 1:8</span></span>

And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in the vineyard,.... The
Targum is,

"after they have got in the vintage.''

A cottage in the vineyard was a booth, as the word (e) signifies, which
was erected in the middle of the vineyard for the keeper of the vineyard
to watch in night and day, that the fruit might not be hurt by birds, or
stolen by thieves, and was a very, lonely place; and when the clusters
of the vine were gathered, this cottage or booth was left by the keeper
himself: and such it is suggested Jerusalem should be, not only stand
alone, the cities all around being destroyed by the besiegers, but empty
of inhabitants itself, when taken.

As a lodge in a garden of cucumbers: the Targum adds here also,

"after they have gathered them out of it.''

A lodge in a garden of cucumbers was built up for the gardener to watch
in at night, that nobody came and stole away the cucumbers, and this was
also a lonely place; but when the cucumbers were gathered, the gardener
left his lodge entirely; and such a forsaken place would Jerusalem be at
the time of its destruction; see [Luk
19:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#043).

as a besieged city; which is in great distress, and none care to come
near it, and as many as can make their escape out of it; or "as a city
kept"; so Gussetius (f), who understands this, and all the above
clauses, of some places preserved from the sword in the common
desolation.

\(e\) , Sept. (f) "ut urbs custodita", Gusset. Comment. Ling. Ebr. p.
529. "Observata vel observanda", Forerius.

[Isaiah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 1:9</span></span>

Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant,.... This
is an instance of the super abounding goodness of the Lord of hosts, as
the Targum expresses it; that he should, in those very wicked and
calamitous times, leave and reserve a few from being defiled with the
sins of the age, and from being involved in the general calamity of it;
which was true of the Christian Jews at the time of Jerusalem's
destruction; for that this prophecy belongs to these times is clear from
the application of it by the Apostle Paul, [Rom
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029) and which confirms the sense
given of the above passages: "the very small remnant" are the remnant
according to the election of grace, the little flock, the few that
entered in at the strait gate and are saved, or the few that believed in
Christ, and so were saved from that untoward generation; these were
"left", reserved, distinguished, and secured in the grace of election,
being a remnant according to it, in the hands of Christ to whom they
were given, and in whom they were preserved; in redemption by him, that
they might be a peculiar people; in providence till called, in which the
Lord watched over them to do them good, and waited to be gracious to
them, and saved them to be called; and in effectual calling, in which he
separated them from the rest of the world, and kept them by his power
through faith unto salvation. And this was done "unto us"; for the sake
of his church, that that might continue, and he might have a seed to
serve him: and by "the Lord of hosts", of the hosts of heaven, the sun,
and moon, and stars, and of the angels there, and of the inhabitants of
the earth; which shows great condescension in him to regard this
remnant, and great grace to them; since he could not stand in need of
them, having the host of heaven on his right hand and on his left; nor
was there any thing in them that could deserve this of him; but it was,
as Jarchi observes, in his mercy, and not for their righteousness: to
which may be added, that since he is the Lord of hosts, he was able to
protect and preserve this remnant, notwithstanding all the opposition of
men and devils, as he did; and had he not taken such a method as this,

we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto
Gomorrah: cities that were infamous for their sins, and notorious for
the punishment of them, being consumed by fire from heaven, [Gen
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013) and not only the Jews, but any
and every nation, even the whole world, would have been like these
cities, both for sin and punishment, had it not been for the
distinguishing grace of God, in leaving and reserving a few for his
glory, and the support of his interest. All the holiness that ever was,
is, or will be in the world, is owing to electing, redeeming, and
efficacious grace: there had not been a holy man nor a holy woman in the
world, in any age, if God had not taken such methods of grace; and it is
owing to, and for the sake of, this small remnant, that temporal
judgments are often averted from a nation and people, and that the
conflagration of the world is not yet; this is kept back till they are
gathered in; and were it not for this distinguishing grace, every
individual of mankind would have been cast into hell, and must have
suffered the vengeance of eternal fire, which the punishment of Sodom
and Gomorrah, was an example of.

[Isaiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 1:10</span></span>

Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom,.... Not literally, but
mystically, meaning the governors of Judea; they and their people having
sinned in like manner, and as openly, as the rulers of Sodom, and the
inhabitants thereof; see [Isa 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009) and
so the Targum paraphrases the words,

"receive the word of the Lord, ye governors, whose works are evil like
the governors of Sodom.''

These are called to attend to the word of the Lord; either the
Scriptures, which should be the rule of faith and practice, from which
they had swerved; or to the word which now came to them by the prophet,
and is contained in the following verses; or rather to the Gospel
preached to them by John the Baptist, Christ, and his apostles, see [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003) which being rejected by them as it
was, it is declared that it would be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for them, [Mat
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024).

give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah; the inhabitants
of Judea; for as were both the civil and ecclesiastical rulers, so were
the people both in Isaiah's time, and in the times of Christ and his
apostles. The Targum is,

"hearken to the law of our God, ye people whose works are like to the
people of Gomorrah.''

And by "the law of our God" is meant, not so much the law of Moses,
which these people had not hearkened to, but had broken it, and cast it
away from them, as the doctrine of the grace of God, the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is our God; which was first sent and preached to
this wicked people, for the sake of the small remnant, according to the
election of grace left among them; see [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003).

[Isaiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 1:11</span></span>

To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the
Lord,.... These people, though they neglected the weightier matters of
the law, and the more substantial duties of religion, as did the Scribes
and Pharisees in Christ's time, [Mat
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023) yet were very diligent in the
observance of the ceremonial law, and repeated their sacrifices almost
without number, on which they placed all their trust and dependence;
wherefore, to take off their confidence in these things, the Lord
observes to them the unprofitableness of them; they could be of no avail
to them, for they could not expiate their sins, or atone for them; and
they could not be profitable to God, for he had no need of them; see
[Psa 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010).

I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; to
the loathing of them, and therefore would no more eat their flesh, and
drink their blood, or accept of them in sacrifice, [Psa
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013) "rams" were used for burnt
offerings, [Exo 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#018), [Lev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010) and the fat of any creature
offered in sacrifice was burnt, and forbidden to be eaten by men, [Lev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008), [Lev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015).

and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats:
as he did in moral services, in acts of beneficence and mercy, and in
sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022), [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006) much less did he delight in the
sacrifices of these creatures, as offered by such wicked hands and
without faith in the blood and sacrifice of Christ; and still less when
these were superseded and abrogated by Christ; for this prophecy belongs
to the times of the apostles, as appears from [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) see [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006). The several creatures mentioned
were used in sacrifice, and their blood was sprinkled round about the
altar, [Lev 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002) and before the vail,
[Lev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006).

[Isaiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 1:12</span></span>

When ye come to appear before me,.... At the grand festivals of the
passover, pentecost, and tabernacles, at which times all the males in
Israel appeared before God, [Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017).

who hath required this at your hand; either to appear at such times,
these feasts being no more to be observed; or to offer the above
sacrifices; these were not required of the Israelites when they first
came out of Egypt, [Jer 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022) nor were
they necessary to appear before God with, or to introduce them to the
throne of his grace, [Mic 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006) and much
less under the Gospel dispensation, being abolished by the sacrifice of
Christ; or this relates to what follows,

to tread my courts? in that unbecoming and hypocritical way they did,
and with such wicked hearts and bloody hands. "Courts" are mentioned,
because, as Kimchi observes, the Israelites stood in the courts of the
Lord's house, and did not go into the temple, only the priests.

[Isaiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 1:13</span></span>

Bring no more vain oblations,.... As all such were, which were offered
up without faith in Christ, in hypocrisy, and with dependence on them
for pardon and atonement, and particularly when put an end to by the
sacrifice of Christ; see [Mat 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009).
The Targum renders it, "an oblation of robbery"; see [Isa
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008).

incense is an abomination to me; instead of being of a sweet smell. This
was burnt on the altar of incense, and put upon the sacrifices, [Exo
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001) was typical of prayer, [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002) but now under the Gospel
dispensation to be disused, and so disagreeable to God, that it is as if
an idol was blessed, [Isa 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003).

the new moons; the feasts kept on the first day of the month, at the
appearance of the moon:

and sabbaths; observed every seventh day, every seventh year, and every
seven times seventh year:

the calling of assemblies; or "the new moon and sabbath, do not call a
congregation". These assemblies called were the holy convocations on the
seventh day sabbath, at the feasts of passover, pentecost, and
tabernacles, at the blowing of the trumpets, and on the day of
atonement, [Lev 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#003) &c. [Num
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#026). The words,

I cannot away with or "bear", may be joined with the following word,
"iniquity"; and the meaning is, that the Lord could not bear the
iniquity that was in their hearts when they had their solemn assemblies
and holy convocations:

it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting: or cessation from work on any
of the above festivals; particularly the feast of weeks, or pentecost,
was called "Atzareth", by the Jews (g), the same word with this here
(h).

\(g\) Misn. Chagiga, c. 2. sect. 4. (h) The whole verse, agreeably to
the accents, is thus rendered by Reinbeck. de Accent. Heb. p. 377, 378.

"Do not go on to offer oblation of vanity; incense of abomination is it
to me; do not go on, I say, on the new moon, and sabbath, to call a
convocation: I cannot bear iniquity, together with the most solemn
congregation.''

[Isaiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 1:14</span></span>

Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth,.... The Targum
is,

"my Word abhorreth;''

the Messiah, the essential Word. These are the same as before.

They are a trouble unto me; as they were kept and observed, either when
they should not, or in a manner unbecoming:

I am weary to bear them; because of the sins with which they made him to
serve, [Isa 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024).

[Isaiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 1:15</span></span>

And when ye spread forth your hands,.... That is, in prayer, this being
a prayer gesture: hence the Targum paraphrases it,

"and when the priests spread out their hands to pray for you.''

I will hide mine eyes from you; will not look upon them, nor regard
their prayer; see [Lam 3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042).

yea, when ye make many prayers; as the Scribes and Pharisees did in
Christ's time, and thought to be heard for their much speaking, like the
Gentiles, [Mat 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007).

I will not hear; so as to give an answer, or fulfil their requests: the
reason follows,

your hands are full of blood; of the prophets of the Lord, of Christ and
his followers, whom they put to death.

[Isaiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 1:16</span></span>

Wash ye, make you clean, &c. These two words are to be regarded as one,
since they intend the same thing, and suppose the persons spoken to to
be unclean, as they were, notwithstanding their legal sacrifices and
ceremonial ablutions; and are designed to convince them of it, to bring
them to a sense of their inability to cleanse themselves, to lead them
to inquire after the proper means of it, and so to the fountain of
Christ's blood to wash in, which only cleanses from it:

put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; the exhortation
is not barely to put away their doings, but the evil of them, and that
not from themselves, but from before the eyes of God, from the eyes of
his vindictive justice, which is only done by the sacrifice of Christ;
and the use of this exhortation is to show the necessity of putting away
sin to salvation, and the insufficiency of the blood of bulls and goats
to do it, since, notwithstanding these, it remains untaken away; and to
direct to the sacrifice of Christ, which effectually does it.

Cease to do evil; either from ceremonial works done with a wicked mind,
or from outward immoralities, such as shedding innocent blood,
oppressing the fatherless and widow, things mentioned in the context; it
denotes a cessation from a series and course of sinning, otherwise there
is no ceasing from sin in this life.

[Isaiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 1:17</span></span>

Learn to do well,.... Which men are naturally ignorant of; to do good
they have no knowledge; nor can they that are accustomed to do evil
learn to do well of themselves; but the Lord can teach them to profit,
and of him they should ask wisdom, and desire, under the influence of
his grace, to learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, and
particularly to do acts of beneficence to all men, and especially to the
household of faith; and also, the following ones,

seek judgment; seek to do justice between man and man in any cause
depending, without respect of persons:

relieve the oppressed; the poor that are oppressed by their neighbours
that are richer and mightier than they, right their wrongs, and deliver
them out of the hands of their oppressors (i):

judge the fatherless; do justice to them who have none to take care of
them, and defend them:

plead for the widow; that is desolate, and has none to plead her cause.

\(i\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 9. sect. 3. T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 67. 1,

[Isaiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 1:18</span></span>

Come now, and let us reason, together, saith the Lord,.... These words
stand not in connection either with the preceding or following, but are
to be read in a parenthesis, and are thrown in for the sake of the small
remnant God had left among this wicked people, in order to comfort them,
being distressed with sin. These, seeing their sins in their dreadful
colours, and with all their aggravating circumstances, were ready to
conclude that they were unpardonable; and, seeing God as an angry Judge,
dared not come nigh him, but stood at a distance, fearing and expecting
his vengeance to fall upon them, and therefore put away the promises,
and refused to be comforted; when the Lord was pleased to encourage them
to draw near to him, and come and reason with him: not at the bar of his
justice; there is no reasoning with him there; none can contend with
him, or answer him, one of a thousand; if he marks iniquity in strict
justice, none can stand before him; there is no entering the lists with
him upon the foot of justice, or at its bar: but at the bar of mercy, at
the throne of grace; there the righteous may dispute with him from his
declarations and promises, as well as come with boldness to him; and at
the altar and sacrifice of Christ, and at the fountain of his blood:
here sinners may reason with him from the virtue and efficacy of his
blood and sacrifice; and from the Lord's proclamation of grace and mercy
through him; and from his promises to forgive repenting and confessing
sinners: and here God reasons with sensible souls from his own covenant
promises and proclamations to forgive sin; from the aboundings of his
grace over abounding sin; from the righteousness of Christ to justify,
his blood to cleanse from sin, and his sacrifice to atone for it; and
from the end of his coming into the world to save the chief of sinners:
saying,

though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Every sin is a
transgression of the law, and hateful and abominable to God; no sin is
venial in itself, but deserving of the wrath of God, and the curses of
the law; all sin is mortal, the wages of it is death: but all are not
alike; some are greater, others lesser; some are attended with
aggravating circumstances, as when the persons that commit them have,
besides the light of nature, also the law of Moses, or the Gospel of
Christ; have had the advantage of a religious education; have sat under
a Gospel ministry, and received much speculative light and knowledge;
yea, have been under convictions of sin time after time, and yet have
been ringleaders and encouragers of others in sin, guilty of very
enormous crimes, which in themselves are comparable to "scarlet" and
"crimson": and perhaps reference may be had to the sin of murder, since
the persons, among whom these dwelt, their hands were full of blood; and
may respect the crucifiers of Christ, among whom there were some
savingly convicted and converted. Moreover, they may be signified hereby
on account of the effects of them, they defile men, provoke God to
wrath, and, through the law, work wrath in their consciences; and may
signify, that they are sins of a deep dye, and which have such a place
in their hearts and consciences, that nothing can remove them but the
blood of Christ: and besides are open, flagrant, and notorious to all,
and especially to God; yet these, through the grace and blood of Jesus,
become as white as wool and as snow: not that pardon of sin takes sin
out of the hearts and natures of men, nor changes the nature of sin, or
causes it to cease to be sin; but this is to be understood of the
persons of sinners, who hereby are made so white, yea, whiter than this,
[Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001) as they are considered in
Christ, washed in his blood, and clothed with his righteousness, which
is fine linen, clean and white; God, seeing no iniquity in them, has
thus graciously dealt with them, and they being without fault, spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing. It was with respect to this Scripture that
the Jews in later times were wont to tie a scarlet thread to the head of
the scapegoat, when he was sent into the wilderness; though at first
they fastened it to the door of the outward porch, and then to the door
of the inward porch, and, if it turned white, it was a sign their sins
were forgiven them, but, if not, otherwise (k); and it is owned by them,
that it belongs to future time, the time of the Messiah (l).

\(k\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 89. 2. (l) Gussetius observes, that signifies
not "oppressed", but infected with leaven, and so means, reduce to a
right way him that is corrupt with the leaven of vice, by hindering him
that he may not go on to hurt the fatherless. Comment. Ebr. p. 265.

[Isaiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 1:19</span></span>

If ye be willing and obedient,.... The Targum adds, "to my Word": the
Word made flesh, and dwelling among them; who would have gathered the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to his ministry, to attend his word and
ordinances, but their rulers would not:

ye shall eat the good of the land; the land of Canaan; as the Jews held
the possession of that land, before the times of Christ, by their
obedience to the laws of God, which were given them as a body politic,
and which, so long as they observed, they were continued in the quiet
and full enjoyment of all the blessings of it; so, when Christ came, had
they received, embraced, and acknowledged him as the Messiah, and been
obedient to his will, though only externally, they would have remained
in their own land, and enjoyed all the good things in it undisturbed by
enemies.

[Isaiah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 1:20</span></span>

But if ye refuse and rebel,.... The Targum is, "and do not receive my
Word"; the Messiah, when come, neither his person, nor his doctrines and
ordinances:

ye shall be devoured with the sword; of the Roman armies, as they were
under Titus Vespasian; see [Mat 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007).

for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it; now, by Isaiah, as well as in
former times, [Lev 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025).

[Isaiah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 1:21</span></span>

How is the faithful city become a harlot!.... The city of Jerusalem, in
which were the temple, and the pure worship of God, and was in the tribe
of Judah, which ruled with God, and was very faithful with the saints
when the ten tribes revolted, and fell in with the sin of Jeroboam; but
now, in Isaiah's time, was become like a treacherous wife to her
husband, unfaithful to the Lord, went after other lovers, committed
spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry, with stocks and stones; and in
the times of Christ were a wicked and an adulterous generation,
corrupting the word and worship of God; see [Mat
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039).

it was full of judgment; strict justice was exercised privately between
man and man, as well as in the public courts of judicature;

righteousness lodged in it; that is, righteous men, who walked in all
the commandments of the Lord, and lived soberly, righteously, and godly;
see [Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013).

but now murderers: of the prophets whom they stoned, who were sent unto
them, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom they were the betrayers and
murderers; see [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037).

[Isaiah 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 1:22</span></span>

Thy silver is become dross,.... Meaning either that such persons, who
had the appearance of goodness, looked like genuine silver, were now
become reprobate, and, as the wicked of the earth, like dross, [Jer
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030) or that the word of God, which is
as silver purified seven times, was now corrupted with false glosses and
human traditions, which were as dross:

thy wine mixed with water (m); the wine of the divine word, which was
mixed and blended with the inventions of men, as before; so the roof of
the church's mouth, which is no other than the ministry of the word, is
compared to the best wine, [Sol 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#009).

\(m\) It being usual to mix water with wine, and drink it, and this
being not at all reproachful, but commendable, Gussetius thinks such a
version does not express the sense of the words; he therefore thinks
that is the same as contracted, which signified "infatuated"; and so the
words should be rendered, "thy wine is infatuated into water"; is
degenerated, and has lost its spirit and sprightliness, and is become
insipid and tasteless. So Jarchi mentions a Midrash, which interprets it
by the same word in [Ecc 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#002). It is a
word only used in this place. Joseph Kimchi says that in the Arabic,
language has the signification of mixture, but without giving any
instance. Indeed, according to Castel, it is used for the lees of oil.

[Isaiah 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 1:23</span></span>

Thy princes are rebellious,.... Stubborn and obstinate, refused to
receive and acknowledge the Messiah; such were the Jewish rulers, civil
and ecclesiastical, in the times of Christ.

And companions of thieves: who devoured widows' houses; made the temple,
which was a house of prayer, a den of thieves; and took away the key of
knowledge from the people, and would not suffer them to attend the
ministry of the Gospel, [Mat 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013).

everyone loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards. The Targum
paraphrases it,

"everyone says to his neighbour, do me a favour in my cause, I will
return "it" to thee in thy cause;''

and so justice was perverted:

they judge not the fatherless; that is, either they do not take their
cause in hand at all, or, if they do, do not do them justice, but wrong
them of their goods and estates, which, of right, belong to them:

neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them; there being no money
to be got by undertaking it; see the case of the unjust judge, a picture
of judges in those times, [Luk 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002).

[Isaiah 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 1:24</span></span>

Therefore, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of
Israel,.... All these names and titles, which are expressive of the
majesty, power, and authority of God, are used to give the greater
solemnity and weight to what follows; and to show that he is able to
accomplish what he determines and threatens to do.

Ah! which is a particle, either expressive of grief at their wretched
and miserable condition, or of indignation at their provoking sins and
transgressions:

I will ease me of mine adversaries; or, "I will take comfort (n) of"
them, by destroying them; expressing the pleasure and satisfaction he
should take in avenging his justice on them: they had been a trouble to
him, and had wearied him with their sins, and now he will ease himself
of them by removing them. The Targum is,

"I will comfort the city of Jerusalem;''

not taking the sense of the words:

and avenge me of mine enemies; the Jews, who were enemies to Christ and
his Gospel, and would not have him to reign over them, and which was the
cause of the destruction of their city, temple, and nation; see [Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014).

\(n\) "consolationem capiam", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.
"Consolabor me", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 1:25</span></span>

And I will turn my hand upon thee,.... The remnant, according to the
election of grace, left in Jerusalem, [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) meaning not his afflicting hand,
no, not even as a fatherly chastisement; though the Lord sometimes, by
such means, purges away the iniquity of his people, as follows; see [Isa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009) much less his hand of wrath and
vengeance, the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his
anger; but his hand of efficacious grace in conversion, with which he
plucks sinners as brands out of the burning; delivers them from the
power of Satan; turns their hearts to himself; opens them, to attend
unto and understand divine things; breaks them in pieces with the hammer
of his word; works grace in them, and carries on the good work in their
souls: all which is owing to his mighty hand of grace upon them, and to
the exertions of the exceeding greatness of his power towards them. This
was accomplished in part in the conversion of a large number of the Jews
on the day of Pentecost, and afterwards; and will be more fully
accomplished in the latter day, when that people shall turn to the Lord,
in consequence of his hand of powerful grace being turned on them. The
phrase is used of the display of divine grace and mercy, in [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007).

and purely purge away thy dross; which the Targum rightly interprets of
"ungodliness" or wickedness; it means the sins of converted ones, which,
at conversion, they are purely purged from; not that sin, as to the
being of it, is removed from them; that dwells in them, abides with
them; and, like dross, is a heavy burden, a dead weight upon them, and
will be while they are in this tabernacle, and makes them groan, being
burdened; so far from it, that in their view it rather increases; they
see the plague of their own hearts; and such innumerable swarms of
corruption they never saw before; sin revives, and they die; but in
conversion grace superabounds it, deluges over it, keeps down the force
and power of it, so that it has not the dominion; the old man is put off
concerning the former conversation, which ceases to be a series, a
course of sinning: besides, through the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, which cleanseth from all the dross and filth of sin, the guilt
is removed from the conscience, and perfect peace and full pardon take
place; all iniquity is caused to pass from them, and they are clothed
with change of raiment, the righteousness of Christ, by which they are
justified from all things, and are pure, spotless, and without fault
before the throne:

and take away all thy tin. The Targum also interprets this of iniquity,
rendering it, "I will take away all thy sin"; but it is better to
understand it of self-righteousness; which, as tin is of more worth than
dross, and looks like silver; so this has the appearance of some good in
it, and was what the Jews were fond of, trusted in, and depended on, and
which they followed after, and endeavoured to establish and hold fast;
but this in conversion is all taken away: the Lord, by his Spirit;
convinces of the weakness and insufficiency of it, to justify in his
sight; shows that it is not a righteousness, and will be of no service
in that respect; yea, takes away these filthy rags, and clothes with the
righteousness of Christ; causes the soul to drop and renounce its own
righteousness, and put on that; and not only to renounce works before
conversion, but all after it, as a profession of religion, subjection to
Gospel ordinances, and all works, though done in faith, and in a right
manner; a glaring instance we have of all this in one of that little
remnant, the Apostle Paul, [Phi 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006).
Moreover, by "dross" and "tin", or "tins", in the plural number, may be
meant persons; wicked and profane men, by the former, who should be put
away like dross, [Psa 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119) and self
righteous persons, by the latter; who shine like silver, make a show of
religion, appear outwardly righteous; but these, as well as the other,
should be separated from the people of God, when the precious and the
vile should be distinguished.

[Isaiah 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 1:26</span></span>

And I will restore thy judges as at the first,.... This refers not to
the times after the Babylonish, captivity, when the Jews had judges and
rulers, such as Zerubbabel and Nehemiah, as they had in the times of
Moses, Joshua, and the judges, or as in the times of David and Solomon;
but it refers, as Kimchi observes, to the times of the Messiah; and is
true of the apostles of Christ, who were set on twelve thrones, had
power and authority from Christ to preach his Gospel, and to judge the
twelve tribes of Israel in a doctrinal way, [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028) for which they were abundantly
qualified, having the spirit of counsel and of judgment resting upon
them, as the prophets of old; and will be again verified in the
ministers of the Gospel, at the time of the Jews' conversion, when the
watchmen shall see eye to eye, have a clear discerning and judgment of
things as at the first, [Isa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008).

and thy counsellors as at the beginning; which is to be understood of
the same persons; the apostles at Jerusalem gave advice and counsel in
matters of difficulty, and were consulted on special occasions, of which
there is an instance in [Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001) and
ordinary ministers of the word are qualified, and especially will be in
the latter day, to give advice both to sensible sinners, inquiring the
way of salvation, and to saints when under desertion, and have lost
their beloved, or have any matters of difficulty upon them, whether with
respect to faith or practice.

Afterward thou shall be called the city of righteousness: when many
shall be converted through the hand of the Lord turned upon them, and
become incorporated into a church state, and having the apostles and
other ministers of the Gospel among them, with proper officers over
them, as the first Christian church at Jerusalem had; and the members of
it were righteous persons, such as were justified by the righteousness
of Christ, and lived righteously, walking in the ordinances of the Lord,
and as became the Gospel of Christ, and will be the case of the churches
of Christ in the latter day:

the faithful city; to Christ, his Gospel, ordinances, and one another,
as the first Christians at Jerusalem were; see [Act
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#012). A true church of Christ is a
congregation of faithful men, who keep the ordinances as they were
delivered; stand first in the faith of the Gospel; take care that the
laws of Christ's house are put in execution; and do not suffer sin upon
one another, nor bear them that are evil, whether in doctrine or
practice; and which in the latter day will be the case of the churches
of Christ in a remarkable manner, when they will justly bear this
character.

[Isaiah 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 1:27</span></span>

Zion shall be redeemed with judgment,.... The blessing of redemption by
Christ is the source and foundation of the other blessings of grace,
before mentioned, the little remnant are favoured with, as
justification, pardon of sin, and conversion, [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018), [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025) it is of a spiritual nature; the
redemption of the soul is a deliverance from the captivity of sin,
Satan, and the law, and is plenteous and eternal; the objects of
redeeming grace are "Zion"

and her converts; not the world, but the church is redeemed by Christ;
for by Zion is meant, not a place, but people, even the church and
people of God, who frequently bear the name of Zion in this prophecy,
and in other passages of Scripture, both of the Old and of the New
Testament; see [Isa 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014) compared to
Mount Zion for its height and holiness; for being the object of God's
love, the instance of his choice, the place of his habitation; where his
worship is, he grants his presence, and distributes his blessings; for
its being a perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth, well
fortified and immovable: and the redemption of the church by Christ is

with judgment; with the judgment and vengeance of God on Christ, and
through the condemnation of him as her Head and representative; with the
judgment of God, which is according to truth, in whose judgment she is
truly redeemed by the blood of Christ, and really delivered from her
bondage, according to his justice and holiness, which are glorified by
it: but here the redemption of Zion seems to mean a more glorious state
of the church, a restoration of her to her former glory, or to a
greater, which will be in the latter day, and may be discerned as
drawing near by the signs of the times fulfilling, [Luk
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028) whereby the truth and
faithfulness of God, in his promises concerning it, will be honoured,
and he will appear to be a God of judgment:

and her converts with righteousness; so called, not because converted by
the church, for conversion is God's work, and not man's; no man can
effect his own conversion, he is passive in it; nor can any others, not
their nearest friends and relations; they can only pray for it, as
Abraham did for Ishmael, and bring them under the means; nor are
ministers sufficient, only instruments of conversion neither Zion's
ministers nor members can convert one sinner: but they are so called,
either because converted "in" her, through the ministry of the word as a
means, preached in the midst of her, [Psa
87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005) or because converted "to" her,
[Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005) being made to submit to the
ordinances of the church, and to join themselves to it. "Converts" are
the objects of redemption by Christ; all that are redeemed are, sooner
or later, converted; and all that are converted are redeemed; and the
redemption of them by his blood is consistent "with" the "righteousness"
of God; for hereby sin is fully condemned and punished; the justice of
God has all its demands, and the law is completely fulfilled; and so the
end of God is answered, which is to declare his righteousness by it.
Moreover, in the latter day, when there, will be a redemption and
deliverance or the church out of all her troubles and distresses, her
converts will manifestly appear to be all righteous, being justified
with the spotless righteousness of Christ, [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021).

[Isaiah 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 1:28</span></span>

And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall be
together,.... Of the beast and false prophet, of the followers of
antichrist, the man of sin, who are transgressors of the law of God, and
sinners against the Lord; the destruction of these, or the breaking of
them into shivers, as the word (o) signifies, see [Rev
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027) will be at the time of Zion's
redemption, and make a part of it; and it shall be all at once and
together; these sinners will be all together consumed out of the earth,
and these wicked antichristian ones will be no more in it, [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035).

and they that forsake the Lord; his word, his worship and ordinances; as
the Papists have manifestly done, by setting up their own unwritten
traditions against the word of God, by adulterating his ordinances, and
introducing new ones, and by worshipping images of gold, silver, brass,
and wood;

wherefore they shall be consumed; with the breath of Christ's mouth, and
with the brightness of his coming, [Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008).

\(o\) "contritio sive confractio", Syr.

[Isaiah 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 1:29</span></span>

For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired,.... Though
there is a change of persons in the words, the same are intended; and
design such, who being convinced of the idolatries of the church of Rome
they have been fond of, and delighted in, will be ashamed of them, and
relinquish them, and come out of Babylon a little before the destruction
of it; for under oaks, and such like green trees, idolatry used to be
committed, to which the allusion is; see [Jer
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020) and so the Targum interprets it
of "trees of idols"; that is, under which idolatry was practised:

and ye shall be confounded for the gardens ye have chosen; where also
idolatrous practices were used, see [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003) and so the Targum paraphrases it,

"and ye shall be ashamed of the gardens of idols, from whom ye have
sought help.''

The sense is the same as before; unless both clauses should rather be
understood of the destruction of sinners, before spoken of, who at that
time will be filled with shame and confusion, they in vain praying to
their idols for help; which sense the following words incline to.

[Isaiah 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 1:30</span></span>

For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth,.... Shall be stripped of
all their dependencies and self confidence, and be as naked and as bare
as an oak that has cast its leaves; or thus, in a way of just
retaliation, since they have desired oaks, and sacrificed under them,
they shall be like them as in the wintertime, stripped of all their
riches, honour, substance, and desirable things; see [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012).

and as a garden that hath no water; in which the herbs and plants are
dried up and withered: it signifies the uncomfortable condition such
shall be in, as before.

[Isaiah 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 1:31</span></span>

And the strong shall be as tow,.... "that strong one", who is eminently
so; the little horn, whose look is more stout than his fellows, [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020) the beast who had great power and
authority given by the dragon, [Rev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002) who shall be cast alive into the
lake of fire; when he will be like tow in those devouring flames,
easily, quickly, and irrecoverably consumed, [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011), [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020).

and the maker of it as a spark, or "his work"; so the Targum,

"and the work of their hands shall be as a spark of fire;''

or like the embers and ashes of a coal, which are blown away and lost at
once: so antichrist, and all his evil works, as well as all his evil
workers under him, will be entirely consumed: or, as it may be rendered,
"he that wrought him": that is, Satan, for his coming is after the
working of Satan; he has his seat, power, and authority, from the
dragon, the old serpent, and the devil, and may be truly called a
creature of his, [Th2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009).

and they shall both burn together; both the pope and the devil in the
lake of fire and brimstone, into which they will both be cast, [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010).

and none shall quench them; that fire will be unquenchable and
everlasting; they will be tormented for ever and ever, and so will all
the worshippers of the beast, [Mat
25:41.](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041) The Chaldee paraphrase is,

"so the wicked shall be consumed, and their evil works, and there shall
be no mercy upon them.''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 2](isa002)

</div>
