<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa053)  [Next](isa055) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 54](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 54:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 54

As the former chapter is a prophecy of the humiliation and exaltation of
Christ, of his sufferings and death, and the glory that should follow;
this is a prophecy of that part of his glory which relates to the
flourishing estate of his church, as the fruit of his death, and
explains and enlarges upon the promise of his having a numerous seed.
The prophecy reaches from the death and resurrection of Christ to his
second coming; and describes the state of the church during that time,
which had been like a barren woman, but now fruitful, which was matter
of joy; and would increase, and have yet a more numerous issue, through
the conversion and accession of the Gentiles; and therefore is bid not
to fear, since she should not bear the shame and reproach of widowhood,
[Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001), the reason confirming which
is, because Christ was her husband, who was her Maker and Redeemer, the
God of Israel, and of the whole earth, [Isa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005), and though she might for some
time be under some dark providences, and seem to be forsaken of God, and
lie under his displeasure; yet she is assured of the love of God towards
her, that it is constant and perpetual; which is illustrated by the oath
and covenant of God with Noah, and by its being more immovable than
mountains and hills, [Isa 54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006), and
though she would sometimes be in a very afflicted and uncomfortable
condition, yet should be raised again to a state of great honour and
splendour, of spiritual knowledge, peace, and safety, [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011) and that all her enemies, that
gathered together against her, should perish, and all their attempts be
unsuccessful, since the Lord was on her side, and would defend her
cause, and protect her, [Isa 54:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015).

[Isaiah 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 54:1</span></span>

Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear,.... The Targum interprets this
of Jerusalem, paraphrasing the words thus,

"sing praise, O Jerusalem, which was as a barren woman that bears not;''

and so the apostle applies the words of the text to the Jerusalem above,
the mother of us all, the then present Gospel church, [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026), which, at the first setting of
it up, in the times of Christ, during his life and at the time of his
death, and before the day of Pentecost, was like a barren woman; the
number of converts were very small; few believed the report of the
Gospel, professed Christ, and submitted to his ordinances; the names of
the disciples were but a hundred and twenty. Though some understand this
of the Jewish church, under the Old Testament dispensation, whose
members were not many, and whose proselytes from the Gentiles were but
few; and others of the Gentile world, before the coming of Christ, and
the preaching of the Gospel in it; but the former sense is to be
preferred, having the suffrage of the apostle:

break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail
with child; among whom there were few instances of conversion, scarce
any begotten and born again of incorruptible seed by the word of God,
and no signs thereof; but now it being otherwise, and multitudes being
converted both in Judea and in the Gentile world, the church and its
members are called upon to express their joy aloud in songs of praise,
setting forth the glory of efficacious grace, in the regeneration of
men; for as this is matter of joy to the angels of heaven, so to the
saints on earth:

for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the
married wife, saith the Lord; more souls were born again, and added to
the church after the death of Christ, when she was in a desolate
condition, like a woman deprived of her husband, and in a widowhood
state, then there were while Christ was here on earth, personally
present with his people, and preaching the Gospel himself unto men;
three thousand were converted under one sermon, and great numbers
afterwards were added, so that the church at Jerusalem was in a much
more flourishing condition after the death of Christ than before; more
fruitful when it was become like a widow than when the bridegroom was
with her; and the church of Christ still increased yet more and more
afterwards, as the following verses predict. The Targum is,

"more shall be the children of Jerusalem than the children of the
habitable city.''

The edition of it, in the king of Spain's Bible, has it,

"than the children of Rome;''

and so it is quoted by R. Elias (h), and by Buxtorf (i). The Jews
understand this prophecy of their deliverance from their present
condition by the Messiah; and of the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the
prosperity of it.

\(h\) In Tishbi, p. 227. (i) Lexic. Talmud. col. 996, 2229.

[Isaiah 54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 54:2</span></span>

Enlarge the place of thy tent,.... To which the church is compared,
because of its uncertain and movable condition, being sometimes in one
place, and sometimes in another; and because of its outward meanness and
weakness, as well as its small extent; but now it is signified that it
should be enlarged, and room be made for an accession of in habitants to
it; or, in other words, that the Gospel church state should not be
confined to Jerusalem, but should take place in other parts of Judea,
and in Galilee, and in Samaria; hence we read of churches in those
places, [Act 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#031),

and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitation; alluding to
the curtains of which tents or tabernacles were made, which used to be
stretched out on poles or stakes, in order to make more room, and hold
more people. This may respect the spreading of the Gospel by the
apostles, who may be here meant, and the success of it, especially among
the Gentiles; who may be said to stretch out the curtains of the tent,
the church, when, according to their commission, they went and preached
the Gospel to every creature. First they travelled as far as Phoenicia,
Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching to the Jews only; but when they wholly
rejected the Gospel, they turned to the Gentiles, and went everywhere
preaching the word, [Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019), and
their ministry was blessed to the conversion of multitudes, and Gospel
churches were set up in all parts of the world. The Apostle Paul was an
eminent instrument of stretching these curtains, who went from
Jerusalem, round about to Illyricum, fully preaching the Gospel of
Christ, [Rom 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019),

spare not: any cost or pains, to spread the Gospel, enlarge the interest
of Christ, and increase his church and people; as did not the apostles
of Christ, who may be supposed to be the persons here addressed:

lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; the curtains being
stretched out, it was necessary the cords, to which they were fastened,
should be lengthened, that they might reach further, and take in a
greater compass; and the wider the tent is made by such means, the
stronger should be the staves, and the more surely should they be drove
and fixed in the earth, to hold the cords with the curtains bound unto
them; all which express the enlargement of the church in the Gentile
world, by means of the Gospel ministry and discipline. The Targum is,

"multiply the people of thy camp, and strengthen the governors.''

[Isaiah 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 54:3</span></span>

For thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the left,.... To the
south, and to the north, as the Targum, like an inundation of water,
that breaks through and overflows the banks of the river, and spreads
itself in the adjacent countries; or like a warehouse overstocked with
goods, bursts the walls in which they are pent up; or rather as infants
break forth from the womb at the time of birth, as Pharez did, from
whence he had his name, [Gen 38:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#029) see
[Hos 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#013), or as, when a country is
become exceeding numerous, the inhabitants break out, and go forth
beyond their borders, and seek new settlements, the place of their abode
being too small for them; so it shall be in the latter day, through the
vast number of converts that will be made; see [Isa
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#019),

and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles; where formerly only Heathens
lived, there the Gospel of Christ shall be carried by his apostles and
other ministers; and being succeeded to the conversion of many souls,
through the power of divine grace accompanying it, a spiritual seed, the
seed of the church, shall take place, and dwell there; this was true in
the first ages of Christianity, more especially in Constantine's time;
and will be more fully accomplished in the latter day, when the fulness
of the Gentiles shall be brought in:

and make the desolate cities to be inhabited: such cities as were
destitute of the knowledge of Christ and his salvation, and of all
divine and spiritual things, shall now be inhabited by spiritual men,
such as believe in Christ, and profess his name; such cities as Rome,
Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, Philippi, Thessalonica, and many others.

[Isaiah 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 54:4</span></span>

Fear not,.... The fulfilment of these things; however unlikely and
unpromising they might seem, yet God was able to perform them; and
therefore way should not be given to a fearful, distrustful, and
unbelieving heart:

for thou shall not be ashamed; as men are, when disappointed of what
they have been hoping for and expecting; but so it should not be with
the church, she should not be ashamed of her hope, faith, and
confidence; for there would be a performance of all that the Lord had
spoken: nor should she be ashamed of her barrenness, which should cease;
and of the fewness of her children or converts, which would be many; and
of the straitness of the place of her tent or habitation, which would
now be enlarged:

neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame; other
words made use of to express the same thing, and for the further
confirmation of it, that she needed not, and that she should not be put
to the blush, or to shame and confusion, on the above accounts:

for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth; by which may be meant
either the small number of converts at the first preaching of the
Gospel; or more especially that there were so few of the wise and
learned, the rich and noble, that embraced it, with which the first
Christians were greatly upbraided; or those persecutions which attended
them the three first centuries, which, being now at an end, shall be
forgotten:

and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more; which
signifies much the same as before, the seeming desolate estate of the
church upon the death of Christ; when she seemed to be deprived of her
husband, and forsaken by him, and left as a widow, and without children,
barren and unfruitful; which was reckoned reproachful with the Jews,
[Luk 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#025).

[Isaiah 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 54:5</span></span>

For thy Maker is thine Husband,.... That is, Christ, the Husband of the
church, and of every true believer; who secretly betrothed them to
himself in eternity, having asked him of his father; and, being given to
him, openly espouses them in conversion, one by one, as a chaste virgin;
which he will do more publicly in a body at the last day, when the
marriage of the Lamb will be come, when he will appear as the bridegroom
of his people; and to which character he acts up, by loving them with a
love of complacency and delight, most affectionately and constantly; by
sympathizing with them in all their troubles; by nourishing and
cherishing them as his own flesh, and interesting them in all he is and
has. It is, in the Hebrew text (k) "thy Makers, thy Husbands", Father,
Son, and Spirit; though the relation of a husband is more peculiar to
Christ; and the words are a reason of the church's fruitfulness, and why
she need not fear the performance of what was promised her; and which is
wonderful and amazing; he who stands in such a near and endearing
relation to his church and people, is the "Maker" of all things, yea,
their Maker, both as creatures, and as new creatures:

the Lord of hosts is his name; of armies above and below, in heaven, and
in earth; how great therefore must this their Husband be! to what honour
and dignity are they advanced! how safe must they be under his
protection! nor need they fear any enemy:

thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; he who is the church's Husband is
her Redeemer; and who so fit as he to redeem her from sin, Satan, and
the law, and every enemy; who is of the same nature with her, so dearly
loves her, and so able to save her? for which he is also abundantly
qualified, being holy in both his natures, in his person and offices, in
his birth, life, and death; for this seems greatly to respect him as
man, as he was a descendant of the Israelitish nation, and of the seed
of Abraham:

the God of the whole earth shall he be called: not of Israel only, but
of all the nations of the world, of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews;
the earth was made by him; the world and all that are in it are his: he
is the Governor among the nations; and in the latter day will appear to
be the King over all the earth, and will be owned as such; so great and
illustrious a Person is the church's Husband. These words are applied by
the Jews to the times of the Messiah (l).

\(k\) Heb. "mariti tui, factores tui", Piscator; "qui crearunt te,
habent te in matrimonio", Cocceius. (l) Shemot Rabba, sect. 15. fol.
102. 4.

[Isaiah 54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 54:6</span></span>

For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit,.... That has lost her husband by death, is solitary upon it, is
like one forsaken, and mourns for the loss of him; or is forsaken by a
living husband, rejected by him, having a bill of divorce from him, and
so she grieves at his unkindness to her, and the reproach cast upon her;
as such an one was the church when it was first constituted, when the
members of which it consisted were called out of the world by the grace
of God, and formed into a church state; almost as soon as ever they were
thus embodied together, Christ was taken from them by death, and they
were left alone, and filled with grief and trouble: the apostles and
first preachers of the Gospel were persecuted from place to place, and
all of them lost their lives for the cause in which they were engaged;
and the church endured grievous persecutions during the three first
centuries, when she seemed to be forsaken of God, and was greatly
oppressed and grieved in spirit. Some understand this of the Gentiles,
and of their state and condition when called, as described in [Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010), but rather it may be interpreted
of the Jews, now cut off and forsaken; and who, when they come to be
sensible of their case, will be grieved and mourn, even when they shall
be called and converted in the latter day; but I think the first sense
is best:

and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God; or, "and as
a wife of youth (m)"; whom a man marries in his youth, and she a young
woman herself, which makes it the more grievous to be despised, refused,
and forsaken, or to seem to be so. The words may be rendered thus,
"and", or "but, a wife of youth thou art, though thou wast despised"
(n), or "refused, saith thy God"; that is, though thou hast been
seemingly despised and cast off, my providential dispensations towards
thee may be so interpreted by thyself and others; yet I am thy God, thy
Maker, Redeemer, and Husband, and thou art as dear to me as the wife of
a man's youth, for whom he has the most passionate love; and which
agrees with what follows.

\(m\) , Sept.; sic Arab. & Targum; "et velut foeminam", Tigurine
version, Castalio; "et ut uxorem", Vitringa. (n) "quamvis spreta sis",
Junius & Tremellius; "fueris", Piscator.

[Isaiah 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 54:7</span></span>

For a small moment have I forsaken thee,.... The people of God seem to
be forsaken by him when he hides his face from them, as it is afterwards
explained; when they are in distress, and he does not immediately appear
for them; when they are afflicted in body and mind, though these
afflictions are but for a moment; nor are they really forsaken, not as
to things temporal or spiritual; God never forsakes the work of his own
hands, nor his people, at least for ever, or so as that they shall
perish. Some interpret this of the seventy years' captivity of the Jews
in Babylon, which was but a very short time; others of the times of
ignorance in the Gentile world before the coming of Christ, which God
winked at, when he overlooked them, and took no notice of them; but I
choose to understand it of the time and state of the Christian church,
during the ten persecutions of Rome Pagan, when it seemed to be forsaken
of God, and to be triumphed over by her enemies:

but with great mercies will I gather thee; they had been scattered about
by persecution, but now should be gathered together in bodies, and have
their public assemblies, and worship God openly, none making them
afraid; which was fulfilled in Constantine's time, when Paganism was
abolished, and Christianity established throughout the Roman empire;
when public places for Christian worship were opened everywhere, the
Gospel was freely preached, and multitudes were gathered by effectual
calling, and brought into the Gospel church, which was now in a very
flourishing condition; for this is not to be understood of the gathering
of the captive Jews from Babylon, nor of the calling of the Gentiles by
the ministry of the apostles, nor of the restoration and conversion of
the Jews in the latter day, though this is more eligible than the
former, and much less of the gathering of the saints at the last day.

[Isaiah 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 54:8</span></span>

In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,.... This
signifies much the same as before, when God hides his face from his
people, withdraws his gracious presence, and does not grant the
discoveries of his love; or they are under the frowns of his providence,
and have not the smiles of his face and the light of his countenance as
formerly, then they think they are forsaken by him; though all this is
but for a moment, a small period of time; and though it seems to be in
"wrath", it is but "little wrath"; and this wrath is no other than the
displeasure of a loving and tender hearted father. The Syriac version
renders it, "great wrath"; and so Schultens (o) thinks the word
signifies "overflowing wrath" (p), and the vehemency of it; to which
agrees R. Menachem (q), who interprets it, "the heat of wrath"; so the
Lord's suffering such a scene of bloody persecutions to attend his
church in the first ages of Christianity might seem to be:

but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord
thy Redeemer; all the dealings of God with his people, however dark and
dismal they be, whatever appearances there are in them of wrath and
displeasure, they are all agreeable to, and do not contradict, his
everlasting love; and sooner or later he will make it manifest, he has
mercy in store for his people, which he does and will exercise towards
them; this mercy flows from his love and kindness to them, which
kindness is everlasting, and continues in and through all states and
conditions into which they come; the consideration of which is very
comfortable and encouraging, and of which they may be assured from the
relation the Lord stands in to them as their Redeemer; for, having
redeemed them at the expense of his blood, he will effectually gather
them by grace in calling, and will never lose them, or suffer them to
perish here or hereafter.

\(o\) Animadv. in Job, p. 145, 146. (p) "pauxillo irae exundantis, vel
exiguo irae ebullientis", Vitringa. (q) Apud Jarchi, Kimchi, & Ben
Melech, in loc.

[Isaiah 54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 54:9</span></span>

For this is as the waters of Noah unto me,.... Some copies, as Kimchi
and Ben Melech observe, read these two words, , as one, thus, "as the
days of Noah"; and this is followed by the Targum, Vulgate Latin, and
Syriac versions; both readings may be kept, and joined in one, and the
sense be, "for this is as the waters that were in the days of Noah unto
me"; so Kimchi and Menachem join them. The meaning is, that God's
dispensation towards his people, at the time the prophecy refers to, is
like that of his to Noah and his family; and the love he bears to them
is like that which he bore to him; and the covenant he has made with
them is as that he made with him:

for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the
earth; he gave his word for it, which is as firm as his oath; he made a
covenant with Noah, and confirmed it by a rainbow, that the waters
should no more go over the earth as they had, and that the world should
be no more destroyed by a flood, [Gen
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009),

so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee;
for though the Lord's people are by nature children of wrath, as others,
he has not appointed them to it, nor will he suffer it to fall upon
them, but saves them from it through the righteousness of Christ, who
has borne it for them; and though he rebukes by his Spirit, by his word
and ministers, and by his providences, yet not in wrath, but in love;
and of this he has given the strongest assurances; he has not only said
it, but swore to it in covenant, [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003). The Jews (r) refer this prophecy
to the times of the Messiah.

\(r\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 99. 1.

[Isaiah 54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 54:10</span></span>

For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed,.... As
sometimes by earthquakes, and as they will at the last day, when the
earth shall be dissolved, and all in it, things the most solid, firm,
and durable: it may be understood comparatively; sooner shall these
depart and be removed than the kindness and covenant of God: it may be
interpreted figuratively of revolutions in kingdoms and states, and
particularly of the abolition of Paganism in the times of Constantine;
and which is expressed in much such language; "the heaven departed as a
scroll when it is rolled together, and every mountain and island were
moved out of their places", [Rev 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014).
Kimchi observes, that mountains and hills may be interpreted of the
kings of the nations; with this compare [Rev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015),

but my kindness shall not depart from thee; the love of God to his
people is an everlasting love; it always continues; it never did, nor
never will depart, notwithstanding their fall in Adam, their depraved
state by nature, their actual sins and transgressions, their many
revoltings and backslidings; though the Lord may hide his face from
them, and afflict them, still he loves them; whatever departs from them,
his kindness shall not; though riches may flee away from them, friends
stand aloof off from them, health may be taken away, and life itself,
yet the love of God is always the same; and so, whatever providences may
attend his church and interest in any period of time, he has the same
paternal care for it, and kindness for his people, as ever:

neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed; the covenant of grace
made with Christ and his people in him from everlasting, so called,
because peace is a considerable article of it; even that peace which was
upon the heart and thought of God from everlasting; the scheme of which
was drawn by him; all things relating to it were settled in this
covenant, as that Christ should be the Maker of it, and that it should
be made by his blood; besides, peace includes all the blessings of grace
which that covenant is stored with; and the covenant is the spring and
source of all peace, spiritual and eternal: moreover, as this refers to
Gospel times, the new covenant is here meant, and the publication of it,
in which the Gospel of peace, or peace by Jesus Christ, is preached unto
men; to which may be added, that one part, at least, of the sense of the
passage, may be, that notwithstanding all the troubles and exercises the
church of Christ should meet with from Rome Pagan or Papal, yet the
promise and covenant of God, that it should enjoy peace and prosperity
in the latter day, should never be made void, but should have its sure
and certain accomplishment:

saith the Lord, that hath mercy on thee; for all springs from the mercy
of God, and not the merits of men; and therefore the fulfilment of the
covenant and promises may be depended upon.

[Isaiah 54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 54:11</span></span>

O thou afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted,.... Or, "O
thou poor" (s) church; for the first Christian churches chiefly
consisted of poor persons, not many mighty and noble being called; and
which were greatly "afflicted" with false teachers, who broached errors
and heresies, and made schisms among them; and "tossed with tempests"
like a ship at sea; or "stormed" (t) with the rage and fury of violent
persecutors, such as the Roman emperors were; and not "comforted",
having none to administer any external comfort or relief to them; none
of the kings or princes of the earth, or any civil magistrate to protect
and defend them; what comfort they had was internal and spiritual; what
they had from Christ and his Spirit, and by the word and ordinances; or
rather this may describe the state of the church under Papal tyranny and
persecution, which brings it nearer to the times of peace and prosperity
after promised:

behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours; or, "with paint" (u);
such as women used to paint their faces or eyes with, [Kg2
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030). The Targum is,

"behold, I will lay with paint the stones of thy pavement;''

and the words seem plainly to design the stones of a pavement, and
perhaps by an hypallage or transposition may be rendered,

I will lay thy pavement with glistering stones; so the word is
translated [Ch1 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002) or, "with stones
of paint" (w); which are of the colour of the "stibium", or paint before
mentioned, and which was of a black colour; and Aben Ezra says the word
here signifies a precious stone of a black colour; perhaps black marble
is meant, a stone fit for pavements; but, be these stones what they
will, they design in the spiritual sense the materials of a Gospel
church, those "lively stones" which

are built up a spiritual house, and which are beautified with the gifts
and graces of the Spirit of God; and may also denote that the lowest and
meanest of the Lord's people, pointed out by stones of the pavement,
should be thus adorned:

and lay thy foundations with sapphires; a precious stone of a white
colour, according to R. Saadiah Gaon; but, according to Aben Ezra, of a
red colour; though the sapphire is usually said to be of a sky colour,
shining with specks of gold. The Targum renders it, "with precious
stones"; and so the foundation of the wall of the New Jerusalem is said
to be garnished with all manner of precious stones, [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019), this may respect Christ, the
sure foundation God has laid in Zion, the foundation of the apostles and
prophets; the one and only foundation of the church of Christ, and all
true believers, who is more precious than sapphires, or all the most
precious stones; he always has been the foundation of his church in all
ages; but the meaning is, that he shall now appear most clearly and
manifestly to be the foundation, and to be a firm, rich, and glorious
one; see [Exo 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010).

\(s\) V. L. Munster, Pagninus; "O paupercula", Tigurine version;
"inops", Cocceius. (t) "tempestate obruta"; Munster, Vatablus, Forerius.
(u) "in fuco", Tigurine version; "in stibio", Sanctius. (w) "Stibinis
lapidibus", Forerius.

[Isaiah 54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 54:12</span></span>

And I will make thy windows of agates,.... Some sort of which stones,
Pliny (x) says, were valued for their clearness like glass; but the
stone which bears this name with us is not clear and lucid enough to
make windows of. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic
versions, render it, "of jasper", a stone more fit for that purpose; and
it is interpreted of the jasper in the Talmud (y); so "the light" of the
New Jerusalem is said to be like unto the "jasper stone", [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011). Some take the crystal to be
meant, which suits well with windows; the word (z) for which has its
name from the sun, because by means of them the rays and light of the
sun are let into a house, and illuminate it; these in a figurative sense
may design the ministers of the Gospel, who are the lights of the world,
especially of the church; and the word and ordinances administered by
them, by means of which the light of spiritual knowledge, joy, and
comfort, is let into the churches, and into the souls of men, from
Christ, the sun of righteousness. The phrase signifies, that in the
latter day their ministrations should be very clear and bright, and be
greatly owned, and be very successful: "and thy gates of carbuncles";
precious stones so called from their fiery flaming colour. The gates of
the New Jerusalem are said to be so many pearls, [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021) which there, as here, signify
the entrance into the church of God, which is through Christ, who is the
door into it, and through faith in him, which works by love; these gates
will be open in the latter day to receive many, who will come in great
numbers, and are called "praise", [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011), which will be expressed in very
warm and lively strains of love and affection, of which the carbuncle
may be a symbol:

and all thy borders of pleasant stones; true believers, called "lively
stones", and who are pleasant in the sight of God and Christ, and are
taken pleasure in by one another; see [Psa
102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014). The Septuagint and Arabic
versions render it, "thy wall", which agree with [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018), where the wall of the New
Jerusalem is said to be of jasper.

\(x\) Nat. Hist l. 37. c. 10. (y) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 75. 1. (z)
"a radice, quae solem significat", Sanctius,

[Isaiah 54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 54:13</span></span>

And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord,.... The children of
the church, who are born in her, and nursed up at her side, and who are
the children of God by adoption, which is made manifest by regeneration;
these the Lord will take care of that they be "taught", even "all" of
them, from the least to the greatest, [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034), they shall be taught of the
Lord himself, by his ministers, word, and ordinances, as means, and by
his Spirit, as the efficient; by whom they are taught to know
themselves, their vileness and sinfulness, their folly and weakness,
their want of right counsels, and the insufficiency of their own to know
Christ, and the way of salvation by him; him as the only Saviour, able
and willing so to know him as to believe in him, receive him, and walk
on in him; this had an accomplishment in the first times of the Gospel;
see [Joh 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045) and will have a further
one in the latter day, when there will be a greater effusion of the
Spirit, when the doctrines of the Gospel will be taught and understood
more clearly, fully, and largely:

and great shall be the peace of thy children; the inward peace of their
minds in and from Christ, arising from a view of their justification by
his righteousness, from the sprinklings of his blood upon their
consciences, and from the discoveries of his love to their souls,
enjoyed in a way of believing, and by means of the word and ordinances;
also peace among themselves, harmony and concord, and no more strifes,
contentions, and animosities; likewise outward peace from enemies, no
more persecution or war. This word includes all kind of prosperity,
external and internal, temporal and spiritual. This, with the following
verses, explain the figurative phrases used in the foregoing. These
words are applied by the Jews (a) to the times of the Messiah, when all
Israel shall learn the law from the Lord; so the Targum,

"all thy children shall know the law of the Lord;''

but it is much better understood of all the children of the church, the
true Israel of God, whether Jews or Gentiles, learning the Gospel of
Christ.

\(a\) Midrash Tillim, apud Yalkut in Psal. xxi. 1.

[Isaiah 54:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 54:14</span></span>

In righteousness shalt thou be established,.... In the righteousness of
Christ, from whence flows the peace before spoken of, and which is the
stability of the church of Christ, and the security of it and its
members from condemnation. The doctrine of justification by Christ's
righteousness is, as Luther calls it, "articulus stantis vel cadentis
ecclesiae", the article of the church, by which, as it is held fast or
neglected, it stands or falls: or be established in exercising
righteousness, doing justice and judgment, which, as it is the support
and establishment of a kingdom and state, so of the church; for if
purity of manners, holiness and righteousness, are neglected, a church
soon comes to decay and ruin; but such will be the holiness of the
professors of religion in the latter day, that every pot and vessel in
it shall be holiness to the Lord, [Zac
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020),

thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear; so far from
it, that thou shalt not be in the least afraid of it, neither from
within nor from without; not from false teachers that oppress the mind
with legal doctrine; nor from persecutors that oppress and injure in
person and property: the church will be now free from the oppression and
tyranny of Rome, or mystical Babylon, which will now fall, and from the
persecution of the antichristian states, on whom the vials of God's
wrath will be poured, and so the church will be no more in fear of them;
the words may be rendered, "therefore thou shalt not fear" (b); there
will be no cause for it, no occasion of it:

and from terror; it shall not come near thee; the terror of the
antichristian beast and powers, which shall be no more, after their last
effort next mentioned.

\(b\) "quare non timebis, vel ideo non metues", Vitringa; "quare ne
timeas", Forerius.

[Isaiah 54:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 54:15</span></span>

Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me,.... Not by the
Lord, by his command or order to do his will, and execute his pleasure,
which sometimes was the case, as in Sennacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, and
others; but so it shall not be, when the enemies of Christ and his
people gather together against them in the latter day; this will be by
the means of three unclean spirits like frogs that will come out of the
mouth of the dragon, beast, and false prophet; even spirits of devils,
Popish priests, and Jesuits, who will instigate, stir up, and get
together the antichristian kings of the earth to the battle of almighty
God, [Rev 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014). Aben Ezra, Kimchi,
and Ben Melech, interpret them of Gog and Magog:

whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake;
because of the love that I bear to thee, they shall not succeed, or do
thee any hurt, but shall perish; or, "shall fall to thee" (c); so far
from doing thee any hurt, they shall come over to thee, and be on thy
side; be joined to thee, as the Vulgate Latin version; that is, the
remnant that shall escape, and be converted, and give glory to God, [Rev
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013) or rather, "shall fall before
thee" (d), in thy sight; or, as the Targum, in the midst of thee; which
remarkably paraphrases the words thus,

"at the end the kings of the nations, which are gathered together to
afflict thee, O Jerusalem, shall fall in the midst of thee;''

for the kings of the earth that shall be gathered together against
Christ and his church shall fall in battle before them, and their flesh
shall become meat for the fowls of the heaven; the beast and false
prophet, in company with them, will be taken and cast alive into the
lake of fire, and the remnant be slain with the sword of Christ, [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017).

\(c\) "ad te cadet", Cocceius. (d) "Cotam te cadet", Grotius, Gataker.

[Isaiah 54:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 54:16</span></span>

Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire,....
Into which he puts his iron to soften it, that he may beat it, and form
it into what shape he pleases; which descriptive clause is added to show
that it is a blacksmith that is intended, and to distinguish him from
the carpenter and mason, of whom this word is also used, who deal, the
one in wood, and the other in stone, and neither of which requires fire:
now the Lord observes, to the comfort of his people, surrounded by
enemies with instruments of war in their hands, that he made the smith
that made these, not only as a man, but as an artificer gave him all the
skill he has in making military weapons; and therefore could take away
his skill, or hinder him from making any, or destroy and defeat, and
render useless those that are made; and therefore they had nothing to
fear from warlike preparations. Some understand this of the devil, that
great incendiary of mankind; and others of a council of war, that forms
the design, blows up the coals of contention, and brings forth the plan
of operation in war, it follows, as a further description of the smith,

and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work: who takes the iron
out of the fire which he blows, as an instrument to work upon, and which
he forms into a military weapon, as an arrow, a sword, a spear, or
shield; or, "for their work" (e); for the use of the enemies of Christ
and his church:

and I have created the waster to destroy; military men, soldiers that
use the above weapons of destruction for that purpose; these are God's
creatures, and he can destroy or disappoint them, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise. Some understand this also of the devil,
who is by way of eminence the waster of mankind; others of tyrannical
princes; I should choose to interpret it of the Romish antichrist, that
waster and destroyer of the souls of men, and of the antichristian
states that destroy the earth, and shall be destroyed themselves; or of
the Turk, the locust, whose king is called Apollyon and Abaddon, which
signifies a waster and a destroyer, [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018). These are said to be "created"
by the Lord, not only because they are his creatures, the work of his
hands, but because they are raised up by his providence, according to
his secret purpose, as Pharaoh was, to show his power in them; and are
permitted by him to continue for awhile to fulfil his will, being
entirely dependent upon him, and subject to his influence, direction,
and overruling providence; and therefore his people had no reason to be
afraid of them.

\(e\) "ad opus ipsorum", Gataker.

[Isaiah 54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 54:17</span></span>

No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper,.... All weapons of
war, as the Targum, which are made with a design to hurt and destroy the
people of God, shall be rendered useless; not one of them shall prosper
to the advantage of their enemies, or so as to answer their design; nor
to the hurt and prejudice, ruin and destruction, of the saints:

and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment; that shall
raise any calumny upon thee, or bring any charge against thee, or enter
into a lawsuit with thee, litigate a point with thee in any court of
judicature, or claim, in right and law, a power, authority, and dominion
over thee, as the pope of Rome does over the consciences of men:

thou shalt condemn; disprove and roll off the calumny, refute the charge
and accusation, put to silence the clamours and pretences of wicked men,
carry the cause against them, and shake off the yoke of bondage they
would bring them under; and, instead of being condemned by them, condemn
them. By "weapon" may be meant all the attempts made by force to ruin
the interest and church of Christ in the world, such as the bloody
persecutions of the Roman emperors, who, though they made sad havoc of
the professors of Christianity, and designed hereby to have rooted it
out of the world, and thought they should have accomplished it, yet
could not do it; so far from it, that the Christians yet more and more
increased, insomuch that it became a common saying, that the blood of
the martyrs was the seed of the church; also the wars of the Papists
with the Albigenses and Waldenses, and all the cruel methods they have
taken by fire and faggot, and the bloody inquisition, to hinder the
growth of what they call heresy; yet all have been in vain, a
reformation has taken place, and many nations have embraced the truth,
and shook off the yoke of Popery; together with all their efforts since
to crush the Protestant interest; and though the kings of the earth will
be stirred up, and gather together to the battle of the Lord God
Almighty, they will not succeed, but be overcome and slain, and the
beast and false prophet at the head of them will be taken and cast alive
into the lake of fire: and by the "tongue" may be designed the edicts of
the Pagan emperors, forbidding the exercise of the Christian religion,
and threatening the preachers and professors of it with imprisonment,
confiscation of goods, and death itself; and the anathemas, bulls, and
interdicts of the popes of Rome, as well as the reproaches, scandals,
and calumnies uttered by the emissaries of that church against all that
depart from it; together with the errors and heresies of false teachers
of all sorts in all ages of the world, which, though levelled against
the faith and doctrine of the church of Christ, have not been able to
subvert it, nor ever will:

this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord; this, with all that is
said in this chapter, is the part, portion, and privilege, that such
shall enjoy who serve the Lord Christ, and not antichrist; they shall be
treated rather as sons than as servants, and have an inheritance
assigned them; not only protection from all enemies, and absolution from
all charges, but they shall receive the reward of the inheritance in
heaven, that which is incorruptible and undefiled, and reserved there,
since they serve the Lord Christ:

and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord; the vindication of
their righteousness, of their cause, and of their character; or the
reward of their righteous works in a way of grace; even all that
righteousness and true holiness that is in them, and that righteousness
which is imputed to them, and by which they are justified, are from the
Lord; by which they are secured from all the charges of law and justice,
and, from all the accusations of men and devils, and which will answer
for them in a time to come, and acquit them at the bar of God before men
and angels; see [Rom 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 55](isa055)

</div>
