<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa011)  [Next](isa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 12

This chapter contains a song of praise and thanksgiving for redemption
and salvation by Christ, of which the preceding chapter [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001) is a famous prophecy. It begins
with an account of the church's former uncomfortable and now comfortable
state and condition, [Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001) the
foundation of whose comfort was Christ her salvation and strength, and
so her song, which engaged her trust, and dispelled her fears, [Isa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002) hence encouragement to others to
apply to the fulness of Christ for grace, and fresh supplies of it, to
be had with joy, [Isa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003) and then
follow certain mutual exhortations to praise, exalt, and glorify Christ,
with reasons enforcing them, [Isa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004).

[Isaiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 12:1</span></span>

And in that day thou shalt say,.... The following song of praise; just
as Israel did, when they were brought through the Red sea, and saved out
of the hands of their enemies; to which there are several allusions and
references in it; that deliverance being typical of salvation by Christ;
the Gospel day, or the times of the Gospel, are here meant:

O Lord, I will praise thee; or "confess thee"; to be my Lord, Redeemer,
and Saviour, my Husband, Head, and King; or "confess to thee" (q), my
sins and transgressions, and unworthiness to receive any favour from
thee, and gratefully acknowledge all the favours bestowed upon me:

though thou wast angry with me; as it appeared to the church, and
according to her apprehensions of things, though not in reality, or
strictly or properly speaking; for anger is not to be ascribed to God;
but it is a speaking after the manner of men; and the Lord seems to be
angry when he hides his face from his people, when he refuses to hear
their cries, when he afflicts them, and continues his hand upon them,
and when he lets in a sense of wrath into their consciences:

thine anger is turned away; he granting his gracious presence; taking
off his afflicting hand; manifesting his love, particularly his
pardoning grace and mercy; peace and reconciliation being made by the
blood of Christ, and justice satisfied, the effects of resentment and
displeasure cease:

and thou comfortedst me; by shedding abroad his love in her heart; by
discovering the free and full forgiveness of sin; by lifting up the
light of his countenance; by an application of precious promises; and by
means of the word and ordinances, through the influence of the blessed
Spirit as a comforter; who leads in this way for comfort to the person,
blood, righteousness, sacrifice, and fulness of Christ, and comforts
with these, by applying them, and showing interest in them. The Targum
is,

"and thou shalt say at that time, I will confess before the Lord; for
that I have sinned before thee, thine anger is upon me; but when I am
turned to the law, thine anger will turn from me, and thou wilt have
mercy on me;''

or rather turned to Christ, and embrace his Gospel, which is the only
way to have comfort.

\(q\) "confitebor tibi", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 12:2</span></span>

Behold, God is my salvation,.... Or Saviour; that is, Christ, who is
God, the great God, and so fit to be a Saviour, and is one, was
appointed by the Father, provided in covenant, promised in the word,
sent in the fulness of time, and is become the author of salvation,
which a creature could not be; and this the church saw her interest in,
and which was the ground of her comfort before declared; and to which
she prefixed the word "behold", as a note of asseveration, affirming him
to be her Saviour; and of admiration, wondering at it; and of exclusion
of all others from being concerned therein; and of attention and
direction to others, pointing him out as the only one to look unto.

I will trust, and not be afraid; "trust" in Christ for salvation, be
confident of enjoying it, and look upon myself safe and secure from all
wrath and condemnation, and from every enemy; and not be "afraid" of
sin, Satan, the world, death, hell, and wrath to come. The Targum joins
this and the preceding clause together,

"behold, in the word of God my salvation I trust, and shall not be
moved:''

for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; the author of her
spiritual strength; the "strength" of her life, and of her heart, which
maintained the one, and supported the other; the strength of her graces,
and of her duties, by which she exercised the one, and performed the
other: and the subject matter of her "song" were his person, and the
fulness and fitness of it, his righteousness, and salvation by him; this
clause, and the following one, are taken out of [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002),

he also is become my salvation; salvation is wrought out by Christ, and
believers have it in him, and they know it, and believe it, and so are
already saved in him.

[Isaiah 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 12:3</span></span>

Therefore with joy shall ye draw water,.... These words are either an
exhortation to others, as the Septuagint and Arabic versions render it,
"draw ye"; and so likewise an encouragement to them by her example, or a
prophecy that they should do this; that is, apply to Christ for grace,
and receive it from him: for by "water" is meant grace, which is
compared to it, because it is softening, purifying, fructifying,
cooling, and refreshing, and extinguishes thirst; and this is to be
"drawn", it is to be come at, though the well in which it is be deep,
and not in the reach of everyone; the bucket is faith that it is drawn
with, and this is the gift of God; and it is in the exercise of this
grace, which requires diligence, strength, and labour, that saints
receive from Christ, and grace for grace; and this is exercised in the
use of means, by prayer, reading of the Scriptures, and attendance on
the word and ordinances, by which faith draws hard, and receives much,
and, when it does, it is attended "with joy": salvation itself is
received with joy, and so is the Saviour; as also a justifying
righteousness, and pardoning grace, and likewise every supply of grace;
which joy is of a spiritual kind, is in a way of believing, what a
stranger intermeddles not with, and is unspeakable and full of glory:

out of the wells of salvation, or "fountains"; as all the three Persons
are; Jehovah the Father, as he is called "the fountain of living water",
[Jer 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013) so he is the fountain of
salvation; it springs from him, from his everlasting love, his eternal
purposes, his infinite wisdom, his sure and unalterable covenant, his
free grace in the mission of his Son; and he himself is the God of
grace, from whence it all comes, and every supply of it. The Spirit and
his grace are called a "well of living water", [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014) and he also is a well of
salvation; it is he that convinces men of their need of it, that brings
near this salvation to them, and shows them their interest in it, and
bears witness to it, and is the earnest and pledge of it; and he is the
author of all that grace which makes them meet for it, and from whom are
all the supplies of it by the way. But more especially Christ is meant,
who is the "fountain of gardens, and well of living water", [Sol
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015) in whom salvation is, and in no
other: the words may be rendered, "the wells" or "fountains of the
Saviour" (r), yea, of Jesus; and which are no other than the fulness of
grace in him: the phrase denotes the abundance of grace in Christ, much
of which is given out in conversion; an abundance of it is received with
the free gift of righteousness for justification; and a large measure of
it in the pardon of sins, and in all the after supplies, through the
wilderness of this world, till the saints come to glory; and which is
vouchsafed to a great number, to all the elect angels and elect men, to
all the churches, and the members thereof, in all ages; and this always
has been and ever will be communicating to them. The Targum is,

"and ye shall receive a new doctrine from the chosen, the righteous;''

or of the righteous; which is true of the doctrine of the Gospel,
received by the hands of chosen men, the apostles of Christ. The Jews
(s) make use of this passage, in confirmation of the ceremony of drawing
of water at the feast of tabernacles; and say (t) it signifies the
drawing of the Holy Ghost; that is, his grace.

\(r\) "de fontibus Salvatoris", V. L.; Vatablus. (s) T. Bab. Succa, fol.
48. 2. & 50. 2. (t) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 70. fol. 62. 3. T. Hieros.
Succa, fol. 55. 1.

[Isaiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 12:4</span></span>

In that day shall ye say, praise the Lord,.... On account of his being
and perfections, for blessings received from him, especially spiritual
ones; and particularly such as are before mentioned, fulness of grace in
him, strength and salvation by him, a view of interest in him as a
Saviour, and divine comforts communicated from him; which is done by
giving him the glory of them, and thanks for them. This is a work very
proper for Gospel times; it always was a duty, and there was ever reason
for it under the former dispensation, and much more under the present
one; and there will be still more reason for it in the latter day here
referred to, when antichrist will be destroyed, the kingdom of Christ
will be enlarged, and his church will be in a very glorious state and
condition, her walls will be salvation, and her gates praise; when the
saints will be stirring up one another to this service, and engaging in
it with all readiness and cheerfulness; see [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015),

call upon his name: which takes in the whole of religions worship, of
which Christ is the object, being the true Jehovah; and particularly
prayer, in which his name is invoked together with faith in him, and
expressions of affection to his name; which is precious to believers,
and is as ointment poured out:

declare his doings among the people; not merely his works of creation,
in which he was equally concerned with his divine Father; nor so much
his miracles which he wrought when on earth, in proof of his deity and
Messiahship, and in confirmation of his doctrine; but his acts of
obedience and righteousness, which were perfect; and his bearing the
sins of his people, and the punishment due to them; and so fulfilled the
whole law, and hereby accomplished the great work of redemption and
salvation; which, according to his orders, have been published among the
Gentiles, for their good, and his glory:

make mention that his name is exalted; that is, he himself, who has a
name given him above every name; for having obeyed, suffered, and died
in the room of his people, he is by his Father, according to promise,
exalted, by raising him from the dead, receiving him into heaven,
placing him at his right hand, giving him all power in heaven and in
earth, and causing angels, authorities, principalities, and powers, to
be subject to him; all which is to be made mention of, to the honour of
his name: or else the sense is, to speak of him, to make mention of his
name, of his person, of his offices, of his grace and salvation, that he
may be exalted in each of them by his people; for he is, and ought to
be, exalted in their hearts, and with their lips, since he is above all
in the excellency of his person, and is their only Saviour and Redeemer,
Head and Husband; and so he will be exalted more abundantly in the
latter day. See Gill on [Isa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011).

[Isaiah 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 12:5</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord,.... Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, vocally and
together, as Gospel churches, to the glory of God; or "sing the Lord"
(u), let him be the subject matter of the song, as in [Isa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002) sing how great and good he is;
sing what he is in himself, and what he is to others:

for he hath done excellent things; he hath wrought out an excellent
salvation, which excels all others, being of a spiritual nature,
complete and everlasting: it is emphatically a great one, in which God
is glorified in all his perfections, and which issues in the eternal
glory and happiness of his people. He has brought in an excellent
righteousness, a righteousness that excels any righteousness of the
creature, men or angels; it being the righteousness of God, a perfect,
pure, and spotless one, which serves for many, even all his spiritual
seed, and is everlasting: he has offered up an excellent sacrifice, a
sacrifice that excels all that were offered up under the law; in the
matter, which is himself; in the use and efficacy of it, to atone for
sin, and take it away; in the continuance of that efficacy, and in its
acceptableness unto God: and he has obtained an excellent victory over
all his and his people's enemies, sin, Satan, the world, and death, and
made them sharers in his conquests; reference seems to be had to [Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001),

this is known in all the earth; that such a salvation is finished; such
a righteousness is brought in; that peace, pardon, and atonement, are
procured, and all enemies are conquered; for the Gospel publishing all
this has been sent into all the world, and will be more fully preached
throughout it in the latter day.

\(u\) "canite Jehovam", Cocceius; Sept.

[Isaiah 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 12:6</span></span>

Cry out, and shout,.... By singing aloud, with the high praises of God
in the mouth:

thou inhabitant of Zion: born and brought up there, free of Zion, that
is settled and dwells there, and so happy; since there plenty of
provisions is had, health is enjoyed, and the inhabitants in the utmost
safety and protection, having the greatest privileges and immunities;
and therefore have reason to sing and shout for joy, and especially for
what follows:

for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee; by "the Holy
One of Israel" is meant Christ, the Redeemer and Husband of this church;
see [Isa 48:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#017) because, as God, he is
the God of Israel, the spiritual Israel, and as such is holy, even
glorious in holiness; and, as man, sprung from Israel, literal Israel,
and as such is holy in his nature, acts, and offices; and is the
sanctifier of the whole Israel of God, from whom they receive all their
holiness: he is "in the midst" of his church, in the midst of Zion, and
the inhabitants of it, to whom he has promised his presence, and grants
it, and which causes such joy and gladness, as nothing else can give;
and here he is "great", and shows himself to be so, the great God, and
our Saviour; a Saviour, and a great one; a great King over the holy hill
of Zion; and a great High Priest over the house of God; wherefore
greatness should be ascribed unto him, and praise be given him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 13](isa013)

</div>
