<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa050)  [Next](isa052) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 51:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 51

This chapter gives the church and people of God reason to expect
comfortable times and certain salvation, though they had many enemies.
They are directed to look to Abraham and Sarah, signified by the rock
and hole of the pit, and observe how he was called alone, blessed and
increased; which should be improved as an argument to strengthen their
faith, that God could and would bless and increase his church, though in
a low estate, and bring it into a flourishing one, [Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001). They are assured of the
publication of the Gospel, expressed by the law, doctrine, and judgment
of the Lord; by which means the righteousness and salvation of Christ
should be brought nigh to them, as the object of their trust and
confidence, [Isa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004), and also of the
perpetuity of his righteousness and salvation, when the heavens, and the
earth, and the inhabitants of it, should decay, even their revilers and
persecutors, and therefore they need not fear their reproaches and
revilings, [Isa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006), upon which
follows a prayer of faith, that the Lord would exert his power as in
former times, when he destroyed the Egyptians, and dried up the Red sea
for Israel to pass through, the ransomed of the Lord; from whence it
might be concluded, that the redeemed of the Lord would be brought into
a very comfortable condition again, [Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009) wherefore they had no reason to
be afraid of men, since the Lord, the Maker of heaven and earth, would
deliver, comfort, and establish them, of which he assured them by his
prophet, [Isa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012), and though
Jerusalem and her sons were, or would be, in a very distressed
condition, through the sword and famine, which is described, [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), yet they should be delivered
out of it, and their persecutors should be brought into the same, [Isa
51:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#021).

[Isaiah 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 51:1</span></span>

Hearken unto me, ye that follow after righteousness,.... After having
declared the doom of the wicked, and those that trust to their own
righteousness, the Lord returns to them that fear him, whom he describes
as such that "follow after righteousness"; not the righteousness of the
law, it is the character of carnal Israel to follow after that; nor is
that attainable in the way it is pursued by such; nor is there any
justification by it; nor is following that consistent with seeking the
Lord, in the next clause: but the righteousness of Christ is meant; not
his essential righteousness as God; nor the righteousness of his office
as Mediator; but that which consists of his active and passive
obedience; of which he is the author and giver, and is in him as its
subject: this is what is commonly called imputed righteousness, an
evangelical one, the righteousness of faith, and is justifying:
"following after" this supposes a want of one; a sense of that want; a
view of this as out of themselves, and in another; a love and liking of
it, and a vehement desire for it; and what determines to an eager
pursuit of it are its perfection, suitableness, and use: now such
persons are called to hearken to the Lord; to the Word of the Lord, as
the Targum; to Christ, to his Gospel, and to his ordinances,
particularly to what is after said:

ye that seek the Lord: the Lord Christ, for life and salvation; for
righteousness and strength; for more grace from him; a greater knowledge
of him, and of doctrine from him, as the Targum; and more communion with
him; that seek his honour and glory in the world, and to be for ever
with him; who seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; that
seek him where he may be found, affectionately and sincerely, carefully,
diligently, constantly, and for everything they want:

look unto the rock whence ye are hewn; which is in the next verse
interpreted of Abraham; so called, not so much for the strength of his
faith, as for his old age; when he looked like a hard dry rock, from
whom no issue could be expected; and yet from hence a large number of
stones were hewn, or a race of men sprung:

and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged; that is, to Sarah, who
was for a long time barren, whose womb was shut up, but afterwards
opened; and from whom, as from a cistern, (to which a wife is sometimes
compared, [Pro 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015)) flowed the waters
of Judah, [Isa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001) or the Jewish
nation. Jerom thinks Christ is meant by both, the Rock of ages, in whom
is everlasting strength; to whom men are to look for salvation,
righteousness, and strength; and out of whose pierced side flowed blood
and water: and in this sense he is followed by Cocceius, who interprets
the rock of Christ, the Rock of salvation; out of whose side flowed the
church, as out of the hole of a pit or cistern.

[Isaiah 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 51:2</span></span>

Look unto Abraham your father,.... Not only the father of the Jewish
nation, but of all them that believe: this explains what is meant by the
rock, in the former verse, who is to be looked unto for imitation in the
exercise of faith, and performance of duty, and for encouragement in
distressed times and circumstances:

and unto Sarah that bare you; signified by the pit or cistern; who was
not only the mother of the Jewish nation; but such also are her
daughters who do well, and tread in her steps: now the very unpromising
circumstances these two persons were in, are proposed to be considered
by the church in her present ones, for the encouragement of her faith;
that as a numerous issue proceeded from them, so also should she become
fruitful and multiply:

for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him; he was
without issue when he was "called" out of Chaldea into another country,
and also the only one of the family; and the Lord "blessed" him not only
with flocks and herds, and gold and silver, but with a son in his old
age; and so "increased" him, that there sprung from him as many as the
stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand by the sea shore
innumerable, [Heb 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#012). The
Septuagint and Arabic versions, between "blessed" and "increased",
insert these words, "and I loved him", which are not in the Hebrew text.
The Targum is,

"and one was Abraham, alone in the world, and I brought him to my
service, and I blessed him, and multiplied him.''

[Isaiah 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 51:3</span></span>

For the Lord shall comfort Zion,.... The church, by his Spirit, in the
ministration of the word, and administration of ordinances; by the
donation of the blessings of grace, and by the application of Gospel
promises; by the discoveries of his love; by granting his gracious
presence; by blessing his word; and by calling many souls, and adding
them to his people: and in order to engage the church and people of God
to believe God will do this, and that he can and will bless and increase
them when in a low estate, the above instances of calling Abraham alone,
and the blessing and increasing him, are produced:

he will comfort all her waste places; by rebuilding them, and restoring
them to their former lustre and glory: the church may be said to be
"waste" and desolate, and like "a wilderness" and "desert", as in the
next clauses, when the doctrines of the Gospel are departed from, the
ordinances of public worship are not attended to, and the discipline of
it is not kept up; when there are great declensions among the Lord's
people, in their faith, love, patience, forbearance, self-denial,
spirituality, and heavenly mindedness; when divisions and animosities
prevail among them; when there is a negligence in their lives and
conversations; and there are but few instances of conversion, and a
general unconcernedness about those things; but so it will not always
be:

and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the
garden of the Lord; the church is a "garden", a small spot, in
comparison of the world, distinguished and separated by the grace of God
from others; in which are many precious souls, comparable to trees,
herbs, and plants; and these do not grow up of themselves, but are
planted there by the Lord; and much pains are taken by him, the
husbandman, to cultivate this garden: for it is his, the garden of the
Lord; it is of his planting; it is his property, and enclosed for his
rise; it is an Eden, pleasantly situated on a fruitful hill, Christ
Jesus, by the river of divine love; is full of pleasant plants, pleasant
to the owner of the garden, and to the saints themselves; it becomes
fruitful through the dews of divine grace, the rising of Christ, the sun
of righteousness, and the blowing of the south wind, the blessed Spirit;
and may be said to be in a very comfortable condition, when the word and
ordinances are duly ministered; when the graces of the Spirit are in
exercise, and many souls are converted: the consequence of which is,

joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of
melody; for the pure preaching of the Gospel; the feast of fat things
made in the holy mountain; the presence of God enjoyed; a lively
exercise of grace in the saints; and many souls born again. The Targum
is,

"joy and rejoicing shall be found in her; they that offer thanksgiving,
and the voice of them that praise;''

all hearts filled with joy and gladness.

[Isaiah 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 51:4</span></span>

Hearken unto me, my people,.... His special people, whether Jews or
Gentiles, chosen by him, taken into covenant with him; given to Christ,
redeemed by him as a peculiar people, and called by his grace; these are
exhorted to hearken to him; to his word, as the Targum; see [Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001),

and give ear unto me, O my nation; not the nation of the Jews only, but
the Gentiles; a nation taken out of a nation, even out of all nations; a
chosen and a holy nation. The Septuagint and Arabic versions render it
"kings"; such are made kings and priests unto God: see [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009),

for a law shall proceed from me; not the Sinai law, but the Gospel; that
doctrine that is said to go out of Zion, [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003), as Kimchi rightly observes, who
adds,

"for the King Messiah shall teach the people to walk in the ways of the
Lord; and this shall be after the war of Gog and Magog:''

and this law or doctrine of God comes from Christ, and is dictated,
directed, and made effectual by his Spirit:

and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people; this is
the same with the law, or doctrine of the Gospel, called "judgment",
because it comes from the God of judgment, flows from his wisdom and
counsel, and is a declaration of his will; it expands his method of
justifying sinners, and is the means of awakening, convincing, and
judging the consciences of men, and of informing and establishing the
judgments of the saints, and by which the world will be judged at the
last day. Now this is

for a light of the people; to enlighten unconverted ones, such who sit
in darkness, to turn them from it, and call them out of it into
marvellous light; and to illuminate the saints yet more and more, both
with respect to doctrine and duty. And this is said to be made to
"rest"; which denotes both the continuance of it in the world, until all
the ends of it are answered; and the spiritual rest it gives to weary
souls now, as well as points out to them that which remains for them
hereafter. Though the words may be rendered, "I will cause my judgment
to break forth" (h); like the morning, suddenly, and in a "moment" (i);
to which agrees what follows.

\(h\) "erumpere faciam", De Dieu. (i) So R. Jonah, in Ben Melech, takes
it to have the signification of "a moment"; as if the sense is, "my
judgment I will show every moment from this time, to enlighten the
people with it."

[Isaiah 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 51:5</span></span>

My righteousness is near,.... These are either the words of God the
Father, and to be understood not of his essential righteousness, nor of
his vindictive justice; but of the righteousness of his Son, which he
calls his own, because he approves and accepts of it, imputes and
reckons it to his people, and with it justifies them. The words may be
rendered, "my righteous One", as in the Vulgate Latin version; not
Cyrus, as Grotius; but Christ, God's righteous servant, who was near to
come in the flesh, in order to work righteousness. Or these are the
words of Christ, speaking of his own righteousness, which was near being
wrought out by him, as it was when he became the end of the law for it,
by obeying its precept, and bearing its penalty; and near being revealed
in the Gospel, where it is revealed from faith to faith; and near being
applied by the blessed Spirit, as it is to all that believe; and is near
to be come at, and laid hold on, by faith:

my salvation is gone forth: the "salvation" appointed by the Lord;
provided in covenant; wrought out by Christ; applied by the Spirit; and
fully enjoyed in heaven: this is "gone forth" in the purpose and decree
of God, in prophecy and promise, and in the declaration of the Gospel:
or, "my Saviour", as the Vulgate Latin version; the Saviour of God's
appointing, providing, and sending. Or these are the words of the
Saviour himself, who has wrought it out, in whom it is, and of whom it
is to be had; it is done, and ready for sinners to look unto and
embrace; it is ready to be revealed, and to be fully enjoyed:

and mine arms shall judge the people; to whom the arm of the Lord is
revealed, and the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation; both the
arms of Christ are ready to receive them, and these protect and defend
them, and judge, condemn, and destroy those that despise it:

the isles shall wait upon me; upon Christ, for his coming; for his
salvation and righteousness; for his Gospel, the truths, promises, and
blessings of it; and in his house and ordinances, for his presence. This
is a prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles, even in the isles of
the sea, those afar off, as ours of Great Britain and Ireland, in which
there have been and are many waiting upon him:

and on mine arm shall they trust; as on Christ, the arm of the Lord, for
salvation; so on the power of Christ for protection and preservation;
and on his promises in the Gospel, for their support; which is the arm
of the Lord revealed unto them, and yields much support and comfort, and
makes known that which is a proper object of trust.

[Isaiah 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 51:6</span></span>

Lift up your eyes to the heavens,.... And observe their beauty and
order, the constant and regular motion of the heavenly bodies, the
firmness and solidity of them:

and look upon the earth beneath; how stable and well founded it is:

for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke; though they are so firm,
and have lasted so long, and have kept their constant situation and
course, yet they shall melt away like salt, as the word (k) signifies,
and disappear in an instant like smoke. Reference seems to be had to the
general conflagration, when the heavens being on fire shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012),

and the earth shall wax old like a garment; and be folded up, and laid
aside, as useless; see [Psa 102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026).
This seems to design not a substantial destruction of the earth, but of
its qualities, when waxing old it shall be renewed and changed. Jarchi
interprets these clauses of the princes of the hosts of people in
heaven, and the governors of the earth; but the inhabitants thereof are
mentioned next:

and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner; as the heavens and
the earth; be dissolved as they, and in like manner; vanish as smoke,
and be seen no more; wax old as a garment, and become useless and
unprofitable. De Dieu renders it, "as a louse" (l), and so this word
sometimes signifies; and this sense is approved of by many learned men
(m), and seems best to agree with the text; since neither the heavens
and the earth are said to die, nor smoke, or a garment: and it may
denote how loathsome and nauseous wicked men are in life, like vermin;
and how mean and contemptible in death, their bodies are vile and
despicable, and how easily they are destroyed:

but my salvation shall be for ever; that salvation which Christ has
wrought out for his people is an everlasting salvation, [Isa
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017), [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009) and they that are interested in it
will be always safe and happy; and though they shall die as other men,
they shall rise again, and enjoy glory, immortality, and eternal life:

and my righteousness shall not be abolished: the righteousness which
Christ has brought in for his people, and by which they are justified,
is also everlasting, [Dan 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024) or,
"shall not be broken" (n); it answers all the demands of law and
justice, and stands firm against all the accusations and charges of men
and devils: or, "shall not fail" (o), as the Septuagint; its virtue to
justify will always continue; it will answer for the saints in a time to
come, even at the last judgment. The Targum is, it

"shall not tarry;''

being near to be wrought out and revealed, [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005).

\(k\) "Symmachus". It is expressive of corruption and consumption, as
Ben Melech observes; which is the sense of salt land, not inhabited Jer
xvii 6. It denotes, as Gussetius (Ebr. Comment. p. 469.) thinks, the
fluctuating and confused agitation of the heavens, like those of the
salt sea, and as smoke over the head. (l) "tanquam pediculus", De Dieu;
so the word is used in Exod. viii. 16, 17, 18. "instar vermiculi",
Vitringa. (m) Calvinus, Gataker, Gussetius. (n) "conteretur", Pagninus,
Montanus; "atteretur", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. So Ben Melech
interprets it, "shall not be broken". (o) , Sept. "non deficiet", V. L.

[Isaiah 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 51:7</span></span>

Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness,.... The righteousness of
God, and of his law; the purity of his nature, what righteousness is
agreeable to him, and required by him; the imperfection and
insufficiency of a man's own righteousness, and the glory and fulness of
Christ's righteousness, revealed in the Gospel; and so know that, as to
approve of it, follow after it, lay hold upon it, believe in it, and
rejoice in it, as their justifying righteousness:

the people in whose heart is my law; not in their heads only, but in
their hearts; having an understanding of it, an affection for it, and
the bias of their minds toward it; being written there by the finger of
the divine Spirit, according to the covenant of grace, [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033), and not in tables of stone, as
the law of Moses, and of which this is not to be understood; but of the
law or doctrine of Christ, even the everlasting Gospel; which coming
with power, and the Holy Ghost, into the hearts of the Lord's people, is
received by them with great approbation and affection, in faith and
love; they obey it from their hearts, and are cast into the mould of it:

fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings; either of the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, for renouncing
a pharisaical righteousness, and embracing the righteousness of Christ;
for rejecting the traditions of the elders, the rituals of the
ceremonial law, and the doctrine of justification by the works of the
moral law; and for cordially receiving the pure Gospel of Christ: or of
idolatrous Heathens, from whom they were called, and that for leaving
the religion of their country, and the gods of their fathers, and
professing the one only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent: or
of the antichristian worshippers, and of the man of sin at the head of
them, who belches out his blasphemies against God and Christ, his
tabernacle and saints; but neither their shocking blasphemies, nor
spiteful taunts and jeers, nor menacing words, nor even cruel
persecutions, should deter the saints from the profession of Christ and
his Gospel.

[Isaiah 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 51:8</span></span>

For the moth shall eat them up like a garment,.... Either these
reproaches, or the persons that reproach; as a garment is eaten by the
moth, secretly, slowly, surely, and at last completely, so that it
becomes utterly good for nothing; so secret, gradual, sure and certain,
complete and perfect, will be the ruin and destruction of the enemies of
Christ and his people:

and the worm shall eat them like wool; or as a woollen garment, which is
most liable to be motheaten; for the moth and worm are much the same, as
Kimchi and Ben Melech observe; who say, that in the Arabic tongue the
moth is called by a name much of the same sound with this word in the
text; and the sense is, that as a woollen garment is eaten and consumed
by vermin, so wicked men will be destroyed by the vengeance of the Lord
upon them; for the moth and worm design both the judgments of God upon
them in this world, and his wrath in the other, where the worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched:

but my righteousness shall be for ever; to justify his people and secure
them from wrath and ruin:

and my salvation from generation to generation; it will abide through
the endless ages of eternity, and be the portion of the saints for ever,
of which they are now heirs; is nearer than when they first believed,
and is ready to be revealed, and will be everlastingly enjoyed by them,
firm against all the accusations and charges of men and devils: or,
"shall not fail" (o), as the Septuagint; its virtue to justify will
always continue; it will answer for the saints in a time to come, even
at the last judgment. The Targum is, it

"shall not tarry;''

being near to be wrought out and revealed, [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005).

\(o\) , Sept. "non deficiet", V. L.

[Isaiah 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 51:9</span></span>

Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord,.... The Septuagint and
Arabic versions take the words to be an address to Jerusalem; and the
Syriac version to Zion, as in [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), but wrongly: they are, as
Jarchi says, a prayer of the prophet, or it may be rather of the church
represented by him; and are addressed either to God the Father, who,
when he does not immediately appear on the behalf of his people, is
thought by them to be asleep, though he never slumbers nor sleeps, but
always keeps a watchful eye over them; but this they not apprehending,
call upon him to "awake"; which is repeated, to show their sense of
danger, and of their need of him, and their vehement importunity; and
that he would clothe himself with strength, and make it visible, exert
his power, and make bare his arm on their behalf: or they are an address
to Christ, who is the power of God, that he would appear in the
greatness of strength, show himself strong in favour of his people, and
take to himself his great power and reign:

awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old; which is
mentioned not only as an argument to prevail with the Lord that he would
do as he had formerly done; but as an argument to encourage the faith of
the church, that as he had done, he could and would still do great
things for them:

art thou not it that hath cut Rahab; that is, Egypt, so called either
from the pride and haughtiness of its inhabitants; or from the large
extent of the country; or from the form of it, being in the likeness of
a pear, as some have thought; see [Psa
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004) and the sense is, art thou not
that very arm, and still possessed of the same power, that cut or
"hewed" to pieces, as the word (p) signifies, the Egyptians, by the ten
plagues sent among them?

and wounded the dragon? that is, Pharaoh king of Egypt, so called from
the river Nile in Egypt, where he reigned, and because of his fierceness
and cruelty, see [Eze 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003). So the
Targum interprets it of Pharaoh and his army, who were strong as a
dragon. And that same mighty arm that destroyed Egypt, and its
tyrannical king, can and will destroy that great city, spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt, and the beast that has two horns like a lamb,
but speaks like a dragon, and to whom the dragon has given his seat,
power, and authority; and the rather this may be believed, since the
great red dragon has been cast out, or Rome Pagan has been destroyed by
him, [Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008).

\(p\) "quod excidit", Piscator; "excidens", Montanas.

[Isaiah 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 51:10</span></span>

Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great
deep,.... That is, the Red sea, and the deep waters of it; as it did, by
causing a strong east wind to blow, which drove the sea back, and made
it a dry land, in the midst of which the children of Israel walked as on
dry land, [Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021) and the same arm
and mighty power can and will dry up the waters of the river Euphrates,
to prepare the way of the kings of the east, [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012),

that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass
over? divided the waters of the sea, made a path through them for the
Israelites that were redeemed out of Egyptian bondage and slavery, to
pass over, and so to go to Canaan's land.

[Isaiah 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 51:11</span></span>

Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return,.... Or "and", or "so"
(q). In like manner, and as sure as the Israelites had a way made for
them through the sea to pass over, so sure shall all those that are
redeemed by the blood of Christ from sin, Satan, the law, death, and
hell, be gathered out of the nations of the world, and from the
antichristian states, and shall be converted and turn to the Lord. Or
these words are a continuation of the above prayer, as Jarchi, "let them
return"; or rather are an answer to it, and a promise that they should:

and come with singing unto Zion; to the Gospel church, and join
themselves to it, praising God for his grace in calling and converting
them, adoring the riches of his distinguishing love, and singing the new
song of redeeming grace; and hereafter they shall return from the grave,
and come to Zion above, singing the song of Moses and of the Lamb:

and everlasting joy shall be upon their head; visible in the present
state, more so hereafter, when there will be upon them an eternal weight
of glory, a crown of life and righteousness:

they shall obtain joy and gladness; by having the presence of God,
communion with him, views of interest in Christ, and the gracious
influences of the blessed Spirit; all these they enjoy in the church
now, but in full perfection hereafter:

and sorrow and mourning shall flee away: either for sin, having the
discoveries and application of forgiving love; or on account of
desertion, now enjoying the light of God's countenance; or by reason of
persecution, which in the latter day glory will entirely cease. But all
this will be most fully accomplished in the New Jerusalem church state,
and ultimate glory, [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004). See
Gill on [Isa 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010).

\(q\) "et nunc", V. L. "ita", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. And Ben
Melech observes, that "and", is in the room of "thus".

[Isaiah 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 51:12</span></span>

I, even I, am he that comforteth you,.... This is an answer to the
prayer of the prophet, or the church by him, in which the Lord promises
not only assistance and help, but comfort; not only to exert his power
and show his great strength by making bare his arm; but to open his
heart, unbosom himself, and show his great love and strong affection for
them; and so administer divine comforts unto them, giving more than was
asked for: and he promises to do it himself, not by his prophets and
ministers, word and ordinances, though these are the usual means; but he
himself would do it by his Spirit and grace, and the immediate
discoveries of his love; and which he repeats, to show the certainty of
it, as well as to point out to their view the great Comforter himself;
which is an instance of amazing condescension, and could not fail of
exciting admiration and thankfulness in them; see [Co2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003),

who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die; a
poor faint hearted creature indeed, to be afraid of a frail mortal dying
man; which is the case of every man, even of the greatest of men, of the
kings and princes of the earth, who all die like other men; the most
proud and haughty tyrants, the fierce and furious persecutors of the
people of God. Perhaps the Roman Pagan persecutors may be had in view,
whose edicts were very terrible to the first Christians, whose
persecutions were very violent and furious, and the tortures and deaths
they put them to were very dreadful; and which put them in great fear
though they had no reason to fear them that could destroy the body, and
do no more; and the rather, since these were mortal men, and did die,
and their persecutions came to an end. Or it may be, the man of sin, the
son of perdition, antichrist, is here referred to, who in his time has
made all to tremble at him, [Rev 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)
but must die, and his power too, and will be destroyed with the breath
of Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his coming; and therefore his
church and people have no reason to be afraid of him:

and of the son of man, which shall be made as grass; as weak as that,
which cannot stand before the scythe, is cut down, and tossed about, and
trampled upon, and made hay of, and becomes the food of beasts, [Psa
90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005). Or the words may be rendered,
"and of the son of man, to whom grass shall be given"; (r) which if
understood of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, of whom the people of the
Jews were afraid, and who was a type of antichrist, it was literally
true of him, [Dan 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#032).

\(r\) "herba dabitur", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 51:13</span></span>

And forgettest the Lord thy Maker,.... That he is thy Maker, and
therefore is able to protect and preserve thee; when the fear of man
prevails God is forgotten, his power, his providence, his promises, and
past instances of divine favour and goodness; were these more frequently
recollected, considered, and thought of, they would prove an antidote
against the fear of men; and especially when it is observed, that he
that is our Maker is he

that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth; these are amazing works of his hands; and what is it that he
cannot do that has made these? these he upholds and maintains in being,
and does all things in them as he pleases, and overrules all for his own
glory and his people's good, and therefore they have nothing to fear
from men; and yet they are afraid of them, such is their distrust and
unbelief:

and hast feared continually every day; not only at some certain times,
when the enemy has appeared very formidable, and threatened with
destruction, or some terrible rumour has been spread, but every day,
every hour, and every moment; and to be always in a panic must be very
uncomfortable living, as well as very dishonourable:

because of the fury of the oppressor; either the king of Babylon, or
antichrist:

as if he were ready to destroy: had drawn his sword, and just going to
give the fatal blow:

and where, or "but where",

is the fury of the oppressor? where's the fury of Pharaoh, that great
oppressor of God's Israel formerly? it is gone and vanished like smoke:
where's the fury of Sennacherib king of Assyria, and his army, that
threatened Jerusalem with ruin? it was over in a short time, in one
night the whole host, or the greater part of it, were destroyed by an
angel: and where is, or will be, the fury of the king of Babylon? it
will not last always; nor the fury of the antichristian oppressor.

[Isaiah 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 51:14</span></span>

The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed,.... The time hastens
on, or God will hasten the time, for the release either of the captive
Jews in literal Babylon, or of his people in mystical Babylon; or they
that are in exile and captivity, as soon as ever opportunity offers for
their release, will take it, and make no delay: though some understand
the words by way of complaint, as if the persons spoken of were
impatient, and could not wait the proper time of their deliverance:

and that he should not die in the pit; in captivity, which was like a
pit or grave:

nor that his bread should fail: while in the pit or prison, or on his
way home. Musculus interprets all this of Pharaoh, whom he supposes to
be the oppressor in the preceding verse, and renders the words,

who hastened going to open, lest he should die in the destruction; who,
when he saw the firstborn slain, hastened to open and let Israel go, and
was urgent upon them to be gone immediately, lest he and all his people
should perish in that calamity:

nor did his bread fail; the bread of the people delivered out of Egypt,
so he understands it, but were provided with bread from heaven, all the
while they were in the wilderness; and yet this instance of divine power
and goodness was greatly forgotten in later times. Jerome applies the
whole to Christ, who should quickly come; going and treading down his
enemies; opening the way of victory; saving those that are converted,
and giving the bread of doctrine to them: but the words are a promise to
exiles and prisoners for the sake of Christ and his Gospel, that they
should be quickly loosed and set free, and not die in prison, nor want
bread, neither corporeal nor spiritual.

[Isaiah 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 51:15</span></span>

But I am the Lord thy God that divided the sea, whose waves roared,....
Referring to the dividing of the Red sea by a violent wind, at which
time the waves of it doubtless roared till they were made to stand
quietly, as a wall on the right and left, for the Israelites to pass
through, as in [Isa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#010). Or this is
to be understood of the power of God at any time in stilling and
quieting the sea when it rages; which signification the word (s) here
used has, as Aben Ezra observes; which power is expressed by a rebuke or
reproof of it. And so the Targum,

"I am the Lord thy God, that rebuketh the sea:''

and in like manner the Syriac version; see [Psa
106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009) with which compare [Mat
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026). Now he that can do, and
oftentimes has done this, can rebuke, restrain, and still the fury of
the oppressors, the rage of the persecutors, Rome Pagan or Papal, and
deliver out of their hands, [Psa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007),

the Lord of hosts is his name: the Lord of armies in heaven and earth,
and therefore is able to do these things in a natural, civil, and
religious sense.

\(s\) "qui tranquillat" Gakater; "faciens quiescere", so some in
Vitringa; and the word has the signification of rest and quietness in
ver 4.

[Isaiah 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 51:16</span></span>

And I have put my words in thy mouth,.... His promises and his truths,
either in the mouth of his church, and people for them, both to preserve
and transmit to future generations, and to publish and declare to the
comfort of each other, [Isa 59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021) or
to the Prophet Isaiah, to make known to the people of Israel; or to
Christ himself, the great Prophet in Israel, by whom grace and truth are
come, and by whom God has spoken all his mind and will, and in whom all
the promises are yea and amen. The doctrines of God, and not men, as
appears by their truth, purity, harmony and efficacy; they are the words
of faith and sound doctrine, of peace and reconciliation, of pardon and
righteousness, of salvation and eternal life; and these were put into
the mouth of Christ, to be published and declared by him as the great
Prophet of the church; for which he was abundantly qualified as man and
Mediator, by being anointed with the Holy Ghost, without measure, and by
having the tongue of the learned given him: hence he declares, that the
doctrine he preached was not his own as man, but his Father's, and that
he spoke nothing of himself, but what he heard of him, and was taught by
him, and had a commandment from him to say; and which words or doctrines
he delivered to his apostles, and put into their mouths to make known
unto men; see [Joh 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016).

And have covered thee in the shadow of my hand; protected and defended
both the church and its members, Christ and his ministers, his interest
and kingdom, his Gospel, and the truths of it, with its ordinances; and
continued them from age to age, notwithstanding the virulence and
violence of false teachers and persecutors, see [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002),

that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth; form
and establish Gospel churches in the world, in the Roman empire, and
elsewhere, both by the words and doctrines of the Gospel; by the
ministry of the apostles, and other preachers of the word; and by the
hand of almighty power, the efficacious grace of God attending the same:
so the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions connect this clause with
the former,

by which I have settled the heavens, &c; these are called "heavens", for
their purity, brightness, and glory they have from the Lord; for the
doctrines and ordinances of the Gospel, which are from heaven, and not
of men; and for the true members of them, which are men born from above,
and partakers of the heavenly calling; and for the ministers of the
Gospel, those stars of light, which here hold forth the light of the
divine word to men; and where the sun of righteousness arises with
healing in his wings, and where the clouds drop down the rain of
heavenly doctrine: these are said to be "planted", as if they were
gardens, as the churches of Christ are, planted with all kind of
pleasant plants, with trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord,
that he may be glorified; and these, being watered with the dew of
heaven, flourish and bring forth fruit: but planting rather denotes the
stability and duration of the churches of Christ, which will continue as
long as the days of heaven: or "that thou mayest plant" (t); referring
either to the ministers of the word, who are instruments in planting
churches, [Co1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007), or to Christ, the
chief master builder and founder of them; though this may principally
respect the making of the new heaven, and the new earth, which will be
of Christ's forming and making, [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001) for it is not to be understood of
the first making of the heavens and earth in a natural sense, or in a
political sense of the settling and establishing of the Jewish nation:

and say unto Zion, thou art my people; the church of God, consisting
whether of Jews or Gentiles, especially the latter, who once were not,
but now, being called through the ministry of the word, are the people
of God: and more particularly this will be declared and made manifest in
the New Jerusalem state, when all the elect of God will be gathered in,
[Rev 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003).

\(t\) "ut plantes", V. L.

[Isaiah 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 51:17</span></span>

Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem,.... As persons out of a sleep, or
out of a stupor, or even out of the sleep of death; for this respects a
more glorious state of the church, the Jerusalem, the mother of us all,
after great afflictions; and especially if it respects the more glorious
state of all on earth, signified by the New Jerusalem, that will be
preceded by the resurrection of the dead, called the first resurrection,
when the saints will awake out of the dust of the earth, and stand upon
their feet; see [Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002), though the
last glorious state of the church, in the spiritual reign of Christ, is
also expressed by the rising of the witnesses slain, by their standing
on their feet, and by their ascension to heaven, [Rev
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011), before which will be a time of
great affliction to the church, as here:

which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury; it is no
unusual thing in Scripture for the judgments of God, upon a nation and
people, or on particular persons, to be signified by a cup, and
especially on wicked men, as the effect of divine wrath, [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006). Here it signifies that judgment
that begins at the house and church of God, [Pe1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017), which looks as if it arose from
the wrath and fury of an incensed God: and though it may greatly intend
the wrathful persecutions of men, yet since they are by the permission
and will of God, and are bounded and limited by him, they are called
"his cup", and said to come from his hand; and the people of God take
them, or consider them as coming by his appointment:

thou hast drunk the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out;
alluding to excessive drinking, which brings a trembling of limbs, and
sometimes paralytic disorders on men, and to the thick sediments in the
bottom of the cup, which are fixed there, as the word (u) signifies, and
are not easily got out, and yet every drop and every dreg are drunk up;
signifying, that the whole portion of sufferings, allotted to the Lord's
people, shall come upon them, even what are most disagreeable to them,
and shall fill them with trembling and astonishment.

\(u\) "crassamentum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Vitringa.

[Isaiah 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 51:18</span></span>

There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath brought
forth,.... Still alluding to drunken persons staggering in the streets,
that can scarcely stand on their feet, and do not know their way, and
yet have none to hold them up and guide them, not even of their friends
and relations:

neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all the sons that
she hath brought up; to hold her up from falling, of which there is
danger by reeling to and fro, through the intoxicating liquor; and this,
either for want of sons, these being dead, or through want of filial
affection in them. This was true of Jerusalem, literally understood, at
the time of her last destruction by the Romans, when she had no king,
priest, nor prophet, to counsel and direct, defend and protect her; and
will be the case of the church of God at the slaying of the witnesses,
when their own friends will be shy of them, and refuse or neglect to do
any kind offices, or show any respect unto them, signified by not
suffering their dead bodies to be put into graves, [Rev
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009).

[Isaiah 51:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 51:19</span></span>

These two things are come unto thee,.... Affliction from the hand of
God, though by means of enemies, and no friends to help, support, and
comfort, as before hinted: or else this respects what follows, after it
is said,

who shall be sorry for thee? lament or bemoan thee? they of the earth
will rejoice and be glad, and others will not dare to show any concern
outwardly, whatever inward grief may be in their breasts, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010),

desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword; which may be
the two things before mentioned, for though there are four words, they
are reducible to two things, desolation, which is the sword, and by it,
and destruction, which is the famine, and comes by that, as Kimchi
observes: or the words may be rendered thus, "desolation, and
destruction, even the famine and the sword"; so that there is no need of
making these things four, and of considering them as distinct from the
other two, as the Targum makes them, which paraphrases the whole thus,

"two tribulations come upon thee, O Jerusalem, thou canst not arise;
when four shall come upon thee, spoiling and breach, and the famine and
the sword, there shall be none to comfort thee but I.''

All this was literally true of Jerusalem, both at the destruction of it
by the Chaldeans and by the Romans, and will be mystically true of the
church at the slaying of the witnesses by the sword of antichrist; when
there will be a famine, not of bread, nor of water, but of hearing the
word of the Lord; and which will bring great devastation and desolation
on the interest of Christ:

by whom shall I comfort thee? there being no ministry of the word, nor
administration of the ordinances, the usual means of comfort, the
witnesses being slain; see [Lam 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009).

[Isaiah 51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 51:20</span></span>

Thy sons have fainted,.... Through want of food, or at the desolation
made, and have no spirit in them to appear in the interest of true
religion:

they lie at the head of all the streets; emaciated by famine, and not
able to walk, but drop down in the streets, and there lie panting and
pining away; or slain by the enemy; or with the famine, and the sword,
as Aben Ezra, and none to bury them; so the dead bodies of the witnesses
shall lie in the street of the great city unburied, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008).

as a wild bull in a net; that is slain, being taken; or, if alive,
however it flings about and struggles, cannot extricate itself: so it
may denote such that survive the calamity, yet held under the power of
the enemy; and though inwardly fretting, and very impatient, cannot help
themselves, no more than such a creature taken in a toil or net; which
Aben Ezra takes to be a fowl, to which a net best agrees; and the
Vulgate Latin version renders it, "as the oryx snared"; which Drusius
says is the name of a bird; though it is used for a wild goat. So
Aristotle (w) makes mention of it as of the goat kind, and says it has
two hoofs, or is cloven footed, and has one horn; and Bochart (x) takes
it to be the same with the unicorn of the Scriptures, or the
"monoceros"; and, according to some writers (y), it is a very fierce and
bold creature, and not easily taken; and therefore it is no wonder, when
it is in the net, that it strives, though in vain, and till it is weary,
to get out of it, and yet is obliged to lie there. But Kimchi says the
word here used signifies a wild ox or bull (z), as we render it: in
Hebrew it is called "tho" or "thoa", and very probably is the same with
the "thoos" mentioned by Aristotle (a) and Pliny (b), and is rendered a
wild ox in [Deu 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#005), where it is
reckoned among sheep, goats, and deer. It is strange that the Septuagint
should render it, "as beet half boiled"; or flaccid and withering, as
the Syriac and Arabic versions, taking it for an herb: and as much out
of the way is the Targum, which renders it,

"as broken bottles:''

they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God; that is,
Jerusalem's sons, the members of the church of God, professors of
religion, now full of calamities, which may seem to flow from the wrath
of God, and be rebukes in fury, when they are only in love, [Rev
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019) and from whence they shall be
delivered, and their enemies punished, as follows.

\(w\) Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 1. (x) Hierozoic. l. 3. c. 27, 28. (y)
Oppian. de Cyneget. l. 2. apud Gataker. & Sanctium in loc. "saevus
oryx", Martial. l. 13. Epigr. 95. (z) And so it is explained in Gloss.
in T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 117. 1. (a) Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 17. (b)
Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 34.

[Isaiah 51:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 51:21</span></span>

Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted,.... By Babylon, by antichrist
and his followers; hear, for thy comfort, the following prophecy:

and drunken, but not with wine; not with wine in a literal sense; nor
with the wine of the fornication of the whore of Rome; nor with
idolatry, as the kings of the earth are said to be, [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002) but, as the Targum expresses it,
with tribulation; with afflictions at the hand of God, and persecutions
from men.

[Isaiah 51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 51:22</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, the Lord and thy God,.... He who is Lord of all,
the eternal Jehovah, who can do all things, and who is the covenant God
of his people, and will do all things he has purposed and promised, and
which are for their good and his glory; of which they may be assured
from the consideration of these names and titles of his, for which
reason they seem to be used and mentioned:

that pleadeth the cause of his people, which is a righteous one, as he
will make it appear to be, by delivering them out of their troubles, and
by avenging their bodies.

Behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling; which he
himself had put there, [Isa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017), and
which none but himself could take out; not she herself, nor any of her
sons, nor indeed could they give her any relief; but when the Lord's
time is come to favour his people, he himself will remove it:

even the dregs of the cup of my fury; it shall all be clean taken away,
nothing of it shall remain:

thou shalt no more drink it again; or "any longer" (c); after the
slaying of the witnesses, and their rising again, there will be no more
persecution of the church of God; see [Isa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009).

\(c\) "non ultra", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 51:23</span></span>

And I will put it into the hand of them that afflict me,.... As the Lord
did to literal Babylon, [Jer 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015), so
will he do to mystical Babylon; he will retaliate upon her all the evils
she has done to others, and destroy them that destroyed the earth; see
[Rev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018),

which have said to thy soul, bow down, that we may go over; who not only
afflicted the bodies, but tyrannized over the souls and consciences of
men; obliging them to a compliance with their idolatrous practices, to
bow down and worship the beast, and his image; and thereby acknowledge
subjection to the see of Rome, and its authority over them: the allusion
seems to be the custom of the eastern kings trampling upon the necks of
their conquered enemies, [Jos 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024),
and the pope of Rome has, in a literal sense, trampled upon the necks
even of kings and emperors.

And thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them
that went over; which expresses the low estate of the church of Christ,
or holy city, while trodden under foot by the Gentiles during the reign
of antichrist, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002), and may also
denote the sneaking outward compliance of some through the force of
persecution, when they did not cordially embrace, nor with conscience,
and from their heart, submit to the authority of the church of Rome; but
though the people of God are represented in such a low and grovelling
condition, yet they shall arise out of it, and come into a very
flourishing one, as the next chapter shows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 52](isa052)

</div>
