<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg001)  [Next](jdg003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JUDGES 2

This chapter gives an account of an angel of the Lord appearing and
rebuking the children of Israel for their present misconduct, [Jdg
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001); of their good behaviour under
Joshua, and the elders that outlived him, [Jdg
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006); and of their idolatries they fell
into afterwards, which greatly provoked the Lord to anger, [Jdg
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011); and of the goodness of God to
them nevertheless, in raising up judges to deliver them out of the hands
of their enemies, of which there are many instances in the following
chapter, [Jdg 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016); and yet that how,
upon the demise of such persons, they relapsed into idolatry which
caused the anger of God to be hot against them, and to determine not to
drive out the Canaanites utterly from them, but to leave them among them
to try them, [Jdg 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#019).

[Judges 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 2:1</span></span>

And an angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim,.... The Targum
calls him a prophet (y); and the Jewish commentators in general
interpret it of Phinehas (z); and that a man is meant is given into by
others, because he is said to come from a certain place in Canaan, and
not from heaven, and spoke in a public congregation, and is not said to
disappear; but neither a man nor a created angel is meant, or otherwise
he would have spoken in the name of the Lord, and have said, "thus saith
the Lord", and not in his own name; ascribing to himself the bringing of
the children of Israel out of Egypt, and swearing to them, and making a
covenant with them, and threatening what he would do to them because of
their sin; wherefore the uncreated Angel, the Angel of the covenant, is
meant, who brought Israel out of Egypt, was with them in the wilderness,
and introduced them into the land of Canaan, and appeared to Joshua as
the Captain of the Lord's host at or near Gilgal, [Jos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013); and because he had not appeared
since, therefore he is said to come from thence to a place afterwards
called Bochim, from what happened at this time:

and said, I made you to go out of Egypt; that is, obliged Pharaoh king
of Egypt to let them go, by inflicting plagues upon him and his people,
which made them urgent upon them to depart:

and I have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers;
into the land of Canaan, now for the most part conquered, and divided
among them, and in which they were settled:

and I said, I will never break my covenant with you; if the covenant
between them was broken, it should not begin with him, it would be their
own fault; all which is mentioned, as so many instances of divine
goodness to them, and as so many aggravations of their sins against God.

\(y\) So Maimonides, Moreh Nevochim, par. 1. c. 15. & par. 2. c. 6. (z)
The Rabbins in Maimon. Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 42.

[Judges 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 2:2</span></span>

And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land,.... This
the Lord charged them not to do, when he covenanted with them, and
assured them of bringing them into the land; and yet they had done it,
as some instances in the preceding chapter show, which were the occasion
of the angel's coming to them to rebuke them, see [Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002),

you shall throw down their altars; this they aught to have done as soon
as they were come into the land, and possessed of the places where they
were erected, to show their detestation of idolatry, and to prevent the
use of them to idolatrous purposes, see [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005),

but ye have not obeyed my voice; the command of God, but on the contrary
had made leagues and covenants with several inhabitants of the land,
allowing them to dwell among them on paying a certain tax or tribute to
them; and had suffered their altars to continue, and them to sacrifice
upon them to their idols, according to their former customs:

why have ye done this? transgressed the commandment of God in the
instances mentioned. It showed the wickedness of their hearts, their
ingratitude to God, who had done such great things for them, and their
proneness to idolatry, and liking of it.

[Judges 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 2:3</span></span>

Wherefore I also said,.... Supposing, or on condition of their being
guilty of the above things, which was foreseen they would:

I will not drive them out from before you; the seven nations of the
Canaanites entirely, and which accounts for the various instances
related in the preceding chapter; where it is observed, that they could
not, or did not, drive the old inhabitants out of such and such places,
because they sinned against the Lord, and he forsook them, and would not
assist them in their enterprises, or them to their sloth and indolence:

but they shall be as thorns in your sides: very troublesome and
afflicting, see [Num 33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055); or for
straits, as the Septuagint, or be such as would bring them into
tribulation, and distress them, as the Targum; so they often did:

and their gods shall be a snare unto you; which they suffered to
continue, and did not destroy them, as they ought to have done; they
would be, as they proved, ensnaring to them, and whereby they were drawn
to forsake the worship of the true God, and bow down to them, as we read
in some following verses.

[Judges 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 2:4</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the angel of the Lord spake these words unto
all the children of Israel,.... This being either one of the three
solemn feasts, when all the males appeared at the tabernacle of the
Lord; or else here was now a solemn convention of all the tribes to
inquire of the Lord the reason why they were not able to drive out the
Canaanites in some places, and why they prevailed over them in many:

that the people lift up their voice, and wept; being affected with what
the angel said, and convicted in their consciences of their sins, and so
fearing the bad consequences thereof, they wept because of the sins they
had been guilty of, and because of the evils that were like to befall
them on account of them.

[Judges 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 2:5</span></span>

And they called the name of that place Bochim,.... Which signifies
"weepers", from the general lamentation of the people, which before had
another name; very probably it was Shiloh itself since all Israel was
gathered together, the tabernacle being now at Shiloh, and also because
sacrifices were offered up, as follows:

and they sacrificed there unto the Lord; to atone for the sins they had
committed; and if they did this in the faith of the great sacrifice of
the Messiah, they did well; however, so far there was an acknowledgment
of their, guilt, and a compliance with the appointments of God directed
to in such cases.

[Judges 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 2:6</span></span>

And when Joshua had let the people go,.... This is not to be connected
with what goes before, as if that was done in Joshua's lifetime; for
during that, as is after testified, the people of Israel served the
Lord; whereas the angel, in the speech to them before related, charges
them with disobeying the voice of the Lord, making leagues with the
inhabitants of the land, and not demolishing their altars, all which was
after the death of Joshua; but this refers to a meeting of them with him
before his death, and his dismission of them, which was either when he
had divided the land by lot unto them, or when he had given them his
last charge before his death, see [Jos
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#028); and this, and what follows, are
repeated and introduced here, to connect the history of Israel, and to
show them how they fell into idolatry, and so under the divine
displeasure, which brought them into distress, from which they were
delivered at various times by judges of his own raising up, which is the
subject matter of this book:

the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess
the land; as it was divided to the several tribes and their families;
which seems to confirm the first sense given, that this refers to the
dismission of the people upon the division of the land among them.

[Judges 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 2:7</span></span>

And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days
of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of
the Lord that he did for Israel. In Egypt, at the Red sea, in the
wilderness, at the river Jordan, and in the land of Canaan; See Gill on
[Jos 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031). The Jews (a) say, the
elders died on the fifth of Shebet, which answers to part of January and
part of February, on which account a fast was kept on that day.

\(a\) Schulchan Aruch, par. 1. c. 580. sect. 2.

[Judges 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 2:8</span></span>

And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died,

being an hundred and ten years old. See Gill on [Jos
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029).

[Judges 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 2:9</span></span>

And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathheres,.... In [Jos 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030); it is
called Timnathserah, the letters of "serah" being here inverted, make
"heres", which sometimes is used for the sun, [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007); and therefore some observe, that
the whole name signifies the figure of the sun, which the Jews say was
put on his monument, in commemoration of the miracle of the sun standing
still at his request, and had this inscription on it,"this is he that
caused the sun to stand still;''but this is not very probable, since it
might have had a tendency to idolatry, the sun being what was the first
object of idolatrous worship among the Heathens, and had the greatest
show of reason for it:

in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash; See Gill
on [Jos 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030).

[Judges 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 2:10</span></span>

And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers,.... Were
dead and buried, that is, the greatest part of those that were
contemporaries with the elders that outlived Joshua; for they might not
be all dead, at least not all that came out of Egypt, and still less all
that came into the land of Canaan; for, according to the computation of
Ben Gersom, the time of Joshua and the elders were but twenty seven
years; and there were no more than sixty seven years from their coming
out of Egypt to this time; and no doubt there were men living of eighty
years of age and more, but these might be but few:

and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord;
so as to love, fear, serve, and worship him; did not own him to be the
one only living and true God, otherwise they must know him nationally,
being educated in the true religion:

nor yet the works which he had done for Israel; some of them, as before
observed, might have seen the works and wonders of the Lord for Israel,
at their first coming out of Egypt; though not being wise, as the above
writer observes, it had no effect upon them, to keep them from doing
evil in the sight of God; and they all of them had been informed of
them, and many had seen, and must have had personal knowledge of what
was done for them at their coming into the land of Canaan; but not a
practical knowledge, or such as had any influence upon them, to preserve
them from idolatry.

[Judges 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 2:11</span></span>

And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord,.... Openly
and publicly, boldly and impudently, in the very face of God, and amidst
all the good things they received from him, which were aggravating
circumstances of their sins; what the evil was they did is next
observed:

and served Baalim; the idol Baal, as the Arabic version, of which there
were many, and therefore a plural word is used; to which the apostle
refers [Co1 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005); for the word
signifies "lords", and there were Baalpeor, Baalzebub, Baalberith, &c.
and who seem to have their name from Bal, Bel, or Belus, a king of
Babylon after Nimrod, and who was the first monarch that was deified,
the Jupiter of the Heathens. Theophilus of Antioch (p) says, that,
according to the history of Thallus, Belus the king of the Assyrians,
whom they worshipped, was older than the Trojan war three hundred twenty
two years; and that some call Cronus or Saturn Bel and Bal; by the
Assyrians called Bel, and in the Punic or Phoenician language Bal (q).

\(p\) Ad Autolyc. l. 3. p. 138, 139. Vid. Lactant. de fals. Relig. l. 1.
c. 23. (q) Servius in Virgil. Aeneid. 1. prope finem.

[Judges 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 2:12</span></span>

And they forsook the Lord God of their fathers,.... The covenant God of
their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their more immediate
ancestors; his worship they forsook, neglected his tabernacle, and the
service of it:

which brought them out of the land of Egypt; out of wretched misery and
bondage there, with an high hand, and outstretched arm; and led them
through the wilderness, and provided for them there, and brought them
into the land of Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey; but all
these mercies were forgotten by them:

and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about
them: the gods of the Canaanites and Phoenicians, of the Egyptians, and
of the Moabites, Amorites, and Edomites, that were round about them, on
the borders of them; instead of one God they worshipped many, even all
in or about the land of Canaan; so much given were they to idolatry:

and bowed themselves unto them; giving them all religious worship and
honour they were capable of:

and provoked the Lord to anger; nothing is more provoking to him than
idolatry; he being a jealous God, and will not bear any rival in
worship, nor his glory to be given to another, to a strange god.

[Judges 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 2:13</span></span>

And they forsook the Lord,.... The worship of the Lord, as the Targum;
this is repeated to observe the heinous sin they were guilty of, and how
displeasing it was to God:

and served Baal and Ashtaroth; two images, as the Arabic version adds;
Baal, from whence Baalim, may signify the he deities of the Gentiles, as
Jupiter, Hercules, &c. and Ashtaroth their female deities, as Juno,
Venus, Diana, &c. the word is plural, and used for flocks of sheep, so
called because they make the owners of them rich; and Kimchi and Ben
Melech say these were images in the form of female sheep. Perhaps, as
Baal may signify the sun, so Ashtaroth the moon, and the stars like
flocks of sheep about her. Ashtaroth was the goddess of the Zidonians,
[Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005); the same with Astarte, the
wife of Cronus or Ham, said to be the Phoenician or Syrian Venus. So
Lucian says (r) there was a temple in Phoenicia, belonging to the
Sidonians, which they say is the temple of Astarte; and, says he, I
think that Astarte is the moon; and Astarte is both by the Phoenicians
(s) and Grecians (t) said to be Venus, and was worshipped by the Syrians
also, as Minutius Felix (u) and Tertullian (w) affirm; the same with
Eostre, or Aestar, the Saxon goddess; hence to this day we call the
passover Easter (x), being in Eoster-month; and with Andraste, a goddess
of the ancient Britains (y). There were four of them, and therefore the
Septuagint here uses the plural number Astartes; so called either from
Asher, being reckoned "blessed" ones, or from Asheroth, the groves they
were worshipped in; or from "Ash", and "Tor", the constellation Taurus
or the bull; so Astarte by Sanchoniatho is said to put upon her head the
head of a bull, as the token of her sovereignty; See Gill on [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005).

\(r\) De Dea Syria. (s) Sanchoniatho apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 1.
p. 38. (t) Suidas in voce (u) In Octavio, p. 6. (w) Apolog. c. 24. (x)
Vid. Owen. Theologoumen, l. 3. c. 4. p. 192. (y) lb. c. 11. p. 244.

[Judges 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 2:14</span></span>

And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel,.... For the idolatries
they were guilty of; it burned within him, it broke forth, and was
poured out like fire on them, and consumed them; see [Nah
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#006),

and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them; that
rifled their houses, and plundered them of their goods and substance:

and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about; the is,
delivered them into their hands, who carried them captive, where they
were as men sold for slaves; see [Psa
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012); and this was in just
retaliation, that as they had said themselves to work wickedness, the
Lord sold them into the hands of their enemies for their wickedness;
and, as they had followed the gods of the people round about them, so he
delivered them up, into the hands of their enemies round about them, as
the Mesopotamians, Moabites, Midianites, Philistines, and Ammonites:

so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies; but turned
their backs on them, and fled whenever engaged in war with them.

[Judges 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 2:15</span></span>

Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for
evil,.... They prospered not in any business they undertook, or put
their hands unto; or in any expedition they went upon, or when they went
out to war, as Kimchi, Ben Melech, and Abarbinel explain the phrase: the
battle went against them, because God was against them; his hand was
against them, and there was no resisting and turning that back; and this
sense seems to agree with what goes before and follows after; though in
some Jewish writings (a) it is explained of those that went out of the
land to escape the calamities of it, and particularly of Elimelech and
his two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, [Rut
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001),

as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them; having
ratified and confirmed his threatening with an oath, that if they served
other gods, he would surely bring upon them all the curses of the law;
see [Deu 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012),

and they were greatly distressed; by the Canaanites they suffered to
dwell among them, who were pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their
sides, as had been threatened them; and by the nations round about them,
who came in upon them, and plundered them, and carried them captive.

\(a\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 12. p. 34.

[Judges 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 2:16</span></span>

Nevertheless, the Lord raised up judges,.... Who are particularly
mentioned by name, and their exploits recorded, in some following
chapters, and from whom the book in general has its name: these were men
that God raised up in an extraordinary manner, and spirited and
qualified for the work he had to do by them; which was to deliver the
people of Israel out of the hands of their oppressors, and restore them
to their privileges and liberties, and protect them in them, and
administer justice to them; which was a wonderful instance of the
goodness of God to them, notwithstanding their many provoking sins and
transgressions:

which delivered them out of the hands of those that spoiled them; who
took away their goods and cattle from them, and carried their persons
captive: these were the instruments of recovering both again, just as
Abraham brought again Lot and all his goods.

[Judges 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 2:17</span></span>

And yet they would not hearken unto their judges,.... Afterwards, or not
always; but when they admonished them of their sins, and advised them to
walk in the good ways of God, and serve him only; they turned a deaf ear
to them, and went on in their own ways, which is a sad aggravation of
their iniquities:

but they went a whoring after their gods, and bowed themselves unto
them; committing spiritual adultery, for such idolatry is, and is often
so represented in Scripture; for by it they broke the covenant God made
with them, which had the nature of a matrimonial contract, and in which
God was an husband to them; and therefore serving other gods was
rejecting him as such, and committing whoredom with others; than which
nothing was more provoking to God, jealous of his honour and glory:

they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in; as
soon as ever Joshua and the elders were dead, they departed from the God
of their fathers, and the way in which they worshipped him; and so
likewise quickly after they had been delivered by the judges, or however
as soon as they were dead:

obeying the commandments of the Lord; serving him at his tabernacle,
according to the laws, commands, and ordinances he gave to Moses, which
is to be understood of their fathers:

but they did not so; did not walk in the same way, nor serve the Lord,
and obey his commands, as their fathers did; but all the reverse.

[Judges 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 2:18</span></span>

And when the Lord raised them up judges, then the Lord was with the
judge,.... Every one of them that he raised up; as he stirred up their
spirits for such service, to judge his people, and qualified them for
it, he assisted and strengthened them, and abode by them, and succeeded
them in whatsoever they engaged for the welfare of the people; the
Targum is,"the Word of the Lord was for the help of the judge:"

and delivered them out of the hands of their enemies all the days of the
judge; so long as a judge lived, or continued to be their judge, they
were protected by him, and preserved from falling into the hands of
their enemies:

for it repented the Lord because of their groanings, by reason of them
that oppressed them and vexed them; the Lord being merciful had
compassion upon them, when they groaned under their oppressions, and
cried unto him, then he received their prayer, as the Targum, and sent
them a deliverer; and so did what men do when they repent of a thing,
change their conduct; thus the Lord changed the outward dispensation of
his providence towards them, according to his unchangeable will; for
otherwise repentance, properly speaking, does not belong unto God: the
Targum is,"he turned from the word he spake;''the threatening he had
denounced.

[Judges 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 2:19</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the judge was dead,.... Any one of them, the
first and so all succeeding ones:

that they returned; to their evil ways and idolatrous practices, from
which they reformed, and for which they showed outward repentance during
the life of the judge; but he dying, they returned again to them:

and corrupted themselves more than their fathers; in Egypt and in the
wilderness; or rather than their fathers that lived in the generation
after the death of Joshua; and so in every generation that lived before
a judge was raised up to deliver them out of the evils brought upon
them; the children of those in every age successively grew worse than
their fathers:

in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; not
content with the idols their fathers served, they sought after and found
out others, and were more constant and frequent in their worship and
service of them, and increased their sacrifices and acts of devotion to
them:

they ceased not from their own doings; or, "did not let them fall" (b);
but retained them, and continued in the practice of them, being what
they were naturally inclined unto and delighted in:

nor from their stubborn way; which they were bent upon, and determined
to continue in: or "their hard way" (c); which their hard hearts had
chosen, and they obstinately persisted in, being obdurate and
stiffnecked; and which, in the issue, they would find hard, troublesome,
and distressing to them, though at present soft and agreeable, and in
which they went on smoothly; but in time would find it rough and rugged,
offensive, stumbling, and ruinous; or it may signify a hard beaten path,
a broad road which multitudes trod in, as is the way of sin.

\(b\) "non Cadere faciebant", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius. (c)
"de via sua dura", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Drusius.

[Judges 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 2:20</span></span>

And the anger of the Lord was hot against Israel,.... As at first, so
whenever they fell into idolatry; see [Jdg
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014),

and he said, because this people have transgressed my covenant which I
commanded their fathers; made at Sinai, in which they were enjoined to
have no other gods before him:

and have not hearkened to my voice; in his commands, and particularly
what related to his worship and against idolatry.

[Judges 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 2:21</span></span>

I also henceforth will not drive out and from before them,.... At least
not as yet, not very soon nor hastily, as in [Jdg
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#023),

of the nations which Joshua left when he died; that is, unsubdued; which
was owing either to the infirmities of old age coming upon him, which
made him incapable of engaging further in war with the Canaanites; or to
the sloth and indolence of the people, being weary of war, and not
caring to prosecute it; or to want of men to cultivate any more land,
and people other cities, than what they were possessed of; and chiefly
this was owing to the providence of God, who had an end to answer
hereby, as follows.

[Judges 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 2:22</span></span>

That through them I may prove Israel,.... Afflict them by them, and so
prove or try them, their faith and patience, which are tried by
afflictions; and such were the Canaanites to them, as afflictions and
temptations are to the spiritual Israel of God; or rather, whether they
would keep in the ways of God, or walk in those the Canaanites did, as
follows:

whether they will keep the way of the Lord, as their fathers did keep
it, or not; whether they would worship the true God their fathers did,
or the gods of the Canaanites; not that the Lord was ignorant of what
they would do, and so made the experiment; but that the sincerity and
faithfulness, or insincerity and unfaithfulness of their hearts, might
appear to themselves and others.

[Judges 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 2:23</span></span>

Therefore the Lord left these nations, without driving them out
hastily,.... Left them unsubdued, or suffered them to continue among the
Israelites, and did not drive them out as he could have done; which was
permitted, either that it might be seen and known whether Israel would
give into the idolatry of these nations or not, [Jdg
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#022); of which there could have been
no trial, if they and their idols had been utterly destroyed; or because
the children of Israel had transgressed the covenant of the Lord,
therefore he would drive no more of them out, but leave them to afflict
and distress them, and thereby prove and try them, [Jdg
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020); both senses may very well stand,
but the former seems rather to agree with what follows:

neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua; having an end to be
answered by them, before suggested, namely, to prove and try Israel;
and, for a like reason, the indwelling sin and corruptions of God's
people are suffered to remain in them, for the trial of their graces,
and that the power of God in the support and deliverance of them might
appear the more manifest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 3](jdg003)

</div>
