<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jos024)  [Next](jdg001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JUDGES

The title of this book in the Hebrew copies is Sepher Shophetim, the
Book of Judges; but the Syriac and Arabic interpreters call it,

"the Book of the Judges of the Children of Israel;''

and the Septuagint only Judges; so called, not because it was written by
them, though some think it was compiled out of annals and diaries kept
by them; but it seems to be the work of one person only: the true reason
of its name is, because it treats of the judges of Israel, gives an
account of their lives and actions, and especially such as concerned
their office; which office was different from that of kings, and seems
only to have been occasional, and chiefly lay in delivering the people
out of the hands of their enemies, when oppressed, distressed, or
carried captive by them; in protecting them in the enjoyment of their
country, rights, and liberties; in leading out their armies against
their enemies when needful; and in settling differences, judging law
suits, and administering justice. The government of the nation, during
their time, was a theocracy. It is not certain who was the penman of
this book; some ascribe it to King Hezekiah, others to Ezra; but the
Jewish writers (a) are generally of opinion that it was written by
Samuel, which is most likely, who was the last of the judges; and it
seems plainly to be written before the times of David, us appears from a
speech of Joab, [Sa2 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#021); and from
some passages in [Psa 68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008), which seem
to refer or allude to [Jdg 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004); and
from Jerusalem being called Jebus, which shows it to be inhabited by the
Jebusites in the time of the writer of this book, whereas it was taken
out of their hands by David; besides, Samuel himself refers to the
annals of this book; [Sa1 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009); and
from whose testimonies, as well as from others in the New Testament,
there is no doubt to be made of its being genuine and authentic, and
written by divine inspiration; as is evident from the use the Apostle
Paul, and the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, have made of it,
[Act 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020); it is useful as an
history, and without which the history of the people of Israel would not
be complete; it containing an account of all their judges, excepting the
two last, Eli and Samuel, of whom an account is given in the following
books, and of some facts incidental to those times, related in an
appendix at the end of it, concerning the idol of Micah, and the war of
Benjamin; and furnishes out many useful moral observations concerning
God's displeasure at sin in his own people Israel, and his corrections
for it; and about his providential care of them in raising up for them
deliverers in their time of need, as well as points at various virtues
and excellencies in great and good men, worthy of imitation. It
contains, according to Piscator, Dr. Lightfoot, and others, an history
of two hundred ninety and nine years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 1](jdg001)

</div>
