<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg010)  [Next](jdg012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JUDGES 11

This chapter gives an account of another judge of Israel, Jephthah, of
his descent and character, [Jdg 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)
of the call the elders of Gilead gave him to be their captain general,
and lead out their forces against the Ammonites, and the agreement he
made with them, [Jdg 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#004) of the
message he sent to the children of Ammon, which brought on a dispute
between him and them about the land Israel possessed on that side Jordan
the Ammonites claimed; Israel's right to which Jephthah defended, and
made it clearly to appear, hoping thereby to put an end to the quarrel
without shedding of blood, [Jdg 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012)
but the children of Ammon not attending to what he said, he prepared to
give them battle, and previous to it he made a vow, and then set forward
and fought them, and got the victory over them, [Jdg
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#028) and the chapter concludes with
the difficulties Jephthah was embarrassed with upon his return home, on
account of his vow, and the performance of it, [Jdg
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034).

[Judges 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 11:1</span></span>

Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour,.... Jephthah had
his name of Gileadite either from his father, whose name was Gilead, or
from the city and country in which he was born, which is most likely,
and so was of the same country with the preceding judge; and he was a
man of great strength and valour, and which perhaps became known by his
successful excursions on parties of the enemies of Israel, the
Ammonites, being at the head of a band of men, who lived by the booty
they got from them:

and he was the son of an harlot; the Targum says, an innkeeper; and,
according to Kimchi, she was a concubine, which some reckoned no better
than an harlot, but such are not usually called so; some Jewish writers
will have her to be one of another tribe his father ought not to have
married; and others, that she was of another nation, a Gentile, so
Josephus (c): and, according to Patricides (d), he was the son of a
Saracen woman; but neither of these are sufficient to denominate her a
harlot:

and Gilead begat Jephthah; he was his son; this was a descendant of
Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, called after the name of
his great ancestor.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 7. sect. 7. (d) Apud Selden. de Success. ad leg.
Ebr. c. 3. p. 32.

[Judges 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 11:2</span></span>

And Gilead's wife bare him sons,.... It seems that, after the birth of
Jephthah, Gilead took him a lawful wife, who bore him sons:

and his wife's sons grew up; to the estate of men:

and they thrust out Jephthah: out of his father's house, his father in
all likelihood being dead, or he would not have suffered it, and what
follows confirms it that he was dead:

and said unto him, thou shalt not inherit in our father's house: as he
might not, if the son of an harlot, or of a woman of another tribe, or
of a concubine; though as Kimchi, from their Rabbins, observes, the son
of such an one might, provided his mother was not an handmaid nor a
stranger. And it looks as if this was not rightly done, but that
Jephthah was injuriously dealt with by his brethren, of which he
complains:

for thou art the son of a strange woman: or of another "woman" (e), that
was not their father's lawful wife; or of a woman of another tribe, as
the Targum; or of another nation, as others, prostitutes being used to
go into foreign countries to get a livelihood, and hide the shame of
their families; hence a strange woman, and a harlot, signified the same
(f), see [Jdg 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001).

\(e\) "mulieris alterius", Pagninus, Montanus; "exterae", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; so Tigurine version. (f) "Pro uxore hanc
peregrinam", Terent. Audria, act 1, scen. 1. l. 118.

[Judges 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 11:3</span></span>

Then Jephthah fled from his brethren,.... Being ill used by them, and a
man of spirit and courage, and could not bear to be treated with
contempt, nor to live in a dependence on others, and therefore sought to
make himself another way:

and dwelt in the land of Tob; which Kimchi and Ben Gersom think was the
name of the lord and owner of the land; Abarbinel interprets it, a good
land, as Tob signifies, so the Targum; but others the name of a city or
country, and conjecture it may be the same with Ishtob, and which was
not far from the children of Ammon, since they sent thither for
assistance, [Sa2 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006). Jerom (g) takes
it for a country, in which Jephthah dwelt, but says no more of it.
Junius says it was on the entrance of Arabia Deserta, in the
Apocypha:"Yea, all our brethren that were in the places of Tobie are put
to death: their wives and their children also they have carried away
captives, and borne away their stuff; and they have destroyed there
about a thousand men.'' (1 Maccabees 5:13)"Then departed they from
thence seven hundred and fifty furlongs, and came to Characa unto the
Jews that are called Tubieni.'' (2 Maccabees 12:17)where the inhabitants
of it are called Tobienians or Tubienians:

and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah; not wicked men, but empty
men, whose pockets were empty; men without money, as Abarbinel
interprets it, had nothing to live upon, no more than Jephthah, and he
being a valiant man, they enlisted themselves under him:

and went out with him; not on any bad design, as to rob and plunder, but
to get their living by hunting; or rather by making excursions into the
enemy's country, and carrying off booty, on which they lived. Josephus
(h) says he maintained them at his own expense, and paid them wages.

\(g\) De loc. Heb. fol. 25. A. (h) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 7. sect.
7.)

[Judges 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 11:4</span></span>

And it came to pass in process of time,.... Some time after Jephthah had
been expelled from his father's house, and he was become famous for his
martial genius, and military exploits; or at the close of the eighteen
years' oppression of the children of Israel by the Ammonites, or some
few days after the children of Israel were gathered together at Mizpeh,
that the people and princes of Gilead were preparing for war with Ammon,
and were thinking of a proper person to be their general:

that the children of Ammon made war against Israel; not only passed over
Jordan again, and encamped in Gilead, but began to attack them in some
place or another, at least threatened them with it, and made motions
towards it.

[Judges 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 11:5</span></span>

And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against
Israel,.... Were preparing for it, and had assembled their forces near
them, and had began to make some efforts against them:

the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob; they
did not send messengers to him, but went themselves, partly to show
greater respect to him, and partly in hopes of better success, being
aware of objections he would make, which they could better answer
themselves than a deputation.

[Judges 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 11:6</span></span>

And they said unto Jephthah, come and be our captain,.... The general of
their army, to conduct and lead on their forces; they did not propose
him to be their king, being convinced by Abimelech's conduct that such a
step would be wrong; nor did they say anything of his being their judge,
having no other view than to serve their present exigence; besides, a
judge was not one chosen by the people, but raised up of God, and which
honour was conferred on Jephthah afterwards:

that we may fight with the children of Ammon; with judgment, courage,
and success; they did not make this proposal to him to save themselves
from being engaged in the war, but that they might have one skilful in
military affairs at the head of them, to instruct them in the art of
war, and lead them on in a regular manner, and animate them by his brave
example.

[Judges 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 11:7</span></span>

And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead,.... In answer to their
request; who though not backward to engage in the war with them, yet
thought it proper to take this opportunity to upbraid them with their
former unkindness to him:

did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father's house? for it seems
some of these elders at least were his brethren; for who else could be
thought to hate him, and through hatred to thrust him out of his
father's house, but they? nor is it at all improbable that they were
among the elders of Gilead, considering what family they were of: though
indeed the magistrates of the city might be assisting to Jephthah's
brethren in the expulsion of him, or however connived at it, when they
should, as he thought, have protected him, and taken care that he had
justice done him; for even though illegitimate, a maintenance was due to
him:

and why are ye come unto me now, when ye are in distress? intimating,
that it was not love and respect to him, but necessity, that brought
them to him with this request; and that since they used him so ill, they
could not reasonably expect he should have any regard unto them.

[Judges 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 11:8</span></span>

And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah,.... In reply to his
objection:

therefore we turn again unto thee now; being sensible of the injury they
had done him, and repenting of it, of which their return to him was an
evidence; it being with this view to remove the disgrace and dishonour
that had been cast upon him, by conferring such honour on him, as to be
their chief ruler:

that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon,
and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead; the end of their
coming to him was not only to bring him back with them to his own
country, and to fight against the Ammonites, and the defence of it, but
to be the sole governor of it; not of all Israel, but of the tribes
beyond Jordan, which inhabited the land of Gilead: more than this they
could not promise, though he afterwards was judge over all Israel,
notwithstanding there was a law in Israel, that no spurious person
should enter into the congregation, or bear any public office; so it was
a law with the Athenians (i), that unless a man was born of both parents
citizens, he should be reckoned spurious, and have no share in the
government, see [Jdg 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#002).

\(i\) Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 6. c. 10. l. 13. c. 24. "Suidas in voce"

[Judges 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 11:9</span></span>

And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead,.... Considering the former
usage he had met with from them, and the character which he himself
bore, and the fickleness of men, when their turn is served, was willing
to make a sure bargain with them:

if ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Ammon; that
is, should he consent to go along with them, and fight their battle for
them:

and the Lord deliver them before me; or into his hands, on whom he
depended for success, and not on his own courage and valour, and
military skill:

shall I be your head? not only captain general of their forces during
the war, but the chief ruler of them when that was ended.

[Judges 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 11:10</span></span>

And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah,.... Assenting to his
proposal, and not only giving their word for it, but their oath:

the Lord be witness between us, if we do not so according to thy words;
that is, make him head over them; they appealed to the omniscient God,
and called on him to be a witness of their agreement to it, and swore by
him they would fulfil it; or if they did not, that the Lord would take
vengeance on them for it, and punish the breach of this covenant and
oath in some way or another; the Targum of Jonathan is,"the Word of the
Lord be a witness between us, &c.''

[Judges 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 11:11</span></span>

Then Jephthah went with the elders of Israel,.... From the land of Tob
into the land of Gilead, his native country:

and the people made him head and captain over them; ratified and
confirmed what the elders had promised, and by a general unanimous vote
appointed him both to be the captain of their forces, and to be the
chief ruler and governor of them. And this they did, though he was the
son of an harlot; and according to the law in [Deu
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002), such an one was not to be a
civil magistrate; but this was a case of necessity, and in which, no
doubt, they were directed by the Lord, who could dispense with his own
law: besides, they had come to such an agreement before they had pitched
on any particular person, that who should begin to fight with the
children of Ammon should be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead so
that they were obliged to it by their vote and decree, when they
assembled at Mizpeh, where it is probable they consulted the Lord, and
acted under his direction, [Jdg 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017)
and where this was confirmed, as seems from the following clause:

and Jephthah uttered all his words before the Lord in Mizpeh; where the
congregation of Israel were assembled, and in which the Shechinah, or
divine Majesty, dwelt, as is observed by Jarchi and Kimchi, and not
Mizpeh in [Jos 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003), as the latter
says, but this was on the other side Jordan, in the land of Gilead;
however, as it was a solemn meeting, the Lord was there, and, as in his
presence, Jephthah rehearsed all that passed between him and the elders
of Gilead; and, no doubt, in prayer to God, desired he would signify his
approbation and ratification of their agreement, and would give him
success in his undertakings against the children of Ammon.

[Judges 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 11:12</span></span>

And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon,....
Being now declared chief and sole governor of the tribes on the other
side Jordan, he acted in character, and as such sent messengers to the
king of the Ammonites, to know the reason of his invading the land that
belonged to Israel, being desirous of adjusting things in an amicable
way, and to prevent the shedding of blood; in which he behaved as a good
man, and not at all inconsistent with a man of valour and courage:

saying, what hast thou to do with me; to invade my land, and disturb my
people, what have I or they done to give occasion for it?

that thou art come against me to fight in my land? he speaks in the
language of a governor, and as a man of spirit concerned for the good of
his country, and determined to defend the rights and liberties of it.

[Judges 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 11:13</span></span>

And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of
Jephthah,.... Who this king of Ammon was is not said, however he
returned an answer to Jephthah's messengers, which they brought to him,
and it was to this purpose; that the reason of his invading the land,
and bringing war into it, was:

because Israel took away my land when they came out of Egypt; not as
soon as they came out of Egypt, for it was thirty nine years afterwards,
and upwards, even a little before they entered into the land of Canaan;
and the land they took was not theirs, but in the possession of Sihon
and Og, kings of the Amorites; though indeed, before their conquest of
it, it had been in the hands of the Moabites and Ammonites, and who
being confederates, or subjects of the same king, is here claimed by the
king of the children of Ammon:

from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan; the river Arnon was the
border between Moab and the Amorites, and the river Jabbok was the
border of the children of Ammon, [Num
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013), the one was to the south of the
country claimed, and the other to the north and to the west, which was
Jordan, and the wilderness to the east, [Jdg
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#022),

now therefore restore these lands again peaceably; this is demanded or
proposed as terms or conditions of peace, and what would prevent a war,
and nothing short of this would do it.

[Judges 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 11:14</span></span>

And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of
Ammon. Being willing to give him all the satisfaction he could, and if
possible live peaceably with him, and prevent the effusion of blood.

[Judges 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 11:15</span></span>

And said unto him,.... By his messengers:

thus saith Jephthah; in a majestic style, as governor of Israel:

Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of
Ammon; they were charged not to take any, nor did they take any that
belonged to any of these countries, or that was then in the possession
of either of them, [Deu 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009) what they
did take was in the hands of Sihon and Og, and they had obtained it by
conquest, and so no more belonging to either of these.

[Judges 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 11:16</span></span>

But when Israel came up from Egypt,.... In order to go to the land of
Canaan, which was higher than the land of Egypt, which lay low (k):

and walked through the wilderness unto the Red sea; which is to be
understood not of their walking to it; when they first came out of
Egypt, they indeed then came to the edge of the wilderness of Etham, and
so to the Red sea, and walked through it as on dry land, and came into
the wilderness of Shur, Sin, and Sinai; and after their departure from
Mount Sinai they came into the wilderness of Paran, in which they were
thirty eight years; and this is the wilderness meant they walked
through, and came to Eziongaber, on the shore of the Red sea, [Num
33:35](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#035).

and came to Kadesh; not Kadeshbarnea, from whence the spies were sent,
but Kadesh on the borders of Edom, from whence messengers were sent to
the king of it, as follows.

\(k\) Theocrit. Idyll. 17. ver. 79.

[Judges 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 11:17</span></span>

Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom,.... The history of
which may be read in [Num 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014), &c.

saying, let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land; the land of Edom,
from the south to the north of it, according to Jarchi, which was the
nearest and shortest way to the land of Canaan; so far were the
Israelites from invading and seizing upon the properties of others, that
they would not attempt to set their foot in another's country without
leave; which they asked in an humble manner, promising to do no injury
to any, but pay for whatever they ate and drank in their passage:

but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto; or grant their request,
but refused them passage through his country:

and in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab, but he would not
consent; that they should pass through his country, which lay, as Jarchi
says, at the end of the land of Edom, to the west of it, and to the
south of Canaan; and though we nowhere else read of their sending
messengers to the king of Moab, and of the denial he made them, it is
not at all to be doubted of, and the Jewish commentators observe, that
it is clearly intimated by Moses, [Deu
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#029).

as the children of Esau, who dwelt in Seir, and the Moabites which dwelt
in Ar, did unto me; which they interpret thus, as the children of Esau
would not suffer Israel to pass through their land, when desired of
them, so neither would the Moabites, when the same request was made to
them:

and Israel abode in Kadesh; quietly and peaceably, and did not attempt
to force their way through either country, but continued in Kadesh some
little time to consider what way they should take, and to wait for
divine direction.

[Judges 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 11:18</span></span>

Then they went along the wilderness,.... The wilderness of Paran, which
lay along the borders of Edom; they went, according to Jarchi, from the
west to the east on the south border of Edom and Moab:

and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab; all the south of
the land of Edom, and all the south of the land of Moab; towards the
sunrising, as in [Num 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#011).

and pitched on the other side of Arnon; the river Arnon, which,
according to Jarchi, was at the east end of the land of Moab, where
began the country of Sihon and Og:

but came not within the border of Moab; so far were they from attempting
to take away any part of that land from the king of it, though ill
treated by him:

for Arnon was the border of Moab; which divided between Moab and the
Amorites, [Num 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013).

[Judges 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 11:19</span></span>

And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of
Heshbon,.... Which was his royal city, where he had his palace, and kept
his court, and is therefore particularly mentioned; and the rather,
because he had taken it from the Moabites, and was part of that land now
in dispute; and this Sihon was not only in possession of, when Israel
sent messengers to him, but it was his royal seat, the metropolis of his
kingdom, and he was called king of it:

and Israel said unto him, let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land
unto my place; the land of Canaan, prepared and reserved for them when
the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, promised by the
Lord to their ancestors and to them, and given unto them, who is
sovereign Lord of all; and all that Israel desired of Sihon was only a
passage through his land to that, promising the same as to the king of
Edom; see the history of it in [Num
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021).

[Judges 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 11:20</span></span>

But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through, his coast,.... For fear
they should seize upon his dominions, and retain them; and the more
fearful he might be, as he knew that his people were one of the seven
nations of the Canaanites, whose land they were going to possess, and
whom they were to destroy:

but Sihon gathered all his people together; in some certain place, and
armed them, and went out in an hostile manner against Israel in the
wilderness, to attack them; whereby it appears that he was the
aggressor, and therefore Israel was not to be blamed, as not for fending
themselves, so neither for seizing and possessing his country when they
had conquered him:

and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel; there was a battle
between them at the place mentioned, and the victory was on Israel's
side, see [Num 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023).

[Judges 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 11:21</span></span>

And the Lord God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the
hand of Israel,.... So that as Sihon, his people, and his country, fell
into the hands of Israel through the victory the Lord gave them over
him, they had a divine right to the land now in dispute:

and they smote them: destroyed him and all his people, as they were
ordered to destroy the seven nations of Canaan, of which the Amorites
were one, [Deu 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001),

so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of
that country; by means of the above victory they came into the lawful
and rightful possession of all the land that belonged to the Amorites,
who were at that time, and none else, the inhabitants of it; and
therefore the Ammonites could have no claim to it, nor was any made till
now.

[Judges 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 11:22</span></span>

And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites,.... Peaceably and
quietly, nor did any pretend to call their right in question, or dispute
their title, or give them any disturbance:

from Arnon unto Jabbok: which was the length of the country, and the
direction was from south to north, and reached from the river Arnon, the
border of Moab, to the river Jabbok, the border of Ammon; so that it
included no part of what was at this time in the possession of either:

and from the wilderness even unto Jordan; which was the breadth of it,
and its direction was from the west to the east, reaching from the
wilderness of Arabia to the river Jordan.

[Judges 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 11:23</span></span>

So now the Lord God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before
his people Israel,.... It is his doing, and not the work of the
Israelites; it is he that dispossessed the Amorites, and put the
Israelites into the possession of their land, and therefore they enjoy
it by a good tenure:

and shouldest thou possess it? what through the blessing of God on their
arms they have obtained by conquest, and he has settled them in; did
they conquer, that thou should possess what they conquered? did their
God put it into their hands to deliver it into thine? did they fight to
recover for thee what thou hadst lost, and to put thee into the
possession of it? did not they fight in their own defence, and their
enemies and their land fell into their hands, and by the laws and right
of nations became theirs? and canst thou expect to possess it? what
reason is there for it?

[Judges 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 11:24</span></span>

Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to
possess?.... Chemosh was the idol of the Moabites, see [Num
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029), which has led some to think,
that the present king of Ammon was also king of Moab, and who insisted
on that part of the country, which formerly belonged to Moab, to be
delivered to him, as well as that which had belonged to Ammon. Now since
the land, which they now inhabited, as well as what they had lost, they
had taken away from others, [Deu 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010),
having conquered them, and which they ascribed to the help and
assistance they had from their idol, and possessed as his gift; Jephthah
argues with them "ad hominem", from the less to the greater:

so whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from before us, them will
we possess; we have surely as good a claim to what the Lord our God
gives to us in a way of conquest, as you have, or can think you have, to
what your idol, as you suppose, has given you: however, what we have
got, or get this way, we are determined to possess, and keep possession
of.

[Judges 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 11:25</span></span>

And now art thou anything better than Balak the son of Zippor king of
Moab?.... This argument seems to strengthen the conjecture, that this
king was king of Moab at this time, and so Balak was one of his
predecessors. Now he is asked, whether he thought he was a wiser and
more knowing prince than he, as to what was his right and due; or
whether he had a better claim, or any additional one to the land in
dispute the other had not; or whether he judged he was more able to
regain what belonged to him:

did he ever strive against Israel? for the land they took away from
Sihon formerly in the possession of the Moabites? did he ever lay any
claim to it, or enter into any dispute, or litigate with Israel about
it? not at all:

or did he ever fight against Israel? that is, on that account; no, he
sent for Balaam to curse Israel, and sought to defend and secure his own
country he was in possession of, which he thought was in danger by the
Israelites being so near him; but he never made war with them under any
such pretence, that they had done him any injury by inheriting the land
they had taken from Sihon and Og, kings of the Amorites.

[Judges 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 11:26</span></span>

While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns,.... This was the principal
city, which formerly belonged to the Moabites, and was taken from them
by Sihon; who being conquered by Israel, it fell into their hands, and
they inhabited it, and the towns adjacent to it, from that time to the
present; see [Num 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025).

and in Aroer and her towns; another city with its villages, taken at the
same time, and ever since inhabited by the Israelites, even by the tribe
of Gad, who rebuilt it; it lay near the river Arnon; see [Num
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034).

and in all the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon; which lay
along by the side of that river, which divided Moab from the kingdom of
the Amorites; these Israel had dwelt in three hundred years; and during
this time, neither Balak king of Moab, nor any of his successors, had
ever disputed Israel's title to those cities, or commenced a war with
them on account of them; but they had continued in the peaceable
enjoyment of them so long as three hundred years; which are thus
reckoned in the Jewish chronology (z); Joshua governed Israel twenty
eight years, Othniel forty, Ehud eighty, Deborah forty, Gideon forty,
Abimelech three, Tola twenty three, Jair twenty two, and eighteen years
Israel was oppressed by the children of Ammon, which with the six years
of Jephthah make just three hundred; so that, according to this
computation, there were six years short of it; but being so near, the
round number is given:

why therefore did ye not recover them within that time? signifying they
ought to have put in their claim sooner, and endeavoured to have
recovered them long before this time, if they had any right unto them;
wherefore Jephthah pleads prescription, and which in a course of time
ought to take place; or otherwise the world would be full of endless
contentions and controversies, and kingdoms and states would never be at
peace, nor each one know and enjoy for certainty its proper domains.

\(z\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 12. Vid. Jarchium & Kimchium in loc.

[Judges 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 11:27</span></span>

Wherefore I have not sinned against thee,.... Had done him no injury,
not wronged him of anything, nor had taken away any part of his country
from him; this Jephthah said in the name of all Israel, of whom he was
governor:

but thou doest me wrong to war against me; meaning that he had no just
cause to commence a war against Israel, but acted an injurious part; and
seeing things could not be adjusted in an amicable way, but must be
decided by the sword, he leaves the affair with the Lord, and appeals to
him:

the Lord the Judge; the Judge of the whole earth, the omniscient God,
that knows all things, the right and wrong of every cause, on which side
truth and justice lie:

be Judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of
Ammon; not that he expected a decision of the controversy between them
would be made that precise and exact day; but that from henceforward the
Lord would appear, by giving success to that party which was in the
right in this contest.

[Judges 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 11:28</span></span>

Howbeit, the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words
of Jephthah which he sent him. He attended not to the arguments Jephthah
made use of, and did not choose to seem at least to be convinced by
them, nor to regard the awful appeal he had made to the great Jehovah.

[Judges 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 11:29</span></span>

Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah,.... The spirit of
strength, as the Targum; of fortitude of mind, of uncommon valour and
courage, and of zeal for God and Israel, and against their enemies; such
a spirit as used to be given to men, when they were in an extraordinary
manner raised up by the Lord, to be judges, saviours, and deliverers of
his people; so that as Jephthah was before chosen by the people to be
the general and head of the tribes beyond Jordan, he was raised up and
qualified by the Lord now to be the judge of all Israel; of which the
Spirit of the Lord coming on him was a sufficient proof and evidence:

and he passed over Gilead and Manasseh; the countries that belonged to
Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh; however, all that part of
it which lay from the place where he was, to the land of the children of
Ammon:

and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead; which lay to the north of the land of
Gilead, or tribe of Gad:

and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over to the children of Ammon; did
not stay for them, to bring on the war in the land of Gilead, but
prevented it by carrying it into the land of the children of Ammon. It
seems by this, that though the children of Ammon had encamped in Gilead
some time before, [Jdg 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017), yet for
some reason or another they had decamped, and had retired into their own
country; but yet threatening Israel with a war, and preparing for it.

[Judges 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 11:30</span></span>

And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the Lord,.... Before he set out for the
land of the children of Ammon, and to fight with them; hoping that such
a religious disposition of mind would be regarded by the Lord, and be
acceptable to him, and he should be blessed with success in his
enterprise:

and said, if thou shall without fail deliver the children of Ammon into
mine hands; though he was assured of the justness of his cause, and of
his call to engage in it, he seems to have some little diffidence in his
mind about the success of it; at least, was not fully certain of it.

[Judges 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 11:31</span></span>

Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house
to meet me,.... If this phrase, "to meet me", is meant intentionally,
then no other than an human creature can be meant; a child, or servant,
or any other of mankind; for none else could come forth with a design to
meet him: but if this is to be understood eventually, of what might meet
him, though not with design, then any other creature may be intended;
and it must be meant what came forth first, as the Vulgate Latin version
expresses it, or otherwise many might come forth at such a time:

when I return in peace from the children of Ammon: safe in his own
person, and having conquered the Ammonites, and restored peace to
Israel:

shall surely be the Lord's; be devoted to him, and made use of, or the
price of it, with which it is redeemed, in his service: and I will offer
it for a burnt offering; that is, if it is what according to the law may
be offered up, as an ox, sheep, ram, or lamb; some read the words
disjunctively, "or I will offer it", &c. it shall either be devoted to
the Lord in the manner that persons or things, according to the law, are
directed to be; or it shall be offered up for a burnt offering, if fit
and proper for the service; so Joseph and David Kimchi, Ben Melech, and
Abarbinel, with others, interpret it; but such a disjunction is objected
to as improper and ridiculous, to distinguish two sentences, when the
one is more general, and the other more special.

[Judges 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 11:32</span></span>

So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon, to fight against
them,.... As in [Jdg 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029), after he
had made the above vow:

and the Lord delivered them into his hands; when both armies met and
engaged, victory was on the side of Jephthah; the Lord being with him,
and giving him success, to where all is justly ascribed.

[Judges 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 11:33</span></span>

And he smote them from Aroer,.... A city which lay near the river Arnon,
on the borders of Moab, [Deu 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012).

even till thou come to Minnith; which seems to have been a place famous
for wheat, [Eze 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017) so David de
Pomis (a) says it was a place where the best wheat grew. Jerom says (b)
in his time was shown a village called Mannith, four miles from Esbus
(or Heshbon), as you go to Philadelphia. Josephus (c) calls it Maniathe,
and it is thought by some to be the Anitha of Ptolemy (d), which he
places in Arabia Petraea even "twenty cities"; which he pursued them
through and took:

and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter; or,
Abel Ceramim. Jerom says (e) in his time was seen a village called
Abela, planted with vineyards, seven miles from Philadelphia:

thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel;
so that they were not able to oppress them any more.

\(a\) Tzemach David, fol. 81. 3. (b) De loc. Heb. fol. 93. E. (c)
Antiqu. l. 5. c. 7. sect. 10. (d) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. (e) De loc.
Heb. fol. 88. K.

[Judges 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 11:34</span></span>

And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house,.... Where he had uttered his
words before the Lord, which had passed between him and the elders of
Gilead, and from whence he set out to fight the children of Ammon, and
whither he returned after he had got the victory over them, [Jdg
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011) and where it seems he had a
house, and his family dwelt; for upon his being fetched from the land of
Tab, he brought what family he had with him, and settled them at Mizpeh,
while he went on the expedition against the children of Ammon:

and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him, with timbrels, and with
dances; accompanied with young women, having timbrels in their hands,
and playing upon them, and dancing as they came along; expressing their
joy at, and congratulating him upon, the victory he had obtained over
the children of Ammon:

and she was his only child: and so dear unto him, and upon whom all his
hopes and expectations of a posterity from him depended:

besides her he had neither son nor daughter: some read it, "of her" (f);
that is, she had neither son nor daughter; and so by this vow, be it
understood in which way it may be, if fulfilled, she must die without
any issue; though the phrase in the Hebrew text is, "of himself" (g); he
had none, though his wife whom he married might have sons and daughters
by an husband she had before him, and so these were brought up in
Jephthah's house as his children; yet they were not begotten by him,
they were not of his body, not his own children; he had none but this
daughter, which made the trial the more grievous to him; her name,
according to Philo, was Seila.

\(f\) Targum apud Kimchi. Vid. Masoram in loc. "ex ea", so some in
Vatablus. (g) "ex se", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius; so
Noldius, p. 614. No. 1641.

[Judges 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 11:35</span></span>

And it came to pass, when he saw her,.... She being the first person
that presented to his view, as she was at the head of the virgins with
their timbrels and dances:

that he rent his clothes; as was the usual manner, when anything
calamitous and distressing happened; see [Gen
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#034).

and said, alas, my daughter, thou hast brought me very low; damped his
spirits, sunk him very low, so that he was ready to drop into the earth,
as we say; he that was now returning in triumph, amidst the acclamations
of the people, in the height of his glory, and extolled to the skies,
and perhaps elated in his own mind; on a sudden, at the sight of his
daughter, was so depressed in his spirits, that he could not bear up;
but was ready to sink and die away, all his honour being as it were laid
in the dust, and nothing to him:

and thou art one of them that trouble me: or among his troublers, and
the greatest he ever met with; he had been in trouble from his brethren,
when they drove him from his father's house, and he had had trouble with
the children of Ammon to subdue them; but this was the greatest trouble
of all, that his daughter should be the first that should meet him; of
whom, according to his vow, he was to be deprived, and so all his future
comforts, hopes, and expectations from her gone; and therefore ranks her
among, and at the head of, his troublers:

for I have opened my mouth unto the Lord; in a vow; not only had
purposed it in his heart, but had expressed it with his lips:

and I cannot go back; or retract it; looking upon himself under an
indispensable obligation to perform it; of which, be it as it may, he
seems to have had mistaken notions and apprehensions; for if his vow was
to sacrifice her, as some think, he was not obliged to do it, since it
was contrary to the law of God, and abominable in his sight; and
besides, what was vowed to be the Lord's, or devoted to him, might be
redeemed according to the law, a female for thirty pieces of silver,
[Lev 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#002) and if the vow was to
separate his daughter from the company of men, and oblige her never to
marry, such a power as this parents had not allowed them over their
children, according to the laws of God or of men, in the Jewish nation;
and therefore, be it which it will, what he had to do was to repent of
this rash vow, and humble himself before God for making it, and not add
sin to sin by performing it.

[Judges 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jdg 11:36</span></span>

And she said unto him, my father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the
Lord,.... The conditional word "if" may be left out, as it is not in the
original text; for her father had told her that he had opened his mouth,
or made a vow to the Lord, and had no doubt explained it to her what it
was, though it is not expressed; she knew it respected her, as it had
issued, and was concerning her, as appears by her later request:

do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; which
is a remarkable instance of filial subjection and obedience to a parent,
and which perhaps was strengthened by a like mistaken notion as that of
her father concerning the vow, that it could not be dispensed with; and
therefore was moved under a sense of religion, as well as filial duty,
to express herself in this manner, as well as by what follows:

forasmuch as the Lord hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies,
even of the children of Ammon: such was her public spirit, and the
grateful sense she had of the divine goodness, in giving victory over
Israel's enemies, and delivering them from them, with vengeance on them,
she cared not what was done to her; yea, desired that what was vowed
might be performed.

[Judges 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jdg 11:37</span></span>

And she said unto her father, let this thing be done for me,.... She had
but one favour to ask of him, which she thought might be granted,
without any breach of the vow:

let me alone two months she desired such a space of time might be
allowed her before the vow took place; and the rather she might be
encouraged to expect that her request would be granted, since no time
was fixed by the vow for the accomplishment of it, and since the time
she asked was not very long, and the end to be answered not unreasonable

that I may go up and down upon the mountains; or, "ascend upon the
mountains" (h); Jepthah's house in Mizpeh being higher than the
mountains; or there might be, as Kimchi and Ben Melech note, a valley
between that and the mountains, to which she descended in order to go up
to the mountains; see [Jdg 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#025) these
she chose to make her abode, and take her walks in, during the time she
asked, as being most fit for retirement and solitude; where she might
give up herself to meditation and prayer, and conversation with her
fellow virgins she would take with her, and so be wrought up to a
greater degree of resignation and submission to her father's will, and
to the will of God in it, as she might suppose:

and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows; the virgins her companions;
this she proposed to be the subject that she and her associates would
dwell upon, during this time of solitude; and the rather, as this may be
thought to be the thing contained in the vow, that as she was a virgin,
so she should continue; by which means she would not be the happy
instrument of increasing the number of the children of Israel, nor of
being the progenitor of the Messiah; upon which accounts it was reckoned
in those times to be very grievous and reproachful to live and die
without issue, and so matter of lamentation and weeping.

\(h\) "et descendam super montes", Pagninus, Montanus; "descendamque ad
montes", Tigurine version.

[Judges 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jdg 11:38</span></span>

And he said, go,.... He granted her request at once:

and he sent her away for two months; as she desired:

and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the
mountains; for the space of two months: the Jewish commentators make
mention of an allegorical exposition of a writer (i) of theirs, who by
mountains understands the sanhedrim, to whom she proposed to go, who
perhaps might find a way for the loosing of the vow; but it is a
question whether there was such a court then in Israel; and had there
been one, and either she or her father had applied to it, in this case
the priests would have pointed out what was to be done, and especially
if the vow had any regard to the sacrifice of his daughter; and even to
her virginity, which he had no power to oblige her to; but the literal
sense is no doubt to be followed.

\(i\) Tanchuma.

[Judges 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jdg 11:39</span></span>

And it came to pass at the end of two months she returned to her
father,.... For the request she made was not a pretence to make her
escape out of his hands; but having done what she proposed to do, and
the time fixed for it being come, she returned to her father's house,
and delivered herself to him:

who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: but what he
did is a question, and which is not easily resolved; some think he
really sacrificed her, through a mistaken sense of [Lev
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029) and which his action are
accounted for through his living a military life, and in a distant part
of the country, and at a time when idolatry had greatly prevailed in
Israel, and to such a degree as it had not before, and no doubt that
branch of it, sacrificing children to Molech; and Jephthah might think
that though that was sinful, yet such a sacrifice might be acceptable to
the Lord; and especially since his vow, as he thought, bound him to it;
and how far the instance of Abraham offering up his son Isaac might
encourage him to it, cannot be said: of this mind were Josephus (k),
Jonathan Ben Uzziah the Targumist, and some other Jewish writers (l);
and many of the ancient Christian fathers, and many modern authors of
every name among Christians; and it has been thought that the story of
Iphigenia, who Capellus (m) thinks is the same with Jepthigenia, that
is, the daughter of Jephthah, and was slain by her father Agamemnon,
having several circumstances in it similar to this, is taken from hence:
and there is much such a case as this related (n) of Idomeneus, a king
of the Cretians, who upon his return after the destruction of Troy,
being in a tempest, vowed, should he be saved, that he would sacrifice
the first he met with to the gods; and as it was his son he first met
with, he sacrificed him; or, as others say, would have done it, but was
prevented by the citizens, and who on this account drove him from his
kingdom. But others are of opinion that what Jephthah did according to
his vow was, that he shut up his daughter, and separated her from the
company of men, and obliged her to live unmarried all her days, and
therefore she is said to bewail her virginity. Kimchi and Ben Melech
say, he built a house for her without the city, where she dwelt alone,
and knew no man; and where her father supported her, and obliged her to
live all her days; and Abarbinel thinks, that the Romanists from hence
learnt to build their cloisters to put their nuns in; and so Ben Gersom
interprets this vow of her being separated from men, and devoted to the
service of God; and which is the sense of many Christian interpreters.
Now though Jephthah had no such power over his daughter, as to oblige
her to perpetual virginity, nor did his vow bind him to it; for persons
devoted to the Lord were not obliged to abstain from marriage, nor have
we any instances of a monastic life in those times, nor among the Jews
at any time; yet as he did something not right, which he thought his vow
obliged him to, one would be rather tempted to think, in charity to him,
that of the two evils he did the least; for if she was put to death, it
must be done either by the magistrates, or by the priests, or by
Jephthah himself; neither of which is probable:

and she knew no man; never married, but lived and died a virgin: "and it
was a custom in Israel"; the Targum adds,"that a man might not offer his
son or his daughter for a burnt offering, as Jephthah the Gileadite did,
and did not consult Phinehas the priest; for had he consulted Phinehas
the priest, he would have redeemed her with a price;''so Jarchi,
according to [Lev 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#004) but each stood
upon their honour, as the Jews say (o); Jephthah being a king would not
go to Phinehas, and Phinehas being an high priest; and the son of an
high priest, would not go to a plebeian; and so, between them both, the
maiden was lost: but the custom refers to what follows.

\(k\) Antiqu l. 5. c. 7. sect. 10. (l) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 60, fol.
52. 3. Vajikra Rabba, sect. 37. fol. 176. 4. (m) De Voto Jephthae, sect.
12. (n) Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c. 22. Servius in Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 3. col. 693. in l. 11. col. 1634. (o) Bereshit Rabba &
Vajikra, ut supra. (l)); Midrash Kohelet, fol. 81. 3.

[Judges 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jdg 11:40</span></span>

That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of
Jephthah the Gileadite,.... Either the death of her, as some, or her
virginity, as others; though the word (p) used may signify to talk and
discourse with her, to hold a confabulation with her, and comfort her,
as Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it; to bring her some news, and tell
her some diverting stories, to cheer and refresh her in her solitude. De
Dieu observes, that the word signifies in the Arabic language to
"praise", or speak in commendation of a person or thing; and indeed in
this sense it seems to be used in this book, [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011), "they shall rehearse", that is,
with praise and thanksgiving, "the righteous acts of the Lord"; and so
the daughters of Israel went every year to the place where the daughter
of Jephthah was, to speak in the praise of her, of her heroism, in so
cheerfully submitting to her father's vow, and expressing such gratitude
and joy at the same time for victory over the enemies of Israel; and
this they did in her presence and while she lived, to keep up her
spirits; or it may be, in some public place, and even after her death,
in memory of her, and to celebrate her praise. Epiphanius says (q), that
in his time, at Sebaste, formerly called Samaria, they deified the
daughter of Jephthah, and kept a feast for her every year. The meeting
of the daughters of Israel, so long as the custom lasted, which perhaps
was only during the life of Jephthah's daughter, was four days in a
year; but whether they were four days running, or once in a quarter of a
year, is not certain; the latter seems most probable.

\(p\) "ad alloquendum", Pagninus, Montanus; "ut dissererent", Tigurine
version; "ut colloquerentur", Vatablus; "ad confabulandum", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator. (q) Contr. Haeres. l. 2. Haeres. 55.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 12](jdg012)

</div>
