<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer026)  [Next](jer028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 27:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 27

This chapter contains a prophecy of the subjection of the king of Judah,
with five neighbouring kings, to the king of Babylon; signified by bonds
and yokes on the prophet's neck, which they are exhorted patiently to
bear, as being most for their good; and not to give heed to false
prophets, who would persuade them to the contrary. The date of the
prophecy is in [Jer 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#001); the order to
make the yokes, and send them to the several neighbouring princes by
their messengers at Jerusalem, [Jer
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#002); what they should say to their
masters from the God of Israel, who is described from his power in the
creation of the earth, and the disposal of it, [Jer
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#004); as that he had given all their
lands into the hand of the king of Babylon, whom they should serve, or
it would be worse for them, [Jer 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006);
and therefore should not hearken to their prophets, who prophesied lies;
if they did, it would be to their hurt; whereas, if they quietly
submitted, they would dwell in their own land, [Jer
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009); particularly Zedekiah king of
Judah is exhorted to submit; and both he, and the priests and the
people, are advised not to hearken to the false prophets, [Jer
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012); particularly as to what they
said concerning the speedy return of the vessels of the temple, which
were carried away to Babylon; but might assure themselves they should
remain there; and the rest also should be taken, and not returned until
the end of the seventy years, [Jer
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#016).

[Jeremiah 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 27:1</span></span>

In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
Judah,.... This is the same date with the prophecy of the preceding
chapter and some think that this verse should conclude that, as
belonging to it; and by which they would reconcile a difficulty that
arises here; the orders for making the yokes being given in the
beginning of Jehoiakim's reign, which yet were to be sent to the
messengers of the neighbouring kings that were come to Zedekiah at
Jerusalem, who did not begin to reign until eleven years after this
time; but the word "saying", at the end of the verse, shows it not to
belong to the preceding, but to what follows: others think it is a
mistake of the copy, and that Jehoiakim is put for Zedekiah; and the
Syriac and Arabic versions read Zedekiah; but he was not the son of
Josiah, as this king is said to be, but his brother: others therefore
think, that though the prophecy was delivered to Jeremiah, and the
orders were given him to make the bonds and yokes after mentioned, at
this time; yet this prophecy was concealed with him, and the orders were
not executed till Zedekiah's time; or that the prophet, in the beginning
of Jehoiakim's reign, made the yokes as he was ordered, and put one on
his neck, to signify the subjection of Judah to the king of Babylon,
which quickly took place, about the third or fourth year of this reign;
and that the rest were sent to the ambassadors of the neighbouring
nations in Zedekiah's time; which latter seems most probable:

came this word unto Jeremiah from the Lord, saying; as follows. This
verse is not in the common editions of the Septuagint; but it is in the
king of Spain's Bible.

[Jeremiah 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 27:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord to me, make thee bonds and yokes,.... The yokes were
made of wood, as appears from [Jer
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#013); and the bonds were strings or
thongs, which bound the yoke together, that it might not slip off the
neck, on which it was put:

and put them upon thy neck; not all of them together, but one after
another, at different times; and this was very significant; for the
prophet being seen abroad with a yoke upon his neck, it would be natural
to inquire the meaning of it; when they would be told it was to signify
the subjection of Judah, and so of other nations, to the king of
Babylon; and that he did wear at times such a yoke, even fifteen years
after, in the fourth of Zedekiah's reign, appears from [Jer
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 27:3</span></span>

And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab,

and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the
king of Zidon,.... All neighbouring kings and states, to whom the wine
cup of God's wrath was to be sent, and they made to drink of it, [Jer
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#021); and against whom Jeremiah
afterwards prophesies:

by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king
of Judah; who were sent by their masters, either to congratulate
Zedekiah upon his accession to the throne; or to enter into a league
with him against the king of Babylon, and shake off his yoke; or to
reside at his court, as ambassadors of nations at peace and in alliance
usually do; and it may be for all those purposes. The yokes therefore
are ordered to be sent to them, as being the most proper and easy way
and method of conveying them, with the meaning of them, to their
respective masters.

[Jeremiah 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 27:4</span></span>

And command them to say unto their masters,.... The prophet is sent with
authority, and ordered to speak in a very high strain, having his orders
from the King of kings and Lord of lords; a greater master than those
messengers had; and to enjoin them to tell their several masters in his
master's name; as follows:

thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; who, though in a
peculiar manner the God of Israel, yet was Lord of the whole world, and
had all the armies of heaven and earth at his command, to enforce his
power and authority; wherefore what he says ought to be attended to:

thus shall ye say to your masters; deliver to them the following words
of the great Jehovah.

[Jeremiah 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 27:5</span></span>

I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the
ground,.... The earth was made by him on the first day, and man and
beast on the sixth day, of the creation; the earth is still supported in
its being, and man and beast are continued on it in succession: this is
mentioned to show his right and authority to dispose of the earth, and
all in it, at his pleasure; which is founded on his creation and
sustaining of it, and all creatures in it: which was, and is, as he
says,

by my great power, and by my outstretched arm; for nothing less could
have created the original chaos out of nothing, and brought that into
form and order, and produced out of it such creatures as man and beast;
and nothing less than that could continue it in being, and a succession
of creatures on it:

and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me; some part of it to
one, and some to another; and more to one than to another; but to none
according to their merit, but according to his own sovereign will and
pleasure; see [Psa 115:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#016).

[Jeremiah 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 27:6</span></span>

And now I have given all these lands,.... Before mentioned; of Edom,
Moab, Ammon, Tyre, Zidon, and Judea:

into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; whom
God used as an instrument in correcting and chastising the nations; and
who obeyed his will, though he knew it not; nor did what he did in
obedience to it; and yet had the honour of being called his servant, and
of being rewarded with a very large empire; which was owing, not so much
to his prowess and valour, wisdom and management, as to the providence
of God; who delivered the above kingdoms, with others, into his hands,
as being the sole proprietor and sovereign disposer of them:

and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him; either
to bring him, and his armies, and his carriages of provisions for them,
and warlike stores, for the invasion and taking the above countries; or
the cattle found there, which belonged to these countries, and the
inhabitants thereof, which would fall into his hands with them.

[Jeremiah 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 27:7</span></span>

And all nations shall serve him,.... That is, all those, all above
mentioned; though there were others also that were tributary to him, but
not every nation under heaven:

and his son, and his son's son; their Scripture names were Evilmerodach
and Belshazzar, [Jer 52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031); and by
Ptolemy, in his canon, are called Iloarudamus and Nabonadius; between
whom he places Niricassolassarus, or Neriglissarus; who was not a son of
Evilmerodach, but his sister's husband. A son of his succeeded him,
called Laborosoarchod; who, reigning but nine months, is not placed in
the canon; agreeably to which is the account of Berosus (h); by whom the
immediate son of Nebuchadnezzar is named Evilmaradouchus; or
Evilmalaurouchus, as in Eusebius (i); who, after he had reigned two
years, was slain by Neriglissoor, or Neriglissar, as in the above
writer, his sister's husband; who, after he had enjoyed the kingdom four
years, died, and left it to his son, whom he calls Chabaessoarachus, or
Laborosoarchados, as before, who reigned but nine months; and then
Nabonnidus succeeded, the name he gives him who was conquered by Cyrus
in the seventeenth year of his reign; and not very different is the
account of Nebuchadnezzar's successors, and the names of them, as given
by Abydenus, out of Megasthenes (k); according to whom,
Evilmalaurouchus, the son of Nebuchadnezzar, was his successor; then
Neriglissar, his sister's husband, who left a son called Labassoarascus;
and after him Nabannidochus, in whose times Cyrus took Babylon; and who
appears to be the same with Belshazzar, the grandson of Nebuchadnezzar;
so that the Scripture is very just and accurate in mentioning these two
only as the son, and son's son of Nebuchadnezzar, whom the nations
should serve; for in the last of these ended the Babylonish monarchy:

until the very time of his land come; or that "itself; also he himself"
(l) or, "also of himself", as the Vulgate Latin version. The Targum is,

"until the time of the destruction of his land come, also of himself;''

there was a time fixed for his life, and so long the nations were to
serve, and did serve, him personally; and there was a time fixed for the
continuance of his monarchy, in his son, and son's son; when it was to
end, as it did, in Belshazzar's reign; and when the seventy years'
captivity of the Jews was up:

and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him; and
his kingdom; subdue it, and make it tributary to them. This was
accomplished by the Medes and Persians, with Darius and Cyrus at the
head of them, and other nations and kings, allies and auxiliaries to
them, and associates with them; see [Jer
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014). The Vulgate Latin version
renders it, "and many nations and great kings shall serve him"; so the
Targum; which falls in with the former part of the verse; wherefore the
other sense is best.

\(h\) Apud Joseph. contra Apion. I. 1. sect. 20. p. 1344. (i) Praepar.
Evangel. I. 9. c. 40. p. 455. (k) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c.
41. p. 457. (l) "etiam illud, vel ipsum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 27:8</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will not
serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon,.... Will not, upon
his approaching to them, invading and besieging them, submit and become
tributary to him, as is more fully expressed in the next clause:

and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon;
or voluntarily become subject to him, and pay a tax he shall impose upon
them. This refers to, and explains the symbol of, Jeremiah's making and
wearing yokes, [Jer 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#002);

that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword, and with the
famine, and with the pestilence; with one judgment after another; some
will perish by the sword of the enemy, sallying out upon them, or
endeavouring to make their escape; others by famine their provisions
being spent through the length of the siege; and others by pestilence,
or the plague, by the immediate hand of God:

until I have consumed them by his hand; Nebuchadnezzar's; by means of
him; by his sword, and strait besieging them; or, "into his hand"; and
so the Targum,

"until I have delivered them into his hand;''

having consumed multitudes by the sword, famine, and pestilence, will
deliver the rest into his hands to be carried captive by him.

[Jeremiah 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 27:9</span></span>

Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets,.... False prophets, as the
Targum. These words are not directed to the Jews, but are a continuation
of what the messengers of the nations should say to their masters from
the God of Israel, by the mouth of his prophet; for they had their
prophets as well as the Jews; as the prophets of Baal, and others:

nor to your diviners; or soothsayers; such an one as was Balaam:

nor to your dreamers; or "dreams"; such as they had themselves, and laid
great stress upon; or to those who pretended to interpret them to them:

nor to your enchanters; or stargazers; astrologers, who pretended by the
position of the stars to foretell what would come to pass:

nor to your sorcerers; or wizards, or necromancers; who, by unlawful
methods, pretended to acquire knowledge of future things:

which speak unto you, saying, ye shall not serve the king of Babylon;
meaning, either that they ought not to become tributary to him; or they
should not be brought into subjection by him: and so were stirred up to
oppose him, and not submit to him.

[Jeremiah 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 27:10</span></span>

For they prophesy a lie unto you,.... That which was vain and false, and
proved so; though they might not know it was when delivered:

to remove you far from your land; not that they designed it by their
prophecies, but so it was eventually; for, standing it out against
Nebuchadnezzar, encouraged by the lies and dreams of their prophets, he,
in process of time, took them, and carried them captive into Babylon;
whereas, had they surrendered at once, they might have continued in
their own land, paying a tax or tribute to the king of Babylon:

and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish; drive them out of
their own land, and so perish in a foreign land: God is said to do that
which his servant or instrument did, being provoked by the sin and
disobedience of the people, hearkening to their lying prophets, and not
to him.

[Jeremiah 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 27:11</span></span>

But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of
Babylon, and serve him,.... That at once, and readily, submit unto him,
and pay him tribute:

those will I let remain still in their own land, saith the Lord;
undisturbed by any other enemy; peaceably dwelling in their own
habitations; following their occupations and business of life; and
enjoying their substance and estates, only paying the tax imposed on
them:

and they shall till it, and dwell therein; manure and cultivate it, and
gather and eat the fruit of it, and continue to do so, they and their
posterity after them.

[Jeremiah 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 27:12</span></span>

I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah,.... At the same time that he
delivered the above message from the Lord to the ambassadors of several
nations, who were then residents in Zedekiah's court, or however in
Jerusalem:

according to all these words; the same things, and much in the same
language, he said to the king of Judah, as to the messengers of the
nations:

saying; as follows:

bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon; you, O king,
your nobles, and your people. Zedekiah was set upon the throne by the
king of Babylon, was a tributary to him, and had took an oath to be
faithful to him; and yet was now meditating rebellion against him; and
was consulting and entering into a confederacy with the neighbouring
nations to throw off the yoke, and be independent on him: wherefore the
sense of this advice must be to bring themselves, he and his people, to
a cheerful submission to it, and a patient bearing it, and not attempt
to shake it off:

and serve him and his people, and live: the king of Babylon, and the
Chaldeans, by faithfully paying the tribute, and acknowledging
subjection to him; and so "live" in their own land, enjoying all other
civil and religious privileges.

[Jeremiah 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 27:13</span></span>

Why will ye die, thou and thy people, the sword, by the famine, and by
the pestilence,.... Through a blockade of the Chaldean army, which would
invade their land, and besiege their city, upon a refusal to be subject
to their yoke:

as the Lord hath spoken against the nation that will not serve the king
of Babylon? as the Lord has threatened shall be the case of any and
everyone of the above nations that should refuse to be tributary to him;
of which, no doubt, Zedekiah and his court had been apprized; see [Jer
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#008).

[Jeremiah 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 27:14</span></span>

Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets,.... The false
prophets, as the Targum; such bad kings always had about them, to whom
they listened, and which often proved of bad consequence to them:

that speak unto you, saying; as follows:

ye shall not serve the king of Babylon; ye ought not to do it, but cast
off his yoke; to which if ye do not willingly submit, he will never be
able to force you to it:

for they prophesy a lie unto you; and therefore should not be hearkened
to, particularly when they promise safety from the king of Babylon.

[Jeremiah 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 27:15</span></span>

For I have not sent them, saith the Lord,.... See [Jer
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#021); yet they prophesy a lie in my
name; to deliver out a lie was a very wicked thing, sinful in them, and
fatal to others; but to make use of the name of the Lord, and cover it
with that, and back it with his authority, was much more wicked and
abominable:

that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish; being driven out
of their own land, perish in another; which, though the false prophets
did not intend by their prophesying, yet such would be, and was, the
issue of it:

ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you; for it would end in the
ruin and destruction of them both; both of the false prophets, as the
Targum here again calls them, and those that listened to their
prophecies; both would fall into the same ditch.

[Jeremiah 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 27:16</span></span>

Also I spake to the priests, and to all this people, saying,.... From
the court he went to the temple, and spoke to the priests that were
ministering there, and to all the people that were assembled for divine
worship; either at the ordinary time of it, or at some one of the solemn
feasts: this was a proper time and place to meet with the people and the
priests; which latter especially had a concern in what he had to say
concerning the vessels of the temple:

thus saith the Lord, hearken not to the words of your prophets that
prophesy unto you: your false prophets, as the Targum:

saying; as follows:

behold, the vessels of the Lord's house shall now shortly be brought
again from Babylon; which were carried thither, both in the times of
Jehoiakim, and of Jeconiah, [Ch2 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007);
these the false prophets gave out would in a short time be returned;
that the king of Babylon, either willingly and of his own accord, or
being pressed or forced to it, would send them back; so little reason
had they to fear an invasion from him, or captivity by him:

for they prophesy a lie unto you; that which is false, and will never be
accomplished, at least in any short time.

[Jeremiah 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 27:17</span></span>

Hearken not unto them,.... The false prophets:

serve the king of Babylon, and live; pay homage and tribute to him;
which is the way to live in your own land, and enjoy the benefits of
that, and of the temple worship; which, if not, you will be utterly
deprived of:

wherefore should this city be laid waste? as it certainly will, should
you rebel against the king of Babylon; and as it was in a few years
after, when they did.

[Jeremiah 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 27:18</span></span>

But if they be prophets, and if the word of the Lord be with them,....
The true prophets of the Lord are sent by him, and have his word put
into them:

let them now make intercession to the Lord of hosts: use their interest
with him, as they must have one, if they are true prophets; let them
pray unto him, who doubtless will hear them; and this will be acting in
character, for prophets ought to be praying persons; and this will turn
to some good account:

that the vessels which are left in the house of the Lord, and in the
house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon; instead
of prophesying about the return of what are gone, let them pray for the
preservation and continuance of what are left, that they do not go also;
of which there was great danger, yea, certainty, in case of
non-submission to, and rebellion against, the king of Babylon; there
were some vessels of the sanctuary which yet remained, as well as others
in the king's palace, and in the houses of the noble and rich men in
Jerusalem; for the keeping of which they would do well to show a proper
concern, and make use of proper means; and nothing more effectual than
prayer to God; and, next to that, submission to the Chaldean yoke.

[Jeremiah 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 27:19</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord of hosts concerning the pillars,.... The pillars
of brass that stood in the temple; the one called Boaz, and the other
Jachin, [Kg1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#015);

and concerning the sea; the sea of molten brass, which stood upon twelve
oxen, [Kg1 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#023);

and concerning the bases: the ten bases, which also were made of brass,
[Kg1 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#027);

and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this city; in
the king's palace, and in the houses of the noblemen, and of the rich
and wealthy inhabitants of Jerusalem.

[Jeremiah 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 27:20</span></span>

Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not,.... For he seems only to
have taken the vessels of gold, and left the vessels of brass, as the
above were; see [Kg2 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013);

when he carried away captive Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of
Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and
Jerusalem; of which see [Kg2 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 27:21</span></span>

Yea, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,

concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the Lord,.... Which
are mentioned in [Jer 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019); together
with others:

and in the house of the king of Judah, and of Jerusalem; see [Jer
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018).

[Jeremiah 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 27:22</span></span>

They shall be carried to Babylon,.... As they were; and of which, with
others, there is a particular account in [Kg2
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013);

and there shall they be until the day that I visit them, saith to the
Lord; the Chaldeans in a way of wrath, and the Jews in a way of grace
and favour; which was at the end of the seventy years' captivity; and so
long the vessels of the sanctuary continued there; here we read of them
as in use the very night that Belshazzar was slain, and Babylon taken,
[Dan 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002);

then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place; which was
fulfilled when the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia
to give leave to the Jews to return to their own land, and rebuild their
temple; and at the same time delivered into the hands of Sheshbazzar,
prince of Judah, the vessels of the temple, [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 28](jer028)

</div>
