<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer009)  [Next](jer011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 10

This chapter shows that there is no comparison to be made between God
and the idols of the Gentiles; represents the destruction of the Jews as
near at hand; and is closed with some petitions of the prophet. It
begins by way of preface with an exhortation to hear the word of the
Lord, and a dehortation not to learn the way of the Heathens, or be
dismayed at their signs, since their customs were in vain, [Jer
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001) which lead on to expose their
idols, and set forth the greatness and glory of God. Their idols are
described by the matter and makers of them, [Jer
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003) and from their impotence to
speak, to stand, to move, or do either good or evil, [Jer
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#004), but, on the other hand, God is
described by the greatness of his name and power, and by the reverence
that belongs unto him; in comparison of whom all the wise men of the
nations are brutish, foolish, and vain, [Jer
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#006), by the epithets of true, living,
and everlasting, and by the terribleness of his wrath, [Jer
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010), by his power and wisdom, in
making the heavens and the earth, in causing thunder and lightning, wind
and rain, when the gods that have no share in these shall utterly
perish, [Jer 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011) their makers being
brutish, and brought to shame; and they falsehood and breathless vanity,
the work of errors, and so shall come to ruin, [Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014), but he, who is Jacob's portion,
and whose inheritance Israel is, is not like them; being the former of
all things, and his name the Lord of hosts, [Jer
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016) and next follows a prophecy of
the destruction of the Jews; wherefore they are bid to gather up their
wares, since in a very little time, and at once, the Lord would fling
them out of the land, and bring them into distress, [Jer
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017), upon which the prophet
expresses his sympathy with his people in trouble, and the part of grief
he took and bore with them, [Jer
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019), the particulars of his
distress, through the desolation of the land, and the captivity of the
people, with the cause and authors of it, by whose means these things
were brought upon them, are mentioned, [Jer
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#020), and the Chaldean army, the
instruments of their ruin, are represented as just at hand, [Jer
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022), when the prophet, directing
himself to God, acknowledges the impotence of man in general to help and
guide himself, deprecates correction in anger to himself in particular,
and prays that the wrath of God might be poured down upon the Heathens,
by whom his people were devoured, consumed, and made desolate, [Jer
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023).

[Jeremiah 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 10:1</span></span>

Hear ye the word which the Lord speaketh unto you, O house of Israel.
Or, "upon you"; or, "concerning you" (k); it may design the judgment of
God decreed and pronounced upon them; or the prophecy of it to them, in
which they were nearly concerned; or the word of God in general, sent
unto them by his prophets, which they were backward of hearing; and
seems to refer particularly to what follows.

\(k\) "super vos", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "de vobis", Vatablus;
"super vobis", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 10:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, learn not the way of the Heathen,.... Of the
nations round about them, particularly the Chaldeans; meaning their
religious ways, their ways of worship, their superstition and idolatry,
which they were very prone unto, and many of which they had learned
already; and were in danger of learning more, as they were about to be
dispersed in divers countries, and especially in Chaldea, which was a
very superstitious and idolatrous nation:

and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; by which are meant, not any
extraordinary signs, such as are predicted in [Joe
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030), and by our Lord, as signs of the
last destruction of Jerusalem, and of his coming, and of the end of the
world, [Mat 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003), but ordinary signs,
which are no other than the sun, and moon, and stars, which are set up
for signs and seasons, and days and years, [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014), and as long as they are observed
as signs of places and of times, it is well enough; but if more is
attributed unto them, as portending things future, and as having an
influence on the birth and death, dispositions and actions of men, when
in such a conjunction, situation, and position, it is wrong; which is
what is called judicial astrology, and to which the Chaldeans were much
addicted, and is here condemned; nor should men possess themselves with
fears with what shall befall them on such accounts, since all things are
under the determination, direction, and influence of the God of heaven,
and not the signs of them; especially they should not be so observed as
to be worshipped, and to be so awed by them as to fear that evil things
will befall, if they are not; and to this sense is the Syriac version,
"the signs of the heavens do not worship, or fear". Jarchi interprets
them of the eclipses of the luminaries, which may be thought to forbode
some dreadful things (l):

for the Heathen are dismayed at them; which is a reason why the people
of God should not, because it is a Heathenish fear; or, "though the
Heathen" (m), &c.; though they are frightened at such and such
conjunctions and positions of the stars, and fear that such and such
dreadful things will follow; and never regard the supreme Being and
first cause of all things; yet such who have the knowledge of the true
God, and a revelation of his will, ought not to be terrified hereby; see
[Isa 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013). This text is brought to
prove that the Israelites are not under any planet (n); since the
Heathens are dismayed at them, but not they.

\(l\) Vid. T. Bab. Succa, fol. 29. 1. (m) "quamvis consterni soleant",
Vatablus. (n) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 156. 1.

[Jeremiah 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 10:3</span></span>

For the customs of the people are vain,.... Or, "their decrees", or
"statutes" (o), their determinations and conclusions, founded upon the
observation of the stars; or, their "rites and ceremonies" (p) in
religion, in the worship of the sun and moon, and the hosts of heaven.
The Syriac version is, "the idols of the people are nothing"; and which
appears by what follows:

for one cutteth a tree out of the forest (the work of the hands of the
workman) with the axe; not for building, or for burning, but to make a
god of; the vanity, stupidity, and folly of which are manifest, when it
is considered that the original of it is a tree that grew in the forest;
the matter and substance of it the body and trunk of a tree cut down
with an axe, and then hewed with the same, and planed with a plane, and
formed into the image of a man, or of some creature; and now, to fall
down and worship this must be vanity and madness to the last degree; see
[Isa 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013).

\(o\) "decreta", Targ.; "statua", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius, Schmidt. (p) Ritus, Vatablus; "ceremoniae", Tigurine version.

[Jeremiah 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 10:4</span></span>

They deck it with silver and with gold,.... Cover it with plates of
silver and gold, for the sake of ornament, that it may look grand,
majestic, and venerable; and by this means draw the eye and attention,
and so the devotion of people to it:

they fasten it with nails and hammers, that it move not. The sense is,
either that the idol was fastened to some post or pillar, or in some
certain place on a pedestal, that it might not fall, it not being able
otherwise to support itself; or the plates of silver and gold, as Kimchi
thinks, were fastened to the idol with nails and hammers, that so they
might not be taken away from it; for, were it not for the nails, the god
would not be able to keep his silver and golden deckings.

[Jeremiah 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 10:5</span></span>

They are upright as the palm tree,.... Being nailed to a post, or
fastened to a pillar, or set upon a pedestal, and so stand erect without
bending any way; and are like a palm tree, which is noted for its
uprightness; hence the church's stature is compared to it, [Sol
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#007), here it is a sarcasm, and a
bitter one:

but speak not; man, that is of an erect stature, in which he differs
from other creatures, has the faculty of speech, which they that go upon
four feet have not; but the idols of the Gentiles, though erect, have
not the power of speaking a word; and therefore can give no answer to
their worshippers; see [Psa 115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005),

they must needs be borne: or, "in carrying be carried" (q); when being
made they are fixed in the designed place, or are moved from place to
place; they are then carried in men's arms, or on their shoulders:

because they cannot go; they have no life, and so are incapable of
motion of themselves; they have feet, but walk not; and cannot arise and
bestir themselves for the help of those that pray unto them, [Psa
115:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#007),

be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil; that is, inflict
judgment, cause drought, famine, or pestilence, or any other evil or
calamity:

neither is it also in them to do good; to give rains and fruitful
seasons, or bestow any favour, temporal or spiritual; see [Jer
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021).

\(q\) "portando portantur", Schmidt; "portabitur" Pagninus;
"portabuntur", Montanus; "omnino portanda sunt", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Jeremiah 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 10:6</span></span>

Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord,.... None like him,
for the perfections of his nature, for the works of his hands, and for
the instances of his kindness and beneficence, both in a way of grace
and providence; there is none like him for doing good, or doing evil;
that is, for bestowing favours, or inflicting punishments; there is none
like him for goodness or greatness, as follows:

thou art great; in his nature; of great power, wisdom, faithfulness,
truth, and goodness; and in his works of creation and providence, and in
everything in which he is concerned; and greatness is to be ascribed to
him, and greatly is he to be praised; and all the glory due unto his
name is to be given him:

and thy name is great in might; his name is himself, and his greatness
much appears in the exertion of the attribute of his power and might; in
making all things out of nothing, in upholding the whole creation, and
in the government of the universe; or the fame of him is great through
the effects of his power, which are to be seen throughout the earth.

[Jeremiah 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 10:7</span></span>

Who would not fear thee, O King of nations?.... Not that the fear of him
among the nations was general, or that he was owned by them as their
King; but inasmuch as of right he was their King, so he ought to have
been feared and reverenced by them; and it was an instance of great
stupidity and ingratitude not to do it. The Targum renders it,

"King of all people;''

and the Syriac version, "King of all worlds"; some reference seems to be
had to this passage in [Rev 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003),
where, instead of "King of nations", the Lord is called "King of
saints"; and there refers to a time when he will be feared, that is,
worshipped and served by all nations, as he ought to be:

for to thee doth it appertain; that is, fear belongs to him, it is his
due; and this, with keeping the commandments of God, is the whole duty
of man. The Vulgate Latin version is, "thine is the glory"; honour or
praise, as the Syriac version; and so Jarchi interprets it of beauty or
glory; but the Targum,

"thine is the kingdom;''

and so Kimchi; and to which agrees the Arabic version.

Forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their
kingdoms, there is none like unto thee; that is, among all the wise
kings of the nations, and all their wise counsellors, there is none like
unto God for wisdom, or for glory and majesty; there is none of them
that has such a kingdom as he has, or that governs it as he does; and as
all their power and government, so all that wisdom by which they manage
their political affairs, are from him.

[Jeremiah 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 10:8</span></span>

But they are altogether brutish and foolish,.... In comparison of the
Lord, there is no knowledge and wisdom in them, this is a certain fact;
they are verily brutish and foolish; or they are one and all so, there
is not a wise man among them: or, "in one thing they are brutish" (r),
&c.; namely, in their idolatry; however wise they may be in other
respects, in this they are foolish: or, to give no more instances of
their brutishness (s) and folly, this one is sufficient, even what
follows,

the stock is a doctrine of vanities; or what they teach persons, as to
worship the trunk of a tree, or any idol of metal, or of wood, is a most
vain and foolish thing, and argues gross stupidity and folly, and proves
them to be brutish, and without understanding.

\(r\) "in hoc uno Munster", Tigurine version; "et certe in una quadem re
obbrutescunt", Piscator. So Jarchi and Abarbinel. (s) The Talmudists
seem to take the word to have the signification of burning; for the
sense of these words being asked, it is replied, there is one thing that
burns the wicked in hell; what is it? idolatry; as it is here written,
"a doctrine of vanities is the stock."

[Jeremiah 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 10:9</span></span>

Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish,.... In Cilicia,
where the Apostle Paul was born; according to Josephus, as Jerom says,
it was a country in India. The Targum renders it, from Africa, and calls
it silver "rolled up", or "covered"; so the Vulgate Latin; such was
beaten with a hammer into plates, and might be rolled up for better
convenience of shipment; and with which they covered and decked their
idols, to make them look glittering and pompous, and command some awe
and reverence from the common people. The Arabic version renders it,
"solid silver"; it being the same word from whence the firmament of
heaven has its name, or the wide expanse; hence we render it "spread",
stretched, and drawn out into plates. The Syriac version is, "the best
silver"; as very likely that from Tarshish was reckoned.

And gold from Uphaz; called sometimes "the gold of Uphaz"; [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005) or "Fess"; perhaps the same with
the gold of Ophir, [Job 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#016) and so
the Targum here calls it, "gold from Ophir"; to which agrees the Syriac
version; and was esteemed the best gold.

The work of workmen, and of the hands of the founder; melter or refiner,
being first purified by him from dross, and then wrought into plates,
and polished, and fitted for the idol; and all this being owing to the
art and workmanship of men, shows the brutishness and ignorance of the
people, in worshipping it as a god. Blue and purple is their clothing;
not the clothing of the workmen, but of the idols; these colours seem to
be chosen to dazzle the eyes of the populace, and cause them to
entertain a high opinion of them; the "blue" being the colour of the
heavens, and the "purple" what is wore by kings; and so both may denote
their deity and dominion. But, alas!

they are all the work of cunning men: both the idols, and their
clothing; especially the latter is meant, which were curiously wrought
and embroidered by men skilful in that art.

[Jeremiah 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 10:10</span></span>

But the Lord is the true God,.... In opposition to all nominal and
fictitious deities, which are not by nature God, only by name, and in
the foolish imagination of the people: or, "the Lord God is truth" (t);
that cannot lie, is true to his covenant and promises, and will never
deceive those that worship and serve him, and rely upon him:

he is the living God; that has life in himself, and is the author and
giver of life to others; to all men natural life, to some men spiritual
and eternal life; whereas the gods of the Gentiles have no life in
themselves; are either dead men, or lifeless and inanimate things,
stocks and stones, and can give no life to others. The words are in the
plural number, "he is the living Gods"; not for the sake of honour and
glory, as Kimchi observes; but as denoting a trinity of Persons in the
unity of the divine essence: for though the words , "living Gods", that
is, living divine Ones, or Persons, are in the plural number, yet "he",
is in the singular; which is worthy of observation. The Syriac version
renders it, "the God of the living"; and so an Oxford Arabic MS, see
[Mat 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032).

And an everlasting King; from everlasting to everlasting; he is King of
old, even from eternity, and will ever be so; his kingdom is an
everlasting one, and his throne for ever and ever, and he will always
have subjects to reign over; nor will he have any successor, as mortal
kings have, even such who have been deified by their idolatrous
subjects.

At his wrath the earth shall tremble; that is, the inhabitants of it,
when it is poured forth in judgments in the present life, and in the
everlasting destruction of soul and body hereafter; and then shall they
fear him, though now they do not.

And the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation; especially
at the day of judgment; see [Rev 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016).

\(t\) "Deus veritas", Pagninus, Montanus, Coceeius.

[Jeremiah 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 10:11</span></span>

Thus shall ye say unto them,.... The godly Jews to the idolatrous
Chaldeans; and therefore this verse alone is written in the Chaldee
language. The Targum prefaces it thus,

"this is the copy of the letter, which Jeremiah the prophet sent to the
rest of the elders of the captivity in Babylon; and if the people among
whom you are should say unto you, serve idols, O house of Israel; then
shall ye answer, and so shall ye say unto them, the idols whom ye serve
are errors, in whom there is no profit; from heaven they cannot bring
down rain, and out of the earth they cannot produce fruit:''

so Jarchi observes: it follows in the text,

the gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall
perish from the earth, and from under these heavens; which the Targum
paraphrases thus,

"they and their worshippers shall perish from the earth, and shall be
consumed from under these heavens.''

The words may be considered as a prediction that so it would be; or as
an imprecation that so it might be, and be read, "let the gods", &c.;
and considered either way, being put into the mouth of the godly Jews in
Babylon, to be openly pronounced by them in the midst of idolaters, and
in answer to them, when they should be enticed to idolatry, show how
open and ingenuous men should be in the profession of the true God, and
his religion and worship: and it may be observed, against the deniers of
the true deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that if he is not that God that
made the heavens and the earth, he lies under this imprecation or
prediction.

[Jeremiah 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 10:12</span></span>

He hath made the earth by his power,.... The Targum considers these
words as a continuation of the answer of the Jews to the Chaldeans,
paraphrasing them thus,

"and so shall ye say unto them, \`we worship him who hath made the earth
by his power':''

who stands opposed to the gods that made not the heavens and the earth,
that had no title to deity, nor right to worship; but the true God has
both; and his making the earth out of nothing, and hanging it upon
nothing, and preserving it firm and stable, are proofs of his almighty
power, and so of his deity; and consequently that he ought to be
worshipped, and he only.

He hath established the world by his wisdom; upon the rivers and floods;
or he hath poised it in the air; or he hath disposed it in an orderly,
regular, and beautiful manner, as the word (u) used signifies; by making
it terraqueous, partly land, and partly water; by opening in it
fountains and rivers; by diversifying it with hills and vales, with wood
and arable land, &c.; all which show the wisdom as well as the power of
God.

And hath stretched out the heavens by his discretion; as a canopy over
the earth, as a tent to dwell in; and which is beautifully bespangled
with the luminaries in it; hence it has the name of expanse, or the
firmament of heaven.

\(u\) "aptavit", Cocceius; "preparans", Schmidt; a "aptavit, disposuit",
Gussetius.

[Jeremiah 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 10:13</span></span>

When he uttereth his voice,.... Declares his will and pleasure, issues
out his commands; or when he thunders, for thunder is his voice, [Job
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#002),

there is a multitude of waters in the heavens; they are covered with
clouds, and these clouds full of water; which is brought about by the
following means:

and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; from
the north and south, as Kimchi observes from the philosophers; or from
all parts of the earth, the most distant, and particularly from the sea,
the border of the earth, from whence clouds arise, being exhaled by the
sun; see [Kg1 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#043).

He maketh lightnings with rain; which very often go together, and the
one makes way for the other, [Job
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#026), though they are so opposite one
to another:

and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures; the caverns of the
earth, or his fists, in which he holds it, [Pro
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004) and lets its loose at his
pleasure; he has plenty of it in reserve; he is Lord over it; he sends
it forth when he pleases, and it fulfils his will and his word.

[Jeremiah 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 10:14</span></span>

Every man is brutish in his knowledge,.... Or science of making an idol,
whether it be of wood, or of gold, or silver, or brass; he is no better
than a brute, if he thinks, when he has made it, he has made a god: or,
"because of knowledge" (w); for want of it; being without the knowledge
of God and divine things, he is like the beasts that perish, [Psa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020),

every founder is confounded by the graven image; or put to shame on
account of it; since, after all his art, and care, and trouble, in
melting and refining, and casting it into a form, it is no more than a
piece of gold, or silver, or brass, and has no deity, nor anything like
it, in it:

for his molten image is falsehood; it is a lie, when it is said to be a
god; and it deceives those who worship it, and place any confidence in
it. Kimchi renders it, "his covering" (x). The covering of the idol with
gold and silver, with blue and purple, as in [Jer
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#004), is all a piece of deceit, to
impose upon the people, and lead them into idolatry:

and there is no breath in them; they are mere stocks and stones,
lifeless and inanimate creatures; they have neither life themselves, nor
can they give it to others.

\(w\) "propter scientiam", Pagninus, Montanus; "a scientia", Calvin,
Grotius, Schmidt. (x) "tectio, sive obductio ejus", Vatablus.

[Jeremiah 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 10:15</span></span>

They are vanity,.... They are the fruit of the vain imagination of men;
to worship them shows the vanity of the human mind; and they are vain
things to trust to:

and the work of errors; of erroneous men, and which lead men into
errors; and are worthy to be laughed at, as the Targum paraphrases it.

In the time of their visitation they shall perish; or in the time that I
shall visit upon them their sins, as the Targum; that is, when Babylon
should be destroyed by the Medes and Persians, as Kimchi interprets it;
when their idols were destroyed also; see [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 10:16</span></span>

The portion of Jacob is not like them,.... Like those idols, vain, and
the work of errors, or shall perish; even the true God, who is the
portion of his people, of Jacob, whom he has chosen and redeemed; who
call themselves by the name of Jacob, and are Israelites indeed, and
plain hearted ones; and who have seen the insufficiency of all other
portions, and the excellency of this; for there is none like it, none so
large, so rich, so satisfying, and so durable; for God is the portion of
his, in all the perfections of his nature, which all, some way or other,
are for their good and advantage; and in all his persons, and under
every character; even all he has is theirs, now and hereafter:

for he is the former of all things: which idols are not, being the maker
of creatures themselves; wherefore the Creator must be a better portion
than they; and as he has all things at his dispose, he bestows them on
his people, and they cannot want:

and Israel is the rod of his inheritance; chosen and possessed by him,
and dear unto him; and wonderful this is, that on the one side he should
be the portion of his people; and, on the other, that they should be his
portion and his inheritance, when so few in number, and despised by and
among men, and but sinful dust and ashes; and especially when what
follows is considered:

the Lord of hosts is his name: his title is the Lord of armies, above
and below; he rules both in heaven and in earth, and has the inhabitants
of both worlds, angels and men, at his command; and yet he chooses a
handful of people to be his possession and inheritance.

[Jeremiah 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 10:17</span></span>

Gather up thy wares out of the land,.... Or thy merchandise, as the
Targum; or thy substance, as the Septuagint; all valuable effects and
goods that are movable, which might be carried from place to place. The
meaning is, that the Jews would gather up their riches from the several
parts of the land of Judea, and bring them to Jerusalem, a fortified
place; or they would be in danger of falling into the hands of the
enemy. Kimchi interprets the words as if spoken of Babylon, and directed
to the Chaldeans, not to be elated with the captivity of Israel; and
because the word signifies "to humble and subdue" he takes the sense to
be,

"gather in or contract thine humiliation or subjection;''

that is, of other nations; refrain thyself, or cease from subduing
kingdoms; that is now at an end, it shall be no more so; but the words
manifestly respect the people of the Jews, as is clear from the next
verse.

O inhabitant of the fortress; of the fortress of Zion, or the fortified
city, Jerusalem. The Targum is,

"O thou that dwellest in the strong place, in the fortified cities.''

It may be rendered, "that dwellest in the siege" (y); in the besieged
city, Jerusalem.

\(y\) "quae habitas in obsidione", V. L. Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 10:18</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord,.... This is a reason enforcing the exhortation
in the preceding verse, and shows that the same people that are spoken
of here are addressed there.

Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once;
meaning the inhabitants of the land of Judea; or otherwise the prophet
would never have expressed such a concern for them as he does in the
following verse. Their captivity is signified by the slinging of a stone
out of a sling, and shows how sudden, swift, and certain, it would be:
and that it would as easily and swiftly be done, and with equal force
and rapidity, as a stone is slung out of a sling; and that it would be
done by the Lord himself, whoever were the instruments:

and will distress them; or "straiten" (z) them, on every side; it seems
to intend the siege; or bring them into great straits and difficulties,
through the pestilence, famine, sword, and captivity:

that they may find it; so as he had spoken by his prophets, it coming to
pass exactly as they had foretold. The Targum is,

"that they may receive the punishment of their sins;''

and so the Septuagint and Arabic versions, "that thy stroke may be
found"; but the Syriac version is very different from either, "that they
may seek me and find"; which is an end that is sometimes answered by
afflictive dispensations.

\(z\) "oblidere faciana eos", some in Vatablus; "et angustabo, vel
obsidebo eos", Schmidt; "faciam ut obsideant eos", Calvin; "arctum ipsis
facium", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 10:19</span></span>

Woe is me for my hurt!.... Or "breach" (a); which was made upon the
people of the Jews, when besieged, taken, and carried captive; with whom
the prophet heartily sympathized, and considered their calamities and
distresses as his own; for these are the words of the prophet, lamenting
the sad estate of his people.

My wound is grievous; causes grief, is very painful, and hard to be
endured:

but I said; within himself, after he had thoroughly considered the
matter:

this is a grief; an affliction, a trial, and exercise:

and I must bear it; patiently and quietly, since it is of God, and is
justly brought upon the people for their sins.

\(a\) "propter confractionem meam", Cocceius Schmidt,

[Jeremiah 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 10:20</span></span>

My tabernacle is spoiled,.... Not the temple at Jerusalem only, rather
Jerusalem itself, as Kimchi; or the whole land, as the Targum,

"my land is wasted:''

the allusion is to the tents of shepherds, and denotes the unstable
condition of the Jewish nation:

and all my cords are broken: all the rest of the cities of the land are
destroyed, as Kimchi; and so the Targum,

"my cities are spoiled:''

as the cords are what the parts of the tabernacle or tent are fastened
and kept together with, they may intend the strength of the nation,
which lay in its wealth, its fortresses, and the numbers of its people,
now weakened, loosed, and broke.

My children are gone forth of me; into captivity, as the Targum
interprets it; the prophet, representing Jerusalem, and the cities of
Judah. The Septuagint adds, "and my sheep"; keeping on the metaphor of a
shepherd, his tent, and flock.

And they are not; either not in the world, being destroyed by one
judgment or another; or rather not in their own land, being carried
captive.

There is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my
curtains; which shows the great destruction and desolation of the land,
and its inhabitants, that there would be none to set up a shepherd's
tent; perhaps the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the rest of the cities,
may be meant.

[Jeremiah 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 10:21</span></span>

For the pastors are become brutish,.... The "kings" of Judah, so the
Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, as Jehoiakim and Zedekiah; though it need
not be restrained to these only, but may include all inferior civil
magistrates, and even all ecclesiastical rulers, who were the shepherds
of the people; but these being like the brute beasts, and without
understanding of civil and religious things, and not knowing how to
govern the people either in a political or ecclesiastical way, were the
cause of their ruin.

And have not sought the Lord; this is an instance of their brutishness
and stupidity, and opens the source of all their mistakes and
misfortunes; they did not seek the Lord for counsel, by whom kings reign
well, and princes decree justice; nor doctrine from the Lord, as the
Targum, as the priests and prophets should have done, in order to
instruct the people, and feed them with knowledge and understanding; nor
did either of them seek the glory of God in what they did, but their own
interest, worldly advantage, or applause:

therefore they shall not prosper; in their kingdom, and in the several
offices and stations in which they were. Some render the words,
"therefore they do not act prudently" (b); not consulting the Lord, nor
warning the people, nor giving them notice of approaching danger:

and all their flocks shall be scattered; the people of the Jews that
were under their government, civil or ecclesiastical, should be
dispersed in several nations, and especially in Chaldee; wherefore it
follows:

\(b\) "non egerunt prudenter", Vatablus, Tigurine version; "non
intellexerunt", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 10:22</span></span>

Behold the noise of the bruit is come,.... Or, "the voice of hearing"
(c); that is, the voice heard; the report that was made that the king of
Babylon had invaded the land, and was coming up to besiege Jerusalem:
"and a great commotion out of the north country"; a large army from
Babylon, which lay north of Judea, which came with great noise, and
caused a great trembling and shaking among the inhabitants of the land
whither they were coming:

to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a den of dragons; this shows
that the whole paragraph is to be understood of the Jewish nation, and
of their destruction. See Gill on [Jer
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011).

\(c\) "vox auditionis", Pagninus, Montanus; "vox auditus", Vatablus,
Calvin; "vox famae", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 10:23</span></span>

O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself,.... Kimchi and Ben
Melech interpret it of that well known man Nebuchadnezzar, whose way was
not in himself, and was not master of his own resolutions, but was under
the influence and direction of divine Providence: when he set out of
Babylon, he thought to have gone against the Ammonites; but when he came
to a place where two ways met; the one leading to the children of Ammon,
the other to Jerusalem; God changed his mind, and he steered his course
to Jerusalem, to chastise Zedekiah for the breach of his oath: but the
words seem to have a more general meaning; and the sense to be, that the
prophet knew that it was not with him, nor with any of the godly, to
escape the judgments that were coming upon them; that they were entirely
in the hands of the Lord, to be guided, directed, and disposed of at his
pleasure. The words may be accommodated to spiritual things and the
affair of salvation; and be rendered thus, "I know, O Lord, that not for
man is his way" (d); his own way is not good for him; not his sinful
way, for this is opposite to God's way, and a going out of it; it is not
according to his word; it is after the course of the world; and it is a
dark and crooked way, and leads to, and ends in, destruction and death,
if grace prevent not: nor the way of his own righteousness; this is no
way of access to God, no way of acceptance with him, no way of
justification before him, no way of salvation, no way to heaven, and
eternal happiness; that which is the good and right way, the only way of
salvation, is not of man, in him, or with him naturally; it is not of
his devising and contriving, and much less of his effecting; it is not
even within his knowledge; and so far as he knows anything of it, he
does not approve of it: but it is of God; the scheme of it is of his
forming; it is a work wrought out by Christ; it is a way of salvation
revealed in the Gospel; and the thing itself is savingly made known, and
applied by the Spirit of God; all which is known and owned when men are
spiritually enlightened:

it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps; as not in natural and
civil things, much less in religious ones; a good man is one that
"walks", which supposes life and strength, without which there can be no
walking; and a progression, a going on in a way; which ways are Christ,
and his ordinances the path of doctrine and of duty; yet it is not even
in this good man "to direct" and order "his steps" of himself; it is the
Lord that must do it, and does; he can take no step aright without him;
he is guided by him and his Spirit, both in the path of truth and of
obedience; and hence it is that the saints persevere unto the end; see
[Psa 37:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023).

\(d\) "novi, Jehovah, quod non sit homini via ejus", Schmidt; so
Vatablus, Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 10:24</span></span>

O Lord, correct me, but with judgment,.... The prophet here represents
the body of the Jewish nation, especially the godly among them; he
considers the troubles coming upon the nation as a correction and
chastisement of the Lord; he does not refuse it, or desire it might not
come upon them; he knew the chastisements of a father are for good; he
only entreats it might be "with judgment"; not in strict justice, as his
and the sins of his people deserved, then they would not be able to bear
it; but in measure and moderation, with a mixture of mercy and
tenderness in it; and in a distinguishing manner, so as to make a
difference between his own people and others, in the correction of them;
see [Eze 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#016),

not in thine anger; in vindictive wrath, and hot displeasure, which is
elsewhere deprecated by the saints, [Psa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001),

lest thou bring me to nothing; or "lessen me" (e), or "make me little";
or make us few, as the Arabic version; or bring to a small number, as
the Syriac; and so to utter ruin.

\(e\) "ne imminuas me", Munster, Calvin, Cocceius; "ne diminuere facias
me", Pagninus, Montanus; "ne paucum reddas me", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 10:25</span></span>

Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not,.... Make a
difference between thy people that know thee, and make a profession of
thy name, and worship thee, and the Heathen, the nations of the world
who are ignorant of God, and worship stocks and stones; while thou
correctest thine own people in measure, in love, and not in wrath, pour
out without measure all thy fury upon the Gentiles that know not God,
and are guilty of the grossest idolatry:

and upon the families that call not on thy name; this does not signify
single families, commonly so called; but kingdoms, as the Targum
interprets it; Heathen kingdoms and nations, that call not upon or
worship the God of Israel, but their own idols; such as the family of
Egypt, [Zac 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017) and so it is
expressed in a parallel place, [Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006), which is either taken from
hence, or this from thence:

for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and
have made his habitation desolate; a heap of words to express the great
destruction and desolation of the land of Israel, of Jerusalem, and the
cities of Judah; and of their houses and dwelling places, private and
public; and of their spoiling them of all their goods, substance,
wealth, and riches; which is given as a reason of the above imprecation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 11](jer011)

</div>
