<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer038)  [Next](jer040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 39:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 39

This chapter gives an account of the taking of Jerusalem by the
Chaldeans, according to the several prophecies of Jeremiah concerning
it. The time of taking it, and by whom, after a siege of eighteen
months, [Jer 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#001); several things
relating to King Zedekiah; his flight; the taking of him; the bringing
him to the king of Babylon, and his sentence on him; the execution of
that sentence, slaying his sons and nobles, putting out his eyes, and
carrying him in chains to Babylon, [Jer
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004); the destruction of the city is
described, by burning the houses in it, breaking down its walls,
carrying the people captive, all, except a few poor persons left in the
land, [Jer 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#008); the preservation of
Jeremiah, according to the king of Babylon's orders by his princes; and
the committing him to the care of Gedaliah, the governor of the poor
Jews, [Jer 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#011); and the chapter is
concluded with a promise of the protection of Ebedmelech, made by the
Lord before the taking of the city, while the prophet was in prison; and
which, no doubt, had its accomplishment, [Jer
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#015).

[Jeremiah 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 39:4</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw them, and
all the men of war,.... That is, when Zedekiah and his soldiers saw the
princes and generals of the Chaldean army enter the city through a
breach made in the wall, and take possession of the middle gate; which
they might see from some high tower where they were for safety, and to
make their observation of the enemy:

then they fled; finding they were not able to keep their posts and
resist the enemy:

and went forth out of the city by night; it being the middle of the
night, as before observed out of Josephus, that the city was taken; and
they took the advantage of the darkness of the night to make their
escape: this they chose rather to do than to surrender to the Chaldeans,
and lie at their mercy: and they went

by the way of the king's garden, by the gate betwixt the two walls;
which lay either between the wall of the city and the outworks, as some;
or between the old wall and the new one Hezekiah built, [Ch2
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005); as others; or rather between the
wall of the city and the wall of the king's garden; this being a private
way, they took it. The Jews have a fable, and which is related both by
Jarchi and Kimchi, that there was a cave or vault underground, from the
king's house to the plains of Jericho; and by this way the king went
that he might not be seen; but God prepared a hind, which the Chaldean
army saw, and pursued, and which went into the cave, add they after it;
and when they were at the mouth of the cave they saw Zedekiah coming out
of it, and took him:

and he went out the way of the plain; on the south side of the which led
to Jericho; and on which side the kings garden was; not that he went
alone, but his wives, and children, and princes, and men of war with
him; see [Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007).

[Jeremiah 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 39:5</span></span>

But the Chaldean army pursued after them,.... Being informed of the
flight of them, by those who surrendered to them, as Josephus says; or
not finding the king, his family, nobles, and guards, at the palace,
where they expected them; and, knowing which way they must take, pursued
after them; not the whole army, only a part of it; for some must remain
at Jerusalem to demolish the city, and take the spoil of it:

and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; not far from it, as
Josephus says; and who also observes, that when his friends and generals
saw the enemy near, they left him, and shifted for themselves, and only
a few were with him when overtook:

and when they had taken him they brought him to Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath: which is generally thought to
be Antioch in Syria; whither he had retired from the siege of Jerusalem,
having left it to his generals to refresh himself in this pleasant
place, as it seems it was; or that he might be nearer his own kingdom,
if any troubles should arise in it during his absence; however, here he
was, and here the army brought Zedekiah to him, and those they took with
him; which must be very agreeable to the king of Babylon to have this
perfidious and ungrateful prince in his power:

where he gave judgment upon him: or passed sentence on him, which was to
have his eyes put out: or, "spake judgments with him" (i); he severely
chide him, and upbraided him for the injury he had done him; the perfidy
he had been guilty of in breaking his oath and covenant. So Josephus
says,

"after he came to him, Nebuchadnezzar began to call him a wicked man and
a covenant breaker, unmindful of promises he had made to preserve the
country for him; he reproached him with ingratitude, in receiving the
kingdom from him he had taken from Jehoiakim, and given to him, who had
used his power against the giver; but, says he, the great God that hates
thy manners has put thee into our hands.''

\(i\) "et locutus est cum eo, vel ipso judicia", Pagninus, Montanus,
Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 39:6</span></span>

Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his
eyes,.... Not with his own hands, but gave orders to do it: these must
be very young, at least some of them; since Zedekiah at this time was
but thirty two years of age. This must be a dreadful spectacle for him
to behold; and the consideration must be cutting, that it was owing to
his own obstinacy in not taking the advice of the Prophet Jeremiah to
surrender to the Chaldeans, whereby he and his family would have been
saved, [Jer 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017);

also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah; who did not come
over to the Chaldean army and surrender themselves; such who advised the
king to stand out to the last, and who fled, and were taken with him; as
many of them as fell into the hands of the king of Babylon. Jarchi says
those were the sanhedrim, who loosed Zedekiah from his oath to
Nebuchadnezzar.

[Jeremiah 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 39:7</span></span>

Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes,.... By what means is not certain;
however, hereby the prophecy of Jeremiah was fulfilled, that his eyes
should see the king of Babylon, as they did, before they were put out,
and that he should not die by the sword, [Jer
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003); and also the prophecy of
Ezekiel, [Eze 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013); that he should be
brought to Babylon, and yet should not see it; for his eyes were put out
before he was carried there: a full proof this of the prescience of God;
of his foreknowledge of future and contingent events; of the truth and
certainty of prophecy, and of the authority of divine revelation:

and bound him with chains, to carry him to Babylon; with two brass or
iron chains, or fetters, for both his legs; and thus bound he was
carried to Babylon, where he remained to the day of his death.

[Jeremiah 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 39:8</span></span>

And the Chaldeans burnt the king's house,.... His palace: this was a
month after the city was taken, as appears from [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012);

and the houses of the people, with fire; the houses of the common
people, as distinct from the king's house, and the houses of the great
men, [Jer 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013); though Jarchi
interprets of the synagogues. It is in the original text in the singular
number, "the house of the people"; which Abarbinel understands of the
temple, called, not the house of God, he having departed from it; but
the house of the people, a den of thieves; according to Adrichomius (k),
there was a house in Jerusalem called "the house of the vulgar", or
common people, where public feasts and sports were kept; but the former
sense seems best:

and broke down the walls of Jerusalem; demolished all the fortifications
of it, and entirely dismantled it, that it might be no more a city of
force and strength, as it had been.

\(k\) Theatrum Terrae Sanct. p. 154.

[Jeremiah 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 39:9</span></span>

Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard,.... The Targum is,

"the captain of those that kill;''

of the soldiers, of the militia. Some render it, the captain of the
"cooks"; others, of the "butchers" (l); but no doubt it was a military
office he bore; he was captain of the forces that were left in
Jerusalem, after the other part went in pursuit of the king and those
with him; or the captain of a company, being sent by the king of Babylon
to execute a commission of his: the same

carried away into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the
city; that were left of the pestilence, famine, and sword; and who were
found in it when it was taken:

and those that fell away, that fell to him; that fell to the Chaldean
army during the siege of the city; and those that betook themselves to
Nebuzaradan, and voluntarily surrendered themselves to him afterwards:

with the rest of the people that remained; in other cities in the land
of Judah.

\(l\) "praefectus coquorum"; so some in Vatablus; "magister laniorum",
Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 39:10</span></span>

But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people,
which had nothing, in the land of Judah,.... Because they would have
been of no service to the Chaldeans, but a burden to them; and because
they had nothing to fear from them; they had no arms to rebel against
them, nor money to purchase any; and because it would be to their
interest to have the land manured, and not lie waste, that they might
have some tribute from it:

and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time; as their own
property to dress and cultivate, and receive the advantage of them;
though very probably a tax was laid upon them; or they were to pay
tribute to the king of Babylon; or, however, contribute out of them to
the support of the government that was placed over them; and this was a
happy incident in their favour; here was a strange change of
circumstances with them; though the nation in general was in distress,
they, who before had nothing, are now proprietors of vineyards and
fields, when the former owners were carried captive: there might be much
of the justice of God conspicuous in this affair; such who had been
oppressed and ill used by the rich are now retaliated with their
possessions. The Targum is,

"and he appointed them to work in the fields and in the vineyards in
that day.''

[Jeremiah 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 39:11</span></span>

Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard,.... Of whom he had heard, by one
or another of his generals or officers; who had been informed, by those
Jews that deserted to them, that Jeremiah had prophesied of the taking
of the city by the Chaldeans; had advised the people to fall off to
them; and had even exhorted the king and princes to surrender up the
city, and themselves, unto them; and that he had suffered much on this
account; wherefore the Lord put it into the heart of this monarch,
otherwise not at all disposed to the prophets of the Lord, to show
regard to him; and therefore, when he sent Nebuzaradan upon an
expedition to Jerusalem, he gave him a particular charge concerning
Jeremiah:

saying; as follows:

[Jeremiah 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 39:12</span></span>

Take him, and look well to him,.... Take him out of prison; take him
under your immediate care; receive him kindly, and use him humanely;
provide everything necessary for him, and let him not want for anything:
or, "set thine eyes upon him" (m) look pleasantly at him, and let him be
always under your view and inspection; treat him not with neglect and
contempt, but see to it that nothing is wanting to him:

and do him no harm; no injury to his person by beating, imprisoning, or
starving him; nor suffer any to be done to him by the common soldiers,
or by his own people:

but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee: let him have whatever he
asks for: this was great favour from a Heathen prince indeed, and more
than he met with from his own countrymen.

\(m\) "et oculos tuos pone super eum", V. L. Vatablus, Pagninus,
Montanus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 39:13</span></span>

So Nebuzaradan captain of the guard sent,.... When he was come to
Jerusalem, one of the first things he did was, he sent a messenger or
messengers to the court of the prison where Jeremiah was, to bring him
from thence; and this he did not alone, but with the rest of the
princes, who had the same charge, and were joined in the commission with
him: two of them are mentioned by name,

Nebushasban Rabsaris and Nergalsharezer Rabmag; the latter of these is
manifestly one of the princes that first entered Jerusalem, at the
taking of it; see Gill on [Jer 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003);
and perhaps the former is the same with Sarsechim Rabsaris, as Hillerus
(n) thinks, mentioned at the same time, who might have two names; unless
we suppose there were two persons in the same office:

and all the king of Babylon's princes: so that great honour was done to
the prophet, to have them all charged with his commission from the king;
and to be sent unto, and for, by them all.

\(n\) Onomastie. Sacr. p. 604.

[Jeremiah 39:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 39:14</span></span>

Even they sent and took Jeremiah out of the court of the prison,....
Where he was, when Jerusalem was taken, [Jer
38:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#028); and where he remained until
this order came:

and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan;
the father of this person seems to be the same who saved Jeremiah from
being delivered into the hand of the people, to be put to death by them,
in Jehoiakim's reign, [Jer 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#024); and
he himself was doubtless a prince of Judah, that deserted to the
Chaldeans during the siege, and was in esteem with them, and appointed a
governor over those that were left in the land: now what is here
recorded was not done immediately after Jeremiah was taken out of the
court of the prison; for however it was, whether through the
multiplicity of business, or the neglect of inferior officers, who did
not attend to the charge the captain of the guard gave them concerning
Jeremiah; though he was taken out of prison, he was bound in chains, and
carried among the captives to Ramah; where, very probably, Nebuzaradan,
looking over his prisoners, to his great surprise finds the prophet
among them; when he released him, and, after some discourse with him,
sent him to Gedaliah; see [Jer 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001);

that he should carry him home; or, "to the house" (o); either to the
house of Gedaliah, as Kimchi; or rather to the house of Jeremiah in
Anathoth:

so he dwelt among the people; that were left in the land, being at full
liberty.

\(o\) "in domum", Schmidt; "ad domum", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 39:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 39:15</span></span>

Now the word of the Lord came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the
court of the prison,.... This prophecy was before the taking of the
city, and after the prophet had been took out of the dungeon by
Ebedmelech; though here inserted after the city was taken; and that to
show the great regard the Lord has to such who show favour to his
prophets; for though we have no account of the accomplishment of this
prophecy, there is no doubt to be made of it; and that Ebedmelech was
saved from the general destruction, as is here predicted:

saying: as follows:

[Jeremiah 39:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 39:16</span></span>

Go and speak to Ebedmelech the Ethiopians,.... Not that the prophet was
to go, or could go, out of prison, to deliver this message to
Ebedmelech; but that he should, as he had opportunity, acquaint him with
it; either by writing to him, or by word of mouth, when he should visit
him; for no doubt he sometimes did, having so great a respect for the
prophet:

saying, thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; whom
Ebedmelech, though an Ethiopian, served; being a proselyte, and a good
man; and therefore would listen unto and believe what came from him:

behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good;
meaning the prophecies delivered out by Jeremiah, which Ebedmelech was
no stranger to, these should be accomplished; not what promised good, on
condition of repentance and amendment; but what threatened evil to the
city, and the inhabitants of it, even the destruction of them:

and they shall be accomplished in that day before thee; signifying that
he should live till then, and his enemies would not be able to take away
his life; and that he should see with his eyes all that was predicted
accomplished, and he himself safe amidst all this.

[Jeremiah 39:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 39:17</span></span>

But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the Lord,.... As from the
famine and pestilence, so from the sword of the Chaldeans, and from all
the evil that shall come upon the city in the day of its destruction:

and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the man of whom thou art
afraid; for though he was a bold and intrepid man, as appears by his
charging the princes and prime ministers of state with having done evil
to the prophet, and that in the presence of the king; yet at times he
was not without his fears, which is the case of the best of men; and
whereas he knew the courtiers owed him a grudge, for the freedom he took
with their characters before the king, and for his friendship to
Jeremiah, he might fear they would seek to do him a mischief, and
contrive his ruin, in some way or another; but here he is assured he
should not be given into their hands; or rather, as Jarchi, into the
hands of the Chaldeans; for, as he believed in the Lord and his prophet,
so he knew that all that was predicted would certainly come to pass; and
that the city, with the king, his nobles, and the inhabitants of it,
would fall into the hands of the Chaldeans; he might tremble at the
righteous judgments of God, and fear that he himself would become a prey
unto them; but here he is assured of the contrary.

[Jeremiah 39:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 39:18</span></span>

For I will surely deliver thee,.... Or, in "delivering will deliver
thee" (p); this is a repetition and confirmation of what is promised in
[Jer 39:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#017), and more fully explains
it:

and thou shall not fall by the sword: by the sword of the Chaldeans,
when the city should be taken, as he feared he should:

but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: shall be safe; be like a
prey taken out of the hand of the mighty, and be enjoyed beyond
expectation, having been given up for lost; and therefore matter of the
greater joy, such as is expressed at the taking of spoils:

because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the Lord. The Targum is,
"in my word"; what he had done in serving the prophet, and other good
actions, sprung from a principle of faith and confidence in the Lord;
and this the Lord had a respect unto; without which works are not right;
and without which it is impossible to please God with them; and which
faith may be, and be true, where fears are.

\(p\) "eripiendo eripiam te", Schmidt; "eruendo eruam te", Pagninus,
Montanus.

[Jeremiah 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 39:1</span></span>

In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month,.... The
month Tebet, which answers to part of our December, and part of January;
so that it was in the winter season the siege of Jerusalem began:

came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem,

and they besieged it; provoked by Zedekiah's breaking covenant with him,
and rebelling against him, who had set him upon his throne, in the room
of his nephew; so that here was a mixture of perfidy and ingratitude,
which he was determined to revenge; and being impatient of it, came at
such an unseasonable time of the year for a long march and a siege. The
king of Babylon came in person at first; but having begun the siege, and
given proper orders to his generals for the carrying of it on, and
supposing it would be a long one, retired to Riblah in Syria, either for
pleasure or for business. The time of beginning the siege exactly agrees
with the account in [Kg2 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001); only
there it is more particular, expressing the day of the month, which was
the tenth of it; and so in [Jer 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004).
The reason of inserting the account of the siege and taking of the city,
in this place, is both to show the exact accomplishment of Jeremiah's
prophecies about it, and to lead on to some facts and predictions that
followed it.

[Jeremiah 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 39:2</span></span>

And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month,.... The month
Tammuz, which answers to part of June, and part of July:

the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up; or taken by storm;
the walls of it were broken by engines and battering rams, so that the
Chaldeans could enter it, and take it. This was just a year and a half
after it had been besieged, not being able to hold out any longer,
because of the famine; see [Jer 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 39:3</span></span>

And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in,.... Into the city: a
breach being made in the walls to take possession of it:

and sat in the middle gate; according to Jarchi, this was a gate of the
temple; the gate Nicanor, the eastern gate, which was between the gate
of the court of the women and the gate of the temple; who observes, that
their Rabbins say, the middle gate was the gate in which the wise men
made their decrees and constitutions: so that, in "the place of
judgment, wickedness was there"; as in [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016); and Josephus (g) says, that the
city was taken in the middle of the night, when the enemies' generals
went into the temple; but rather, according to Kimchi, it was one of the
gates of the city of Jerusalem; according to Abarbinel, Jerusalem had
three walls, and this was the gate of the middle wall; but others take
it to be the gate in the middle wall, between the upper and lower city;
perhaps it is the same called the second gate, [Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010); and might be the chief and
principal gate where these princes placed their seats in triumph as
victors, and so fulfilled the prophecy of Jeremiah, [Jer
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015); though they might have another
reason for it, their own safety; here they sat till the city was well
searched and cleared, lest there should be any ambush laid for them, and
cut them off as they entered. The names of some of them were as follow:

even Nergalsharezer: according to Kimchi, these are two names of two
distinct persons; but generally thought to be one name of the same
person; so Josephus, who calls him Nergelearus. The first part of the
name "Nergal" was the name of an idol with the Cushites, [Kg2
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030); and it was usual with the
Heathens to give the names of their idols to their kings, princes, and
great men. The other part, "Sharezer", is a name of one of Sennacherib's
sons; and seems to be an Assyrian name, [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038). The next is called

Samgarnebo; though, according to Hillerus (h), this is a surname of the
former, to distinguish him from another Nergalsharezer after mentioned,
taken from his office: this name signifying the "strict keeper of Nebo",
the temple of the idol Nebo; see [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). The next is

Sarsechim Rabsaris; for these are not two names of different persons,
but of the same person. The first is his proper name, which signifies
the "prince of the Scythians"; the other his name of office, and
signifies the "chief eunuch", or the "chief of the eunuchs". The last
name is

Nergalsharezer Rabmag; these names belong to the same person, who is
called from his office "Rabmag", the "chief magician", or the "chief of
the magicians", to distinguish him from the other Nergalsharezer before
mentioned: these,

with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon, entered the
city and took it.

\(g\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 8. sect. 2. (h) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 608.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 40](jer040)

</div>
