<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer050)  [Next](jer052) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 51:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 51

The former part of this chapter is a continuation of the prophecy of the
preceding chapter, concerning the destruction of Babylon, [Jer
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001); the latter part of it contains a
prophecy of Jeremiah sent to the captives in Babylon by the hand of
Seraiah, with the copy of the above prophecy against Babylon, and an
order to fasten a stone to it, and cast it into the river Euphrates, as
a sign, confirming the utter and irreparable ruin of Babylon, [Jer
51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059).

[Jeremiah 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 51:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, behold, I will raise up against Babylon,.... This
is not a new prophecy, but a continuation of the former, and an
enlargement of it. The Babylonians being the last and most notorious
enemies of the Jews, their destruction is the longer dwelt upon; and as
they were against the Lord's people the Lord was against them, and
threatens to raise up instruments of his vengeance against them:

and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against
me; that dwell in Babylon, the metropolis of the Chaldeans, the seat and
centre of the enemies of God and his people. It is a periphrasis of the
Chaldeans; and, so the Targum renders it,

"against the inhabitants of the land of the Chaldeans;''

and so the Septuagint version, against the Chaldeans; and Jarchi and
Kimchi observe that according to "athbash", a rule of interpretation
with the Jews, the letters in "leb kame", rendered "the midst of them
that rise up against me", answer to "Cashdim" or the Chaldeans; however
they are no doubt designed; for they rose up against God, by setting up
idols of their own; and against his people, by taking and carrying them
captive: and now the Lord says he would raise up against them

a destroying wind; a northern one, the army of the Modes and Persians,
which should sweep away all before it. The Targum is,

"people that are slayers; whose hearts are lifted up, and are beautiful
in stature, and their spirit destroying.''

[Jeremiah 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 51:2</span></span>

And I will send unto Babylon farmers, that shall fan her, and shall
empty her land,.... Or, "strangers that shall fan her" (c); meaning the
Medes and Persians, who should be like a strong wind upon the mountains,
where corn, having been threshed, was fanned, and the chaff carried away
by the wind; and such would the Chaldeans be in the hand of the
Persians, scattered and dispersed among the nations as chaff with the
wind, and their cities be emptied of inhabitants, and of their wealth
and riches. The Targum is,

"I will send against Babylon spoilers, that shall spoil and exhaust the
land:''

for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about; in the
time of the siege they shall surround her on all sides, so that none
might escape; as Babylon had been a fanner of the Lord's people, now she
should be fanned herself, and stripped of all she had; see [Jer
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007).

\(c\) "alienos", Cocceius; some in Vatablus; so Kimchi, Ben Melech,
Abendana.

[Jeremiah 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 51:3</span></span>

Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow,.... These are
either the words of the Lord to the Medes and Persians, to the archers
among them, to bend their bows and level their arrows against the
Chaldeans, who had bent their bows and shot their arrows against others;
or of the Medes and Persians stirring up one another to draw their bows,
and fight manfully against the enemy:

and against him that lifteth up himself in his brigandine; or coat of
mail; that swaggers about in it, proud of it, and putting his confidence
in it, as if out of all danger. The sense is, that they should direct
their arrows both against those that were more lightly or more heavily
armed; since by them they might do execution among the one and the
other:

and spare ye not her young men; because of their youth, beauty, and
strength:

destroy ye utterly all her host; her whole army, whether officers or
common soldiers; or let them be accoutred in what manner they will. The
Targum is,

"consume all her substance.''

[Jeremiah 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 51:4</span></span>

Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans,.... By the
sword, or by the arrows and darts of the Medes and Persians:

and they that are thrust through in her streets; either by the one or by
the other, especially the latter, since they only are mentioned; See
Gill on [Jer 50:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#030).

[Jeremiah 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 51:5</span></span>

For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God,

of the Lord of hosts,.... That is, not totally and finally; for though
they might seem to be forsaken, when carried captive by their enemies,
yet they were not in such sense as a woman is deprived of her husband
when dead, and she is become a widow, as the word (d) used may signify;
or when divorced from him; or as children are deprived of their parents,
and become orphans; but so it was not with Israel; for thought they were
under the frowns of Providence, and the resentment of God they had
sinned against, yet the relation between them still subsisted; he was
their covenant God and Father, their husband and protector, and who
would vindicate them, and avenge them on their enemies:

though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel;
which was the reason why they were carried captive, and so seemed to be
forsaken of God; or though their land was filled with punishment, with
devastation and destruction, yet nevertheless God would appear for them,
and restore that and them unto it; or rather this is to be understood of
the land of the Chaldeans, as it is by Jarchi and Kimchi; and be
rendered, "for their land is filled with punishment for sin, from", or
"by", or "because of the Holy One of Israel" (e); by which it appears,
that the people of God were not forsaken by him, and were not without a
patron and defender of them; since it was a plain case that the land of
the Chaldeans was filled with the punishment of the sword and other
calamities by the Holy One of Israel, because of the sins they had
committed against him, and the injuries they had done to his people. So
the Targum,

"for their land is filled with, (punishment for) the sins of murder, by
the word of the Holy One of Israel.''

\(d\) "viduus, sive viduatus", Vatablus, Calvin, Montanus; "ut vidua",
Pagninus; "orbus", Schmidt. (e) "quia terra illorum repleta est delicto,
sive reatu, vel poena", Grotius; so some in Gataker. "a Sancto
Israelis", Montanus, Schmidt; "propter Sanctum Israelis", Vatablus,
Calvin, Cocceius; so Ben Melech.

[Jeremiah 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 51:6</span></span>

Flee out of the midst of Babylon,.... This is said either to such as
were there of other nations upon trade and business, as Kimchi, to get
out of it as fast as they could, that they might not be consumed; or to
the Israelites, as Jarchi, the Jews that were captives there. This is
applied to the people of God in mystical Babylon, [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004);

and deliver every man his soul; or "life"; from the destruction coming
on the city, and the inhabitants of it;

be not cut off in her iniquity; or, "that he be not cut off" (f); with
her, in the punishment inflicted upon her for her iniquities; which is
the same as partaking of her plagues, [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004);

for this is the time, of the Lord's vengeance; the time fixed by him to
take vengeance on Babylon for her sins against him, and the wrongs done
to his people:

he will render unto her a recompence; the just demerit of their sins; a
recompence or reward by way of punishment for them; see [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006).

\(f\) "ne exscindamini", Junius & Tremellius, Schmidt; "ne committitote
ut exscindamini", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 51:7</span></span>

Babylon hath been a golden cup in the hand of the Lord,.... Either so
called from the liquor in it, being of a yellow colour, or pure as gold,
as the Jewish commentators generally; or from the matter of it, being
made of gold, denoting the grandeur, splendour, and riches of the
Babylonian empire; which, for the same reason, is called the head of
gold, [Dan 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038); this was in the hand
of the Lord, under his direction, and at his dispose; an instrument he
make use of to dispense the cup of his wrath and vengeance to other
nations, or to inflict punishment on them for their sins; see [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015); or else the sense is, that, by
the permission of God, Babylon had by various specious pretences drawn
the nations of the earth into idolatry, and other sins, which were as
poison in a golden cup, by which they had been deceived; and this suits
best with the use of the phrase in [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004);

that made all the earth drunken; either disturbed them with wars, so
that they were like a drunken man that reels to and fro, and falls, as
they did, into ruin and destruction; or made them drunk with the wine of
her fornication, with idolatry, so that they were intoxicated with it,
as the whore of Rome, mystical Babylon, is said to do, [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002);

the nations have drunken of her wine, therefore the nations are mad:
they drank of the wine of God's wrath by her means, being engaged in
wars, which proved their ruin, and deprived theft of their riches,
strength, and substance, as mad men are of their reason; or they drank
in her errors, and partook of her idolatry, and ran mad upon her idols,
as she did, [Jer 50:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#038); see [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003).

[Jeremiah 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 51:8</span></span>

Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed,.... Or "broken" (g); even into
shivers, as a cup is; for when it had been used to answer the purposes
designed by the Lord, he let it fall cut of his hands at once, and it
was broken; or rather he dashed it in pieces, as a potter's vessel. The
destruction of Babylon was brought about in a very short time,
considering the strength of it; and was unexpected by the inhabitants of
it, and by the nations round about; but, when it was come, it was
irreparable: so the destruction of mystical Babylon will be in one hour,
and it will be an utter and entire destruction, [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008);

howl for her; as the inhabitants of Babylon, and her friends and allies
that loved her, did no doubt; and as the kings and merchants of the
earth, and others, will howl for spiritual Babylon, [Rev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009);

take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed: or balsam; see [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011); which is said by way of
derision and mockery, as Kimchi and Abarbinel observe; or in an ironical
and sarcastic manner; suggesting, that, let what means soever be made
use of, her wound was incurable, her ruin inevitable, and her case
irrecoverable.

\(g\) "confracta est", Schmidt; "fracta est", Cocceius; "contrita est",
Piscator.

[Jeremiah 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 51:9</span></span>

We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed,.... These are
either the words of the friends of Babylon of her auxiliaries and
allies, who did all they could to defend her against the Persians, but
to no purpose; it was not in their power to help her; the time of her
destruction was come, and there was no avoiding it; or of the prophets
and good people of the Jews that were in Babylon, that took pains to
convince, the inhabitants of Babylon of their idolatries and other sins,
and reform them, that so they might not be their ruin; but all
instructions and admonitions were in vain; in like manner many worthy
reformers have laboured much to reclaim mystical Babylon, or the church
of Rome, from her errors and idolatries; but still she retains them;
wherefore it follows:

forsake her, and let us go everyone into his own country; so said the
auxiliary troops that were in the service of the king of Babylon; since
we can do him no good, and are ourselves posed to danger, let us desert
him, and provide for our safety by hastening to our own country as fast
as we can; this was really the case after the first battle of Cyrus with
the Babylonians, in which their king Neriglissar was slain: Croesus and
the rest of the allies, seeing their case so distressed and helpless,
left them to shift for themselves, and fled by night (h): or so might
the Jews say when the city was taken, and they were delivered out of the
hands of their oppressors; and so will the people of God say, who shall
be called out of mystical Babylon just before its ruin, [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004);

for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the
skies: that is, her sins were so many, that they reached even to heaven;
and were taken notice of by God that dwelleth there; and were the cause
of judgment or punishment being from thence inflicted on her, which was
unavoidable, being the decree of heaven, and the just demerit of her
sin; and therefore no help could be afforded her; nor was there any
safety by being in her; see [Rev 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#005).

\(h\) Xenophon, Cyropaedia l. 4. c. 2.

[Jeremiah 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 51:10</span></span>

The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness,.... Or "righteousnesses"
(i) this, as Kimchi observes, is spoken in the person of the Israelites;
not as though the Jews had done no iniquity, for which they were carried
captive; they had committed much, and were far from being righteous in
themselves, but were so in comparison of the Chaldeans; and who had gone
beyond their commission, and had greatly oppressed them, and used them
cruelly; and now the Lord, by bringing destruction upon them, vindicated
the cause of his people, and showed it to be a righteous one; and that
the religion they professed was true, and which the Chaldeans had
derided and reproached: this righteousness, not of their persons, but of
their cause, and the truth of their holy religion, the Lord brought
forth to the light, and made it manifest, by taking their parts, and
destroying their enemies:

come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the Lord our God; the Jews
encourage one another to return into their own land, rebuild their
temple, and set up the worship of God in it; and there declare the
wondrous work of God in the destruction of Babylon, and their
deliverance from thence; giving him the praise and glory of it; and
exciting others to join with them in it, it being the Lord's work, and
marvellous in their eyes; and so, when mystical Babylon is destroyed,
voices will be heard in heaven, in the church, ascribing salvation,
honour, and glory, to God, [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).
All this is true, in an evangelic sense, of such as are redeemed by
Christ, and brought out of mystical Babylon, and are effectually called
by the grace of God; to these the Lord brings forth the righteousness of
Christ, which he makes their own, by imputing it to them; and he brings
it near to them, and puts it upon them; it is revealed unto them from
faith to faith; it is applied to them by the Spirit of God, and put into
their hands to plead with God, as their justifying righteousness; and
which is brought forth by him on all occasions, to free them from all
charges exhibited against them by law or justice, by the world, Satan,
or their own hearts, [Rom 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033); and it
becomes such persons to declare in Zion, in the church of God, the works
of the Lord; not their own, which will not bear the light, nor bear
speaking of; but the works of God, of creation and providence; but more
especially of grace, as the great work of redemption by Jesus Christ;
and particularly the Spirit's work of grace upon their hearts, which is
not the work of men, but of God; being a new creation work; a
regeneration; a resurrection from the dead; and requiring almighty
power, to which man is unfit and unequal: this lies in the quickening of
men dead in trespasses and sins; in enlightening such as are darkness
itself; in an implantation of the principles of grace and holiness in
them; in giving them new hearts and new spirits; and in bringing them
off of their own righteousness, to depend on Christ alone for salvation;
and which work, as it is begun, will be carried on, and performed in
them, until the day of Christ; and, wherever it is, should not be
concealed, but should be declared in the gates of Zion, publicly,
freely, and fitly and faithfully, to the glory of the grace of God, and
for the comfort of his people, to whom every such declaration is matter
of joy and pleasure; see [Psa 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016).

\(i\) "justitas nostras", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Cocceius,
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 51:11</span></span>

Make bright the arrows,.... Which were covered with rust; scour them of
it; anoint them with oil, as armour were wont to be; make them neat,
clean, and bright, that they may pierce the deeper; hence we read of a
"polished shaft", or arrow, one made bright and pure, [Isa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002); agreeably to this some render
the word "sharpen the arrows" (k); so the Targum. The word has the
signification of "choosing"; but, as Gussetius observes (l), whether the
direction be to choose the best arrows, or to scour clean and polish
them, the end is the same; namely, to have such as are most fit for use.
Joseph Kimchi derives the word from another, which signifies a feather;
and so renders it, "feather the arrows" (m); that they may fly the
swifter. These and what follow are either the words of God, or of the
prophet; or, as some think, of the Jews about to return to Judea, whose
words are continued, exhorting the Medes and Persians to go on with the
war against the Chaldeans; but they rather seem to be addressed to the
Chaldeans themselves, putting them upon doing these things; and
suggesting, that when they had done all they could, it would be to no
purpose:

gather the shields; which lay scattered about and neglected in time of
peace: or, "fill" them; fill the hands with them; or bring in a full or
sufficient number; since there would be now occasion for them, to defend
them against the enemy. The Targum, and several versions, render it,
"fill the quivers" (n); that is, with arrows; and so Jarchi: or, "fill
the shields" (o); that is, with oil; anoint them, as in [Isa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005);

the Lord hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes; of
Cyaxares, or Darius the Mede, and of Cyrus, who succeeded his uncle as
king of Media; and indeed the army that came against Babylon was an army
of Medes joined by the Persians, Cyrus being employed as general of it
by his uncle. The Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read it, "the
spirit of the king of the Medes"; with which the following clause seems
to agree:

for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; the device of the king
of the Medes, Darius; or rather the device of the Lord, who stirred up
the spirit of the kings of the Medes; put it into their hearts to fulfil
his will; and gave them wisdom and skill, courage and resolution, to do
it; and as he will to the kings of the earth against mystical Babylon,
[Rev 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016);

because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple;
his vengeance on Babylon, for the destruction of his temple, and the
profanation of it; see [Jer 50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028).

\(k\) "acuite sagittas", V. L. Castalio; "exacuite", Montanus. (l) Ebr.
Comment. p. 148. (m) "Ponite pennas in sagittis", so some in Vatablus.
(n) , Sept. "implete pharetras", V. L. Castalio, So Syr. this version is
prefered by Gussetius, Ebr. Comment. p. 860, 945. (o) "Implete scuta,
scil. oleo", Stockius, p. 1098.

[Jeremiah 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 51:12</span></span>

Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon,.... This is not said to
the Medes and Persians, to put up a flag on the walls of Babylon, as a
sign of victory, as Kimchi, Abarbinel, and others think; for as yet the
city is not supposed to be taken by what follows; but rather to the
Babylonians, to set up an ensign on their walls, to gather the
inhabitants together, to defend their city, and the bulwarks of it;
which, with what follows, is ironically spoken:

make the watch strong; to guard the city; observe the motions of the
enemy, and give proper and timely notice; increase and double it:

set up watchmen; meaning the keepers of the walls; place them upon them,
to keep a good look out, that they might not be surprised: this seems to
respect the great carelessness and security the whole city was in the
night it was taken; being wholly engaged in feasting and revelling, in
rioting and drunkenness, having no fear of danger, or concern for their
safety; with which they are tacitly upbraided:

prepare the ambushes; or, "liers in wait" (p); to second or relieve
those on the walls upon occasion; or seize unawares the besiegers,
should they attempt to scale the walls, and enter the city:

for the Lord hath devised and done that which he spoke against the
inhabitants of Babylon; or as he hath devised, so hath he done, or will
do: his purposes cannot be frustrated, his counsel shall stand; and
therefore had the Babylonians been ever so industrious in their own
defence, they could never have prevented their ruin and destruction,
which was resolved upon, and accordingly effected.

\(p\) "insidiatores", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius,
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 51:13</span></span>

O thou that dwellest upon many waters,.... Here Babylon is addressed,
either by the Lord, or by the prophet, or the godly Jews; who is
described by her, situation, which was by the great river Euphrates;
which being branched out into several canals or rivers, both ran through
it, and encompassed it; hence mention is made of the rivers of Babylon,
[Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001); and a fit emblem this city
was of mystical Babylon, which is also said to sit on many waters,
interpreted of people and nations, [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001); and which Kimchi here interprets
of an affluence of good things, though he admits of the literal sense of
the words:

abundant in treasures: of corn, and of the fruits of the earth, and so
in condition to hold out a siege, as well as strongly fortified by art
and nature, before described; and of gold and silver, the sinews of war,
which she had got together, partly by commerce, and partly by the spoil
of other nations; and yet neither her situation nor her affluence could
secure her from ruin:

thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness; this flourishing
city was now near its end, and with it the whole Babylonish monarchy;
the time fixed by the Lord, for the duration of one and the other, was
now come; and whereas her covetousness was insatiable, and would have
known no bounds, for the enlargement of her dominions, and for the
accumulation of more wealth and riches; God set a limit to it, beyond
which it should not go; which measure was now filled up, and the time
for it expired. The Targum is,

"the day of thy destruction is come, and the time of the visitation of
thy wickedness,''

[Jeremiah 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 51:14</span></span>

The Lord hath sworn by himself, saying,.... Or, "by his soul" or "life"
(q); which is himself, than which he cannot swear by a greater, [Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013); and the certain performance of
what he swears unto need not be doubted of; and indeed the design of the
oath is to assure of the truth of the thing, about which, after this,
there ought to be no hesitation:

surely I fill thee with men as with caterpillars; or "locusts" (r);
march in vast numbers, and make sad desolation where they come; and to
which a numerous army may fitly be compared; and which are here meant,
even the army of Cyrus, that should enter Babylon, and fill it, as it
did. So the Targum,

"the Lord of hosts hath sworn by his word, if I fill them with armies of
many people as locusts:''

and they shall lift up a shout against thee; as soldiers, when they make
the onset in battle; or as besiegers, when they make their attack on a
city; or as when grape gatherers bring in their vintage, or tread out
their wine, to which the allusion is: it signifies that her enemies
should get an entire victory, and triumph over her.

\(q\) "per animam suam", Pagninus, Cocceius, Schmidt. (r) "ut, vel quasi
brucho", V. L. Cocceius, Montanus, Grotius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 51:15</span></span>

He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by
his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding. The
Targum prefaces the words thus,

"these things saith he who hath made the earth, &c.''

The verses [Jer 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#016) are the same
with [Jer 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012). God is described by
his sovereignty, power, and wisdom; and the stupidity of men that trust
in idols, and the vanity of them, are exposed, to convince the
Babylonians that the Lord, who had determined on their destruction,
would surely effect it, and that it would not be in the power of their
idols to prevent it. See Gill on [Jer
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 51:16</span></span>

When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the
heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of his treasures. See Gill on [Jer
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#013).

[Jeremiah 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 51:17</span></span>

Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is confounded by
the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood,

and there is no breath in them. See Gill on [Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014).

[Jeremiah 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 51:18</span></span>

They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation
they shall perish. See Gill on [Jer
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#015).

[Jeremiah 51:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 51:19</span></span>

The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of all
things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the Lord of hosts is
his name. See Gill on [Jer 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016).

[Jeremiah 51:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 51:20</span></span>

Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war,.... This is said by the Lord,
either to Cyrus, as some, to which our version inclines, whom God made
use of as an instrument to subdue nations and kingdoms, and destroy
them; see [Isa 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001); or rather
Babylon, and the king of it, who had been the hammer of the earth, [Jer
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#023); as it may be rendered here,
"thou art my hammer" (s); or, "hast been"; an instrument in his hands,
of beating the nations to pieces, as stones by a hammer, and of
destroying them, as by weapons of war: this, and what follows, are
observed to show, that though Babylon had been used by the Lord for the
destruction of others, it should not be secure from it itself, but
should share the same fate; unless this is to be understood of the
church of God, and kingdom of Christ, which in the latter day will break
in pieces all the kingdoms of the earth, [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044); which sense seems to have some
countenance and confirmation from [Jer
51:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#024) "in your sight". The Targum is,

"thou art a scatterer before me, a city in which are warlike arms;''

which seems to refer to Babylon:

for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I
destroy kingdoms; or, "with thee I have broke in pieces, and have
destroyed"; the future instead of the past (t); as the nations and
kingdoms of Judea, Egypt, Edom, Moab, Ammon, and others: or, "that I may
break in pieces" (u), &c. and so it expresses the end for which he was a
hammer, as well as the use he had been or would be of.

\(s\) "malleus es, vel fuisti mihi", Pagninus, Piscator, Cocceius,
Schmidt. (t) "Dispersi, perdidi", Lutherus; "conquassavi", Munster;
"dissipavi", Piscator. (u) "ut dissiparem", Junius & Tremellius; "ut
dispergam", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 51:21</span></span>

And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider,.... Or,
"have broken": meaning the cavalry of an army, wherein lies its chief
strength:

and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider; which
were also used in war.

[Jeremiah 51:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 51:22</span></span>

And with thee also will I break in pieces man and woman,.... Or, "have
broken"; having no respect to any sex, and to the propagation of
posterity:

and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; not sparing men of
any age, however useful they might be, the one for their wisdom, the
other for their strength:

and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid; who by
procreation of children might fill and strengthen commonwealths.

[Jeremiah 51:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 51:23</span></span>

And I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his
flock,.... Or, have broken; which Abarbinel thinks respects the Arabians
particularly, who were shepherds, and dwelt in tents; but it rather
signifies shepherds and their flocks in general; who were killed or
scattered wherever his armies came, which spared none, even the most
innocent and useful, and though unarmed:

and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of
oxen; with which he ploughed his ground: signifying by this, as well as
the former, that those were not spared, by which kingdoms were supported
and maintained, as shepherds and husbandmen:

and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers; by whom
kingdoms and states are governed and protected.

[Jeremiah 51:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 51:24</span></span>

And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of
Chaldea,.... Or, "but I will render" (w), &c. though I have made this
use of Babylon, she shall not be spared, but receive her just recompense
of reward; not the city of Babylon only, but the whole land of Chaldea,
and all the inhabitants of it:

all their evil that they have done in Zion, in your sight, saith the
Lord; the sense is, that for all the evil the Chaldeans had done in
Judea; the ravages they had made there, the blood they had shed, and the
desolation they had made; and particularly for what they had done in
Jerusalem, and especially in the temple, burning, spoiling, and
profaning that, God would now righteously punish them, and retaliate all
this evil on them; and which should be done publicly, before all the
nations of the world, and particularly in the sight of God's own people:
for this phrase, "in your sight", does not refer to the evils done in
Zion, but to the recompense that should be made for them.

\(w\) "sed rependam", Piscator; "sed retribuam", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 51:25</span></span>

Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the Lord, which
destroyest all the earth,.... Babylon is called a mountain, though
situated in a plain, because of its high walls, lofty towers, and
hanging gardens, which made it look at a distance like a high mountain,
as Lebanon, and others: or because it was a strong fortified city; so
the Targum renders it, O destroying city: or because of its power and
grandeur as a monarchy, it being usual to compare monarchies to
mountains; see [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); here called a
"destroying" one for a reason given, because it destroyed all the earth,
all the nations and kingdoms of it: the same character is given of
mystical Babylon and its inhabitants, [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018),

and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee: in a way of vindictive
wrath, pouring it out upon her, and inflicting his judgments on her;
laying hold on and seizing her in a furious manner, as a man does his
enemy, when he has found him:

and roll them down from the rocks; towers and fortresses in Babylon,
which looked like rocks, but should be now demolished:

and will make thee a burnt mountain: reduced to cinders and ashes by the
conflagration of it: or, "a burning mountain": like Etna and Vesuvius;
we never read of the burning of literal Babylon, but we do of mystical
Babylon: see [Rev 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008); and with this
compare [Rev 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008). The Targum renders
it, a burnt city.

[Jeremiah 51:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 51:26</span></span>

And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for
foundations,.... Signifying that it should be so utterly consumed by
fire, that there should not be a stone left fit to be put into any new
building, especially to be a corner or a foundation stone. The Targum
understands it figuratively,

"and they shall not take of thee a king for a kingdom, and a ruler for
government:''

but thou shall be desolate for ever, saith the Lord; see [Jer
50:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#039).

[Jeremiah 51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 51:27</span></span>

Set ye up a standard in the land,.... Not in Chaldea, but rather in any
land; or in all the countries which belonged to Media and Persia; where
Cyrus's standard is ordered to be set up, to gather soldiers together,
and enlist in his service, in order to go with him in his expedition
against Babylon:

blow the trumpet among the nations; for the same purpose, to call them
to arms, to join the forces of Cyrus, and go with him into the land of
Chaldea:

prepare the nations against her: animate them, stir up their spirits
against her, and furnish them with armour to engage with her: or,
"sanctify" (x) them; select a certain number out of them fit for such
work:

call together the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; the two
former are generally thought to intend Armenia the greater, and the
lesser; and the latter Ascania, a country in Phrygia; and certain it is
that Cyrus first conquered these countries, and had many Armenians,
Phrygians, and Cappadocians, in his army he brought against Babylon, as
Xenophon (y) relates. The Targum is, declare

"against her to the kingdoms of the land of Kardu, the army of Armenia
and Hadeb,''

or Adiabene:

appoint a captain against her; over all these forces thus collected:
Cyrus seems to be intended; unless the singular is put for the plural,
and so intends a sufficient number of general officers of the army:

cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillars; or "locusts" (z);
which though generally smooth, yet some fire hairy and rough; to which
the horses in Cyrus's army are compared, for their multitude, the shape
of their heads, long manes, and manner of going, leaping, and prancing.
So the Targum,

"they shall cause the horses to come up, leaping like the shining
locust;''

that is of a yellow colour, and shines like gold. So the word the Targum
here uses is used by Jonathan in [Lev
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#032); of hair yellow as gold, and
here to be understood of hairy locusts: and, as Aelianus (a) says, there
were locusts of a golden colour in Arabia. And such may be meant here by
the Chaldee paraphrase, which well expresses their motion by leaping;
see [Joe 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005); and which agrees with
that of horses. The word rendered "rough" has the signification of
horror in it, such as makes the hair to stand upright; see [Job
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#015); and so some (b) render it here.
And Bochart (c), from Alcamus, an Arabic writer, observes, that there is
a sort of locusts which have two hairs upon their head, which are called
their horn, which when erected may answer to this sense of the word; and
he brings in the poet Claudian (d), as describing the locust by the top
of its head, as very horrible and terrible; and that some locusts? have
hair upon their heads seems manifest from [Rev
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#008); though it may be, the reason why
they are here represented as so dreadful and frightful may not be so
much on account of their form, as for the terror they strike men with,
when they come in great numbers, and make such terrible havoc of the
fruits of the earth as they do; wherefore the above learned writer
proposes to render the words, "as the horrible locusts" (e).

\(x\) "sanctificate", Piscator, Schmidt. (y) Cyropaedia, l. 5. c. 15. &
l. 7. c. 21. (z) "sicut bruchum", Montanus, Schmidt. (a) De Animal. l.
10. c. 13. (b) "horripilantem", Montanus; "qui horret", Piscator,
Cocceius. (c) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 4. c. 2. col. 456. (d) "Horret apex
capitis, medio fera lumina surgunt Vertice", &c. Epigram. 13. (e) "Non
tam horrentem, quam horrendum sonat".

[Jeremiah 51:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 51:28</span></span>

Prepare against her the nations, with the kings of the Medes,.... At the
head of them, Darius and Cyrus. The Syriac version has it in the
singular number, the king of the Modes:

the captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of
his dominions; that is, the inhabitants of it, the common people, with
their princes, nobles, governors, as captains of them, under Cyrus,
their generalissimo.

[Jeremiah 51:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 51:29</span></span>

And the land shall tremble and sorrow,.... The land of Chaldea, the
inhabitants of it, should tremble, when they heard of this powerful army
invading their land, and besieging their metropolis; and should sorrow,
and be in pain as a woman in travail, as the word (f) signifies:

for every purpose of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon; or,
"shall stand" (g); be certainly fulfilled; for his purposes are firm and
not frustratable:

to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant; this the
Lord purposed, and threatened to do; see [Jer
50:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#039).

\(f\) "et parturiet", Schmidt. So Ben Melech. (g) "stabit, vel stant",
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 51:30</span></span>

The mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight,.... Or, "ceased from
fighting" (h) for it seems, upon Cyrus's first coming, the king of
Babylon and his army gave him battle; but being overthrown, they retired
to the city (i), and dared never fight more:

they have remained in their holds; in the towers and fortresses of
Babylon, never daring to sally out of the city, or appear in the field
of battle any more; even though Cyrus sent the king of Babylon a
personal challenge, to end the quarrel by a single combat (k):

their might hath failed; their courage sunk and was gone; they had no
heart to face their enemy:

they became as women; as weak as they, as the Targum; timorous and
fearful, having no courage left in them, and behaved more like women
than men:

they have burnt her dwelling places; that is, the enemy burnt their
houses, when they entered into the city, to inject terror into them:

her bars are broken; the bars of the gates of the city, or of the
palaces of the king and nobles, and of the houses of the people, by the
soldiers, to get the plunder; see [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001).

\(h\) "cessaverunt a praelio", V. L. "desinent pugnare", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "cessarunt pugnare", Schmidt. So Pagninus,
Montanus. (i) Xenophon, Cyropaedia, l. 5. c. 19. Herodot. l. 1. sive
Clio. c. 190. (k) Xenophon, ib. l. 5. c. 10.

[Jeremiah 51:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 51:31</span></span>

One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
another,.... That is, one post should be after another, and one
messenger after another, post upon post, and messenger upon messenger,
as fast as they could run; when one had been with his message, and
delivered it, and returned, he meets another; or they met one another,
coming from different places:

to show the king of Babylon his city is taken at one end; or, "at the
end" (l); we render it "one end", as Kimchi does; at the end where
Cyrus's army first landed, when they came up the channel of the river
Euphrates they had drained. And so Herodotus (m) says, that when the
Babylonians, which inhabited the "extreme parts" of the city, were
taken, they that were in the middle of it were not sensible of it,
because of the greatness of the city; and the rather, because they were
engaged that night in feasting and dancing. Nay, Aristotle (n) says, it
was reported that one part of the city was taken three days before the
other end knew it, it being more like a country than a city; which does
not seem credible, nor is it consistent with the Scripture account of
it; however, it was taken by surprise, and some parts of it before the
king was aware of it; who very probably had his palace in the middle of
it, whither these messengers ran one after another, or from different
parts, to acquaint him with it.

\(l\) "a fine", Montanus; "ab extremitate", Calvin, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, De Dieu, Schmidt. (m) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 191. (n) Politic. l.
3. c. 3.

[Jeremiah 51:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 51:32</span></span>

And that the passages are stopped,.... Or "taken", or "seized" (o);
where Cyrus placed soldiers to keep them; these were the passages
leading from the river Euphrates to the city, the keys of it; the little
gates, that Herodotus (p) speaks of, leading to the river, which were
left open that night. Kimchi thinks the towers built by the river side,
to keep the enemy out, that should attempt to enter, are meant; these
were now in his hands;

and the reeds they have burnt with fire; which grew upon the banks of
the river, and in the marshes adjoining to it. Some render it, "the
marshes" (q); that is, the reeds and bulrushes in them, which usually
grow in such places. And Herodotus (r) makes mention of a marsh Cyrus
came to; the reeds in it he burnt, having many torches, with which he
might set fire to them; as he proposed with them to burn the houses,
doors, and porches (s); either to make way for his army, which might
hinder the march of it; or to give light, that they might see their way
into the city the better: though some think it was to terrify the
inhabitants; which seems not so likely, since he marched up to the royal
palace with great secrecy. This circumstance is mentioned, to show the
certainty of the enemy's entrance, and the taking of part of the city.
R. Jonah, from the Arabic language, in which the word (t) here used
signifies "fortresses", so renders it here;

and the men of war are affrighted; and so fled, and left the passes,
towers, and fortresses, which fell into the hands of Cyrus, as soon as
they perceived his army was come up the channel and was landed, and the
reeds were burnt.

\(o\) "praeoccupata", V. L. "comprehensa", Montanus; "occupati",
Tigurine version, Schmidt. (p) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 191. (q) "paludes",
V. L. Syr. Grotius; "stagna", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt.
(r) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 191. (s) Xenophon, Cyropaedia, l. 7. c. 22. (t)
"arundinetum feris et hinc munimentum, castellum", Camus apud Golium,
col. 33. "castellum, munimentum viarum, arces", Castel. Lex. col. 29.

[Jeremiah 51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 51:33</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,.... "The Lord of
hosts", the Lord God omnipotent, and can do all things; "the God of
Israel", and therefore will plead their cause, and take vengeance on
Babylon:

the daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor; on which the nations
of the earth had been threshed, or punished and destroyed; and now she
was like a threshing floor, unto which should be gathered, and on which
should be laid, her king, princes, and the people of the land, and be
there beat and crushed to pieces. The Targum renders it the congregation
of Babylon; and the Septuagint the houses of the king of Babylon; so the
Arabic version:

it is time to thresh her; not the floor, but the sheaves on it: or, "it
is the time to tread her" (u); as corn was trodden out by the oxen; or
rather as threshing floors, being new laid with earth, were trodden, and
so made hard and even, and by that means prepared for threshing against
the harvest; when the corn would be ripe, cut down, and gathered in, and
laid up, as follows:

yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come; when she
would be ripe for ruin, and God would, by his instruments, put in the
sickle of his wrath, and cut her down, her king, her princes, her
cities, and her people; see [Rev
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015). The Targum is,

"and yet a very little while, and spoilers shall come to her.''

\(u\) "tempus calcandi eam", Pagninus, Calvin; "tempus calcare eam",
Montanus; "eo tempore quo illa calcari solet", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 51:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 51:34</span></span>

Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me,.... Or "us" (w);
everyone of us: these are the words of Zion and Jerusalem, as appears
from [Jer 51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035); complaining of the
injuries done them by the king of Babylon, who had eaten them up;
spoiled their substance, as the Targum; took their cities, plundered
them of their riches, and carried them away captive:

he hath crushed me; to the earth; or "bruised" or "broken", even all her
bones; see [Jer 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017);

he hath made me an empty vessel; emptied the land of its inhabitants and
riches, and left nothing valuable in it:

he hath swallowed me up like a dragon; or "whale", or any large fish,
which swallow the lesser ones whole. The allusion is to the large
swallow of dragons, which is sometimes represented as almost beyond all
belief; for not only Pliny (x) from Megasthenes reports, that, in India,
serpents, that is, dragons, grow to such a bulk, that they will swallow
whole deer, and even bulls; but Posidonius (y) relates, that in
Coelesyria was one, whose gaping jaws would admit of a horse and his
rider: and Onesicritus (z) speaks of two dragons in the country of
Abisarus in India; the one was fourscore and the other a hundred and
forty cubits long;

he hath filled his belly with my delicates; with the treasures of the
king and his nobles; with the vessels of the temple, and the riches of
the people, which he loaded himself with to his full satisfaction. So
the Targum,

"he filled his treasury with the good of my land;''

he hath cast me out; out of my land, and carried me captive; so the
Targum.

\(w\) The "Cetib", or textual reading, is "us"; but the "Keri", or
marginal reading, is "me", which our version follows, and so the same in
the four following words, in the text. (x) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 14. col.
436. (y) Apud Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 3. c. 14. col. 436. (z)
Apud Strabo. Geograph. l. 15. p. 480.

[Jeremiah 51:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 51:35</span></span>

The violence done to me, and to my flesh, be upon Babylon,.... That is,
let the injuries done to Zion and her children, be avenged on Babylon;
the hurt done to their persons and families, and the spoiling of their
goods, and destruction of their cities, houses, and substance:

shall the inhabitant of Zion say; by way of imprecation:

and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say; let
the guilt of it be charged upon them, and punishment for it be inflicted
on them. The Targum is,

"the sin of the innocent blood which is shed in me;''

let that be imputed to them, and vengeance come upon them for it.

[Jeremiah 51:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 51:36</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord,.... In answer to the prayers of the
inhabitants of Zion and Jerusalem, imprecating divine vengeance on
Babylon:

behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; not by
words only, but by deeds, inflicting punishment on their enemies:

and I will dry up her sea; the confluence of waters about Babylon; the
river Euphrates, the channel of which was drained by Cyrus, by which
means he took the city; and this may figuratively design the abundance
of riches and affluence of good things in Babylon, which should now be
taken from her:

and make her springs dry; deprive her of all the necessaries of life;
and stop up all the avenues by which she was supplied with them; and cut
off all communication of good things to her.

[Jeremiah 51:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 51:37</span></span>

And Babylon shall become heaps,.... The houses should be demolished, and
the stones lie in heaps one upon another, and become mere rubbish:

a dwelling place for dragons; and other wild and savage creatures.
Dragons, as Aelianus (a) observes, love to live in desert places, and
such now Babylon is; it lies in ruins; and even its palace is so full of
scorpions and serpents, as Benjamin of Tudela (b) says it was in his
time, that men durst not enter into it; see [Jer
50:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#039);

an astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant; an astonishment
to neighbouring nations, and to all that pass by; who shall hiss at the
destruction of it, and rejoice, there being not so much as a single
inhabitant in it; which is its case to this day; see [Jer
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#013).

\(a\) De Animal. l. 6. c. 63. (b) Itinerarium, p. 76.

[Jeremiah 51:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 51:38</span></span>

They shall roar together like lions,.... Some understand this of the
Medes and Persians, and the shouts they made at the attacking and taking
of Babylon; but this does not so well agree with that, which seems to
have been done in a secret and silent manner; rather according to the
context the Chaldeans are meant, who are represented as roaring, not
through fear of the enemy, and distress by him; for such a roaring would
not be fitly compared to the roaring of a lion; but either this is
expressive of their roaring and revelling at their feast afterwards
mentioned, and at which time their city was taken; or else of the high
spirits and rage they were in, and the fierceness and readiness they
showed to give battle to Cyrus, when he first came with his army against
them; and they did unite together, and met him, and roared like lions at
him, and fought with him; but being overcome, their courage cooled; they
retired to their city, and dared not appear more; See Gill on [Jer
51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030);

they shall yell as lions' whelps. Jarchi and other Rabbins interpret the
word of the braying of an ass; it signifies to "shake"; and the Vulgate
Latin version renders it, "they shall shake their hair"; as lions do
their manes; and young lions their shaggy hair; and as blustering
bravadoes shake theirs; and so might the Babylonians behave in such a
swaggering way when the Medes and Persians first attacked them.

[Jeremiah 51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 51:39</span></span>

In their heat I will make their feasts,.... I will order it that their
feasts shall be id the time of heat, that so they may be made drunk; so
Jarchi: or when they are hot with feasting, I will disturb their feast
by a handwriting on the wall; so Kimchi; see [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001); to which he directs: or when they
are inflamed with wine, I will put something into their banquets, into
their cups; I will mingle their potions with the wine of my wrath; and,
while they are feasting, ruin shall come upon them; and so it was,
according to Herodotus and Xenophon, that the city of Babylon was taken,
while the inhabitants were feasting; and this account agrees with [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001). This text is quoted in the Talmud
(c), where the gloss on it says,

"this is said concerning Belshazzar and his company, when they returned
from a battle with Darius and Cyrus, who besieged Babylon, and
Belshazzar overcame that day; and they were weary and hot, and sat down
to drink, and were drunken, and on that day he was slain;''

and the Targum is,

"I will bring tribulation upon them:''

and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice; in a riotous and
revelling way; or that they may be mad and tremble, as R. Jonah, from
the use of the word (d) in the Arabic language, interprets it; so
drunken men are oftentimes like mad men, deprived of their senses, and
their limbs tremble through the strength of liquor; and here it
signifies, that the Chaldeans should be so intoxicated with the cup of
divine wrath and vengeance, that they should be at their wits' end; in
the utmost horror and trembling; not able to stand, or defend
themselves; and so the Targum,

"they shall be like drunken men, that they may not be strong;''

but as weak as they:

and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the Lord; not only fall
asleep as drunken men do, and awake again; but sleep, and never awake
more; or die, and not live again, until the resurrection morn; no doubt
many of the Chaldeans, being in a literal sense drunk and asleep when
the city was taken, were slain in their sleep, and never waked again.
The Targum is,

"and die the second death, and not live in the world to come;''

see [Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008).

\(c\) T. Bab. Megilia, fol. 15. 2. (d) "furor ac repentina mors", Camus
apud Golium, col. 1634. "tremor, timor mortis aegroto contingens",
Giggeius apud Castel. col. 2772. So R. Sol. Urbiu. Ohel Moed, fol. 32.
1. interprets the words of trembling.

[Jeremiah 51:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jer 51:40</span></span>

I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter,.... To the place of
slaughter; who shall be able to make no more resistance than lambs. This
explains what is meant by being made drunk, and sleeping a perpetual
sleep, even destruction and death:

like rams with he goats; denoting the promiscuous destruction of the
prince and common people together.

[Jeremiah 51:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jer 51:41</span></span>

How is Sheshach taken!.... Not the city Shushan, as Sir John Marsham
thinks (e); but Babylon, as is plain from a following clause; and so the
Targum,

"how is Babylon subdued!''

called Sheshach, by a position and commutation of letters the Jews call
"athbash"; so Jarchi, Kimchi, and Abarbinel account for it; or else from
their idol Shach, the same with Bel, which was worshipped here, and had
a temple erected for it; and where an annual feast was kept in honour of
it, called the Sacchean feast; and which was observing the very time the
city was taken; and may be the true reason of its having this name given
it now; See Gill on [Jer 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#026); the
taking of which was very wonderful; and therefore this question is put
by way of admiration; it being so well fortified and provided to hold
out a long siege:

and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised? for it was taken by
stratagem and surprise, before the king and his guards, the army, and
the inhabitants of it, were aware; that city, which was matter and
occasion of praise to all the world, and went through it; for the
compass of it, and height and strength of its walls; the river Euphrates
that ran through it, and flowed about it; the temple, palaces, and
gardens in it:

how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations! or, "a
desolation"; and indeed its being a desolation was the reason of its
being an astonishment among the nations; who were amazed to see so
strong, rich, and splendid a city brought to ruin in a very short time.

\(e\) Canon. Chron. p. 607.

[Jeremiah 51:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jer 51:42</span></span>

The sea is come up upon Babylon,.... A vast army, comparable to the
great sea for the multitude thereof, even the army of the Medes and
Persians under Cyrus; so the Targum,

"a king with his armies, which are numerous like the waters of the sea,
is come up against Babylon:''

she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof; being
surrounded, besieged, surprised, and seized upon by the multitude of
soldiers in that army, which poured in upon it unawares. Some think here
is a beautiful antithesis, between the inundation of Cyrus's army and
the draining of the river Euphrates, by which means he poured in his
forces into Babylon.

[Jeremiah 51:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">jer 51:43</span></span>

Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness,.... Which
some understand of Babylon itself, divided into two parts by the river
Euphrates running in the midst of it, called by Berosus (f) the inward
and outward cities; though rather these design the rest of the cities in
Chaldea, of which Babylon was the metropolis, the mother city, and the
other her daughters, which should share the same fate with herself; be
demolished, and the ground on which they stood become a dry, barren,
uncultivated, and desert land:

a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass
thereby; having neither inhabitant nor traveller; see [Jer
50:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#012).

\(f\) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion, l. 1. c. 19.

[Jeremiah 51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jer 51:44</span></span>

And I will punish Bel in Babylon,.... The idol of the Babylonians, who
had a temple in Babylon, where he was worshipped: the same is called
Belus by Aelianus (g), Curtius (h), and Pausanias (i); perhaps the same
Herodian (k) calls Belis, and says some take him to be Apollo; for more
of him; see Gill on [Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001); and See
Gill on [Jer 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002); who was punished
when his temple was demolished, and plundered of its wealth; this golden
image of Belus was broke to pieces, and the gold of it carried away. The
Targum is,

"I will visit or punish them that worship Bel in Babylon:''

and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up;
the rich offerings made to him when victories were obtained; all success
being ascribed to him; and the spoils of conquered enemies, which were
brought and laid up in his temple, particularly the vessels of the
sanctuary at Jerusalem, which were deposited there; see [Ch2
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007); and which were restored by
Cyrus, [Ezr 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007); which restoration of
them greatly fulfilled this prophecy; and was a refunding of what was
lodged with him, or a vomiting what he had swallowed up; compare with
this the story of "Bel and the dragon":

and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him; either to
worship him, or bring their presents to him, to ingratiate themselves
with the king of Babylon:

yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall; which Bel was not able to defend;
and therefore should be deserted by his worshippers. The Targum renders
it in the plural, the walls of Babylon; of which; see Gill on [Jer
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058). Some think that not the wall of
the city is here meant: but the temple of Bel, which was as a wall or
fortress to the city; but now should fall, and be so no more; since it
is not easy to give a reason why mention here should be made of the fall
of the walls of the city; and seeing express mention is made of this
afterwards.

\(g\) Var. Hist. l. 13. c. 3. (h) Hist. l. 5. c. 1. (i) L. 1. sive
Attica, p. 29. (k) Hist. l. 8. c. 7.

[Jeremiah 51:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jer 51:45</span></span>

My people, go ye out of the midst of her,.... This is a call of the Jews
to go out of Babylon, not before the taking of the city by Cyrus; but
when he should issue out a proclamation, giving them liberty to return
to their own land; which many of them, being well settled in Babylon,
would not be ready to accept of, but choose to continue there; wherefore
they are urged to depart from thence, because of the danger they would
be exposed unto; for though the city was not destroyed by Cyrus upon his
taking it, yet it was by Darius Hystaspes some time after. The same call
is given to the people of God to come out of mystical Babylon, [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004);

and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord;
shown in the destruction of Babylon; See Gill on [Jer
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 51:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jer 51:46</span></span>

And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall be
heard in the land,.... The rumour of war in the land of Chaldea; the
report of the Medes and Persians preparing to invade it, and besiege
Babylon, in the peace of which city the Jews had peace; and therefore
might fear they should suffer in the calamities of it; but, lest they
should, they are ordered to go cut of it, and accept the liberty that
should be granted by the conqueror, who would do them no hurt, but good;
and had therefore nothing to fear from him; and, as a token, assuring
them of this, the following things are declared; which, when they should
observe, they need not be troubled, being forewarned; yea, might take
encouragement from it, and believe that their redemption drew nigh:

a rumour shall both come one year and after that in another year shall
come a rumour; in one year there was a rumour of the great preparation
Cyrus was making to invade Chaldea, and besiege Babylon; in another
year, that is, the following, as the Targum rightly renders it, there
was a second rumour of his coming; and who actually did come into
Assyria, but was stopped at the river Gyndes, not being able to pass it
for want of boats; and, being enraged at the loss of a favourite horse
in it, resolved upon the draining it; which he accomplished, by cutting
many sluices and rivulets; in doing which he spent the whole summer; and
the spring following came to Babylon, as Herodotus (l) relates; when
what is after predicted followed:

and violence in the land, ruler against ruler; the king of Babylon came
out with his forces to meet Cyrus, as the same historian says; when a
battle ensue, in which the former was beat, and obliged to retire into
the city, which then Cyrus besieged; and thus violence and devastations
were made in the land by the army of the Medes and Persians; and ruler
was against ruler; Cyrus against Belshazzar, and Belshazzar against him.
Some read it, "ruler upon ruler" (m); that is, one after another, in a
very short time; so Jarchi, Kimchi, and Abarbinel; thus two before
Belshazzar, then Darius, and, after Darius, Cyrus.

\(l\) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 189, 190. (m) "dominator super dominatorem",
Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">jer 51:47</span></span>

Therefore, behold, the days come that I will do judgment on the graven
images of Babylon,.... Because of the connection of these words, some
understand [Jer 51:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#046) of the report of
the deliverance of the Jews time after time; and yet nothing came of it,
which disheartened them; and they were used more cruelly, and with
greater violence, by the Chaldeans and their kings, one after another;
and "therefore" the following things are said; but the particle may be
rendered "moreover" (n), as some observe; or "surely", certainly, of a
truth, as in [Jer 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002); the time is
hastening on, the above things being done, when judgment shall be
executed, not only upon Bel the chief idol, [Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044); but upon all the idols of the
Chaldeans; which should be broke to pieces, and stripped of everything
about them that was valuable; the Medes and Persians having no regard to
images in their worship; though Dr. Prideaux (o) thinks that what is
here said, and in [Jer 51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044); were
fulfilled by Xerxes, when he destroyed and pillaged the Babylonian
temples:

and her whole land shall be confounded; the inhabitants of it, when they
see their images destroyed, in which they trusted for their safety:

and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her; in the midst of
Babylon; where the king and his army were shut up, and dared not move
out; and where they were slain when the army of Cyrus entered.

\(n\) "praeterea"; so Gataker. (o) Connexion, par. 1. B. 2. p. 101. B.
4. p. 242, 243.

[Jeremiah 51:48](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">jer 51:48</span></span>

Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein,

shall sing for Babylon,.... At the destruction of her, rejoicing at it;
not at the ruin of fellow creatures, simply considered; but relatively,
at the righteousness of God in it, and the glory of his justice, and the
deliverance of many by it from tyranny and bondage. This seems to be a
figurative expression often used, in which the heavens and the earth are
brought in as witnesses, approvers, and applauders, of what is done by
the Lord. Some indeed interpret it of the angels, the inhabitants of the
heavens, and of the Jews, dwellers on earth; and others of the church of
God, in heaven and in earth; which, of the two, seems best; the like
will be done at the fall of mystical Babylon, [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020);

for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, saith the Lord; the
Medes and Persians that should and did spoil and plunder Babylon; and
who came from countries that lay north to it.

[Jeremiah 51:49](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">jer 51:49</span></span>

As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel,.... In Jerusalem, when that
city was taken the Chaldeans, and destroyed:

so at Babylon shall all the slain of all the earth; or "land"; that is,
the land of Chaldea; the inhabitants of which fled to Babylon upon the
invasion of the Medes and Persians, both for their own safety, and the
defence of that city; and where, being slain, they fell; and this was a
just retaliation of them for what they had done to Israel. These words
may be considered, as they are by some, as the song of the inhabitants
of heaven and earth, observing and applauding the justice and equity of
divine Providence in this affair; see [Rev
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#007).

[Jeremiah 51:50](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">jer 51:50</span></span>

Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still,.... The Jews,
who had escaped the sword of the Chaldeans when Jerusalem was taken, and
were carried captive into Babylon, where they had remained to this time;
and had also escaped the sword of the Medes and Persians, when Babylon
was taken; these are bid to go away from Babylon, and go into their
land, and not stay in Babylon, or linger there, as Lot in Sodom; or stop
on the road, but make the best of their way to the land of Judea:

remember the Lord afar off; the worship of the Lord, as the Targum
interprets it; the worship of the Lord in the sanctuary at Jerusalem,
from which they were afar off at Babylon; and had been a long time, even
seventy years, deprived of it, as Kimchi explains it:

and let Jerusalem come into your mind; that once famous city, the
metropolis of the nation, that now lay in ruins; the temple that once
stood in it, and the service of God there; that upon the remembrance of,
and calling these to mind, they might be quickened and stirred up to
hasten thither, and rebuild the city and temple, and restore the worship
of God. It is not easy to say whose words these are, whether the words
of the prophet, or of the Lord by him; or of the inhabitants of the
heavens and earth, whose song may be here continued, and in it thus
address the Jews.

[Jeremiah 51:51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">jer 51:51</span></span>

We are confounded, because we have heard reproach,.... These are the
words of the Jews, either objecting to their return to their land; or
lamenting the desolation of it; and complaining of the reproach it lay
under, being destitute of inhabitants; the land in general lying waste
and uncultivated; the city of Jerusalem and temple in ruins; and the
worship of God ceased; and the enemy insulting and reproaching;
suggesting, that their God could not protect and save them; and, under
these discouragements, they could not bear the thoughts of returning to
it:

shame hath covered our faces; they knew not which way to look when they
heard the report of the state of their country, and the reproach of the
enemy, and through shame covered their faces:

for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the Lord's house; the
oracle, or the holy of holies; the temple, or the holy place, and the
porch or court; so Kimchi and Abarbinel; into which the Chaldeans,
strangers to God and the commonwealth of Israel, had entered, to the
profanation of them, and had destroyed them.

[Jeremiah 51:52](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">jer 51:52</span></span>

Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will do
judgment upon her graven images,.... Destroy their gods, who have
reproached the God of Israel, and profaned his sanctuaries; and for that
reason; See Gill on [Jer 51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047); it is
an answer to the objection and complaint of the Jews, and is designed
for their comfort and encouragement:

and through all her land the wounded shall groan; because of their
wounds and pain; and which their idols could not cure, ease, or prevent.

[Jeremiah 51:53](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">jer 51:53</span></span>

Though Babylon should mount up to heaven,.... Could the walls of it,
which were very high, two hundred cubits high, as Herodotus (p) says, be
carried up as high as heaven; or the towers of it, which were exceeding
high, ten foot higher than the walls, as Curtius (q) says, likewise be
raised to the same height:

and though she should fortify the height of her strength: make her walls
and towers as strong as they were high; unless this is to be understood
particularly of the temple of Bel, in which was a solid tower, in length
and thickness about six hundred and sixty feet; and upon this tower
another; and so on to the number of eight, towers; and in the last of
them a large temple, as the above historian (r) relates: but if these
towers could have been piled up in a greater number, even so as to reach
to heaven, it would have availed nothing against the God of heaven, to
secure from his vengeance. The Targum is,

"if Babylon should be built with buildings as high as heaven, and should
fortify the strong holds on high:''

yet from me shall spoilers come, saith the Lord; the Medes and Persians,
sent and commissioned by him, who would pull down and destroy her walls
and towers, be they ever so high and strong.

\(p\) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 178. (q) Hist. l. 5. c. 1. (r) Herodot. l. 1.
c. 181.

[Jeremiah 51:54](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">jer 51:54</span></span>

A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon,.... Of the inhabitants of it upon
its being taken; which is said to denote the certainty of it, which was
as sure as if the cry of the distressed was then heard:

and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans; that is, the
report of a great destruction there, was, or would be, carried from
thence, and spread all over the world.

[Jeremiah 51:55](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">jer 51:55</span></span>

Because the Lord hath spoiled Babylon,.... By means of the Merits and
Persians; these were his instruments he made use of; to these he gave
commission, power, and strength to spoil Babylon; and therefore it is
ascribed to him:

and destroyed out of her the great voice; the noise of people, which is
very great in populous cities, where people are passing to and fro in
great numbers upon business; which ceases when any calamity comes, as
pestilence, famine, or sword, which sweep away the inhabitants; this
last was the case of Babylon. The Targum is,

"and hath destroyed out of her many armies:''

or it may design the great voice of the roaring revelling company in it
at their feast time; which was the time of the destruction of he city,
as often observed: or the voice of triumphs for victories obtained,
which should be no more in it: or the voice of joy and gladness in
common, as will be also the case of mystical Babylon, [Rev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022); this "great voice" may not
unfitly be applied to the voice of antichrist, that mouth speaking
blasphemies, which are long shall be destroyed out of Babylon, [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005);

when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is
uttered; that is, when her enemies come up against her like the waves of
the sea: a loud shout will be made by them, which will be very terrible,
and silence the noise of mirth and jollity among the Babylonians; see
[Jer 51:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#042); though some understand
this of the change that should be made among the Chaldeans; that,
instead of the voice of joy and triumph, there would be the voice of
howling and lamentation; and even among their high and mighty ones, who
would be troubled and distressed, as great waters are, when moved by
tempests. The Targum is,

"and the armies of many people shall be gathered against them, and shall
lift up their voice with a tumult.''

[Jeremiah 51:56](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">jer 51:56</span></span>

Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon,.... That is,
Cyrus, with his army:

and her mighty men are taken; unawares, by surprise:

everyone of their bows is broken; they had no strength to withstand the
enemy, and were obliged to yield at once; lay down their arms, and
submit:

for the Lord God of recompences shall surely requite; that God to whom
vengeance belongs, and will recompense it; who is a God of justice and
equity, the Judge of all the earth; he will render tribulation to them
that trouble his; and requite his enemies and the enemies of his people,
in a righteous manner, for all the evil they have done, as literal, so
mystical Babylon; see [Rev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">jer 51:57</span></span>

And I will make drunk her princes,.... With the wine of divine wrath;
that is, slay them; though there may be an allusion to their being drunk
with wine at the feast Belshazzar made for his thousand lords; who are
the princes here intended, together with the king and his royal family,
[Dan 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001);

and her wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: the
counsellors of state, priests, magicians, and astrologers; officers in
the army, superior and inferior ones; and the soldiers and warriors,
whom Cyrus and his men slew; when they entered the city; compare with
this [Rev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018);

and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not awake; be all asleep in
their drunken fits, and be slain therein; and so never wake, or live
more. The Targum is,

"and they shall die the second death, and not come into the world to
come;''

See Gill on [Jer 51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039);

saith the king, whose name is the Lord of hosts; the King of kings and
Lord of lords; the Lord of armies in heaven and earth; and can do, and
does, what he pleases in both worlds.

[Jeremiah 51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">jer 51:58</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... Because what follows might seem
incredible ever to be effected; it is introduced with this preface,
expressed by him who is the God of truth, and the Lord God omnipotent:

the broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken; or rased up; the
foundations of them, and the ground on which they stood made naked and
bare, and open to public view; everyone of the walls, the inward and the
outward, as Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it. Curtius says (s) the
wall of Babylon was thirty two feet broad, and that carriages might pass
by each other without any danger. Herodotus (t) says it was fifty royal
cubits broad, which were three fingers larger than the common measure;
and both Strabo (u) and Diodorus Siculus (w) affirm, that two chariots
drawn with four horses abreast might meet each other, and pass easily;
and, according to Ctesias (x), the breadth of the wall was large enough
for six chariots: or the words may be read, "the walls of broad Babylon"
(y); for Babylon was very large in circumference; more like a country
than a city, as Aristotle (z) says. Historians differ much about the
compass of its wall; but all agree it was very large; the best account,
which is that of Curtius (a), makes it to be three hundred and fifty
eight furlongs (about forty five miles); with Ctesias it was three
hundred and sixty; and with Clitarchus three hundred and sixty five, as
they are both quoted by Diodorus Siculus (b); according to Strabo (c) it
was three hundred and eighty five; and according to Dion Cassius (d)
four hundred; by Philostratus (e) it is said to be four hundred and
eighty; as also by Herodotus; and by Julian (f) the emperor almost five
hundred. Pliny (g) reckons it sixty miles:

and her high gates shall be burnt with fire; there were a hundred of
them, all of brass, with their posts and hinges, as Herodotus (h)
affirms:

and the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they
shall be weary; which some understand of the builders of the walls,
gates, and city of Babylon, whose labour in the issue was in vain, since
the end of them was to be broken and burned; but rather it designs the
Chaldeans, who laboured in the fire to extinguish and save the city and
its gates, but to no purpose.

\(s\) Hist. l. 5. c. 1. (t) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 178. (u) Geograph l. 16.
p. 508. (w) Bibl. l. 2. p. 96. (x) Apud Diodor. ib. (y) "mari Babelis
lati", Schmidt. (z) Politic. l. 3. c. 3. (a) Hist. l. 5. c. 1. (b) Ut
supra. (Bibl. l. 2. p. 96.) (c) Ut supra. (Geograph l. 16. p. 508.) (d)
Apud Marsham Canon. p. 590. (e) Vita Apollon. l. 1. e. 18. (f) Orat. 3.
p. 236. (g) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 26. (h) L. 1. sive Clio, c. 179.

[Jeremiah 51:59](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">jer 51:59</span></span>

The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah,.... This word is
no other than the above prophecy concerning the destruction of Babylon,
contained in this and the preceding chapter; or rather the order the
prophet gave this prince to take a copy of it with him to Babylon, and
there read it, and their cast it into the river Euphrates, with a stone
bound it. Of this Seraiah we read nowhere else: he is further described
as

the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the
king of Judah into Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign; the Jews
say (i) that Zedekiah, in the fourth year of his reign, went to Babylon,
to reconcile himself to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and took Seraiah
with him, and returned and came to his kingdom in Jerusalem; but we have
no account in Scripture of any such journey he took. The Septuagint and
Arabic versions render it, "when he went from Zedekiah"; as this
particle is sometimes (k) elsewhere rendered, [Gen
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001); and so the Targum explains it,

"when he went on an embassy of Zedekiah;''

and Abarbinel, by the command of the king; it seems he was ambassador
from the king of Judah to the king of Babylon upon some business or
another; and Jeremiah took this opportunity of sending a copy of the
above prophecy by him, for the ends before mentioned: this was in the
fourth year of Zedekiah's reign, seven years before the destruction of
Jerusalem, and sixty years before the taking of Babylon; so long before
was it prophesied of. The Syriac version wrongly reads it "in the
eleventh year"; the year of Jerusalem's destruction; supposing that
Seraiah's going with Zedekiah to Babylon was his going with him into
captivity:

and this Seraiah was a quiet prince; one of a peaceable disposition,
that did not love war, or persecution of good men; and so a fit person
for Zedekiah to send upon an embassy of peace; and for Jeremiah to
employ in such service as he did; for, had he been a hot and haughty
prince, he would have despised his orders and commands. Some render it,
"prince of Menuchah" (l); taking it to be the proper name of a place of
which he was governor; thought to be the same with Manahath, [Ch1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#006). The Targum and Septuagint version
call him "the prince of gifts": one by whom such were introduced into
the king's presence that brought treasure, gifts, or presents to him, as
Jarchi interprets it; according to Kimchi, he was the king's familiar
favourite, with whom he used to converse and delight himself when he was
at rest and at leisure from business. Some take him to be the lord of
the bedchamber, or lord chamberlain; and others lord chief justice of
peace. The first sense seems most agreeable.

\(i\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 25. p. 72, 73. (k) Vid. L'Empereur, Not. in
Mosis Kimchii, p. 254, 255. & Noldii Concordant. Ebr, p. 114. No. 577.
(l) "princeps Menuchae", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 51:60](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">jer 51:60</span></span>

So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon
Babylon,.... The evil of punishment predicted and threatened: this he
delivered, not by word of mouth to Seraiah to relate when he came to
Babylon; but he wrote it in a book for him reread; and he wrote it
himself; Baruch, his amanuensis, not being now with him:

even all these words that are written against Babylon; in this and the
preceding chapter: this book written by Jeremiah was a copy of them.

[Jeremiah 51:61](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">jer 51:61</span></span>

And Jeremiah said to Seraiah,.... At the time he delivered the copy to
him:

when thou comest to Babylon; or art come to Babylon, to the city of
Babylon, and to the captive Jews there:

and shalt see them; the captives; or rather the great and populous city
of Babylon, its high walls, gates, and towers, whose destruction is
foretold in this book, and which might seem incredible. Abarbinel
interprets it of his looking into the book given him; which he thinks
was not to be opened and looked into till he came to Babylon:

and shalt read all these words; not before the king of Babylon and his
princes, and yet not privately to himself; but in some proper place, in
the presence of the captive Jews, or the chief of them, convened for
that purpose.

[Jeremiah 51:62](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">jer 51:62</span></span>

Then shall thou say, O Lord,.... Acknowledging this prophecy to be of
God; believing the accomplishment of it; and praying over it, and for
it, like a good man, as doubtless he was:

thou hast spoken against this place; the city of Babylon, where Seraiah
is now supposed to be:

to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but
that it shall be desolate for ever; this is the substance of the whole
prophecy, that the destruction of Babylon should be an utter and a
perpetual one; and which is expressed in the same words that are here
used, [Jer 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#003).

[Jeremiah 51:63](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">jer 51:63</span></span>

And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book,.... To
the captive Jews; and having also said the above words by way of prayer
and approbation:

that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of
Euphrates; a river by which Babylon was situated. The book, being read,
was to be rolled up again, and then a stone tied to it, and cast into
the middle of the river, where the waters were deepest, and from whence
it could not be taken up; and this was a sign confirming the above
prophecy; compare with this what was done by a mighty angel concerning
mystical Babylon, in which there is an allusion to this, [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021).

[Jeremiah 51:64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">jer 51:64</span></span>

And thou shall say,.... Not only use the above sign and ceremony, but
explain the meaning of it to those of his friends who might accompany
him; and what he said was in the name of the Lord, as the form and
manner in which the following words are delivered show:

thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will
bring upon her; as this book, with the stone bound to it, does, and
shall no more rise than that can; the evil of punishment brought on
Babylon will sink her to such a degree, that she will never be able to
bear up under it; but be so depressed by it as never to rise to her
former state and grandeur any more:

and they shall be weary; the inhabitants of it, and have no strength to
resist their enemies; or, rather, shall be so weak as not to be able to
stand up under the weight and pressure upon them, but shall sink under
it; or shall weary themselves in vain to preserve their city from ruin,
or restore it when ruined; see [Jer
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058);

thus far are the words of Jeremiah; that is, concerning the destruction
of Babylon, as is said concerning Moab, [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047); for what Maimonides (m) says,
that though Jeremiah lived some time after, yet ceased to prophesy; or
that, when he had finished his prophecy concerning Babylon, he
prophesied no more, is not true; for it is certain that many of his
prophecies were delivered out after the date of this, though this is
recorded last: or the sense may be, thus far are the prophetic words of
Jeremiah; and so the Targum,

"hitherto is the prophecy of the words of Jeremiah;''

what follows in the next chapter being historical; for there is no
necessity to conclude from hence that that was wrote by any other hand;
either, as many have thought, by Ezra; or by the men of the great
synagogue, as Abarbinel.

\(m\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 45. Vid. Kimchi in loc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 52](jer052)

</div>
