<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer031)  [Next](jer033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 32:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 32

This chapter contains an account of Jeremiah's imprisonment, and the
cause of it; of his buying a field of his uncle's son, and the design of
it; of his prayer to God, and of the answer returned to him. The time of
his imprisonment, the place where, and the reasons of it, are observed
in [Jer 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001); that his uncle's son
would come and offer the sale of a field to him was told him by the
Lord, which he did accordingly, [Jer
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006); of whom he bought the field,
paid the money, had the purchase confirmed in a legal way, before
witnesses, [Jer 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008); and the writings
of it he committed to Baruch, to put in an earthen vessel, where they
were to continue some time as a pledge of houses, fields, and vineyards,
being possessed again after the captivity, [Jer
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#013); then follows a prayer of his to
the Lord, in which he addresses him as the Maker of all things; as the
Lord God omnipotent; as a God of great grace and mercy, as well as
strict justice; as a God of wisdom, counsel, and might, and an
omniscient and righteous Being, [Jer
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016); and recounts the wonderful
things he had done for the people of Israel, [Jer
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020); and observes the ingratitude
and disobedience of that people, which were the cause of the present
siege of the city, which should surely be delivered into the hands of
the Chaldeans, [Jer 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023); to which
prayer an answer is returned, [Jer
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026); in which the Lord describes
himself as the God of all flesh, and as able to do what he pleases, [Jer
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#027); and confirms the delivery of
the city of Jerusalem unto the Chaldeans, [Jer
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028); and assigns the causes of it,
the backslidings, disobedience, and dreadful idolatry of the people,
[Jer 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030); and, notwithstanding,
promises a restoration of them to their own land again, [Jer
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036); when an opportunity is taken to
insert the covenant of grace, and the special articles and peculiar
promises of it, for the comfort of the spiritual Israel of God, whether
Jews or Gentiles, [Jer 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038); and the
chapter is concluded with a fresh assurance of the return of the
captivity, and of the punctual performance of the promise of it; when
fields should be bought in every part of the land, in like manner as
Jeremiah had bought his, [Jer 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041).

[Jeremiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 32:1</span></span>

The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord,.... The word of prophecy,
as the Targum, concerning Jeremiah's buying the field of his uncle's
son, [Jer 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006); and concerning the
delivery of the city of Jerusalem into the hands of the Chaldeans, [Jer
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026); and the return of the
captivity, [Jer 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036);

in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth
year of Nebuchadrezzar; the same with Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, a
year before the taking of the city by him; for that was in the eleventh
of Zedekiah, and the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar; see [Jer
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 32:2</span></span>

For then the king of Babylon's army besieged Jerusalem,.... And had done
so for some time; for the siege began in the ninth year of Zedekiah's
reign, on the tenth day of the tenth month, [Jer
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004);

and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which
was in the king of Judah's house; which showed great stupidity and
hardness of heart in the king, and his courtiers, and in the people, to
imprison a prophet of the Lord, when surrounded by an enemy's army, and
that according to the prediction of the prophet; by which it appeared
that he was a true prophet; and they might reasonably expect that the
rest of his predictions, which related to the taking of their city, and
carrying them captive, would be fulfilled. It is true, indeed, he was in
a better prison than before, more honourable, being within the limits of
the king's house; and, besides, was not closely confined, but allowed to
walk in the court of the prison; and so had a free air to breathe in,
and more company to converse with, and could exercise himself by walking
about; perhaps he was placed here to keep him from prophesying to the
people to their discouragement, and the more to awe him, as he was under
the eye of the king and his ministry. Of this prison and its court
mention is made in [Neh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025); it seems
to have been for state prisoners.

[Jeremiah 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 32:3</span></span>

For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up,.... In prison, at least in
the court of the prison; he had given orders for his imprisonment, which
were executed, and it was the same as if he had done it himself; the
reason of which was, as follows:

saying, wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, thus saith the Lord,

behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and
he shall take it? meaning the city of Jerusalem, now besieged by the
king of Babylon. This prophecy stands in [Jer
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001); the prophecies of this book not
being put together in proper order of time.

[Jeremiah 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 32:4</span></span>

And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the
Chaldeans,.... This is a continuation of the prophecy of Jeremiah,
repeated by the king to him, and which concerns himself more especially;
who, upon the taking of the city, would endeavour to make his escape, as
he did; but should not be able, [Jer
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008);

but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon; not
only into the hands of his army, and of his generals, but into his own
hand personally; since it follows:

and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his
eyes; converse together face to face, eye to eye; but no doubt with
different tones and looks; the king of Babylon upbraiding the king of
Judah with perjury and ingratitude, and looking upon him with
indignation and contempt; the other speaking faintly, and looking down
with grief, shame, and confusion; moreover, the eyes of the king of
Babylon beheld the eyes of Zedekiah, and ordered them to be put out, as
they were, [Kg2 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007).

[Jeremiah 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 32:5</span></span>

And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon,.... As he did in chains, from
Riblah, where he was brought unto him after he was taken, endeavouring
to make his escape, [Jer 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008);

and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the Lord; in taking him
away by death; for he continued in Babylon to the time of his death,
which was not violent, but natural; and, considering his circumstances,
his captivity, imprisonment, and loss of sight, might be reckoned a
visitation in mercy: though some understand this of God's visiting the
people at the return of them from their seventy years' captivity; if
Zedekiah lived till then, he must be a very old man; but of this we have
no account, nor is it probable:

though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper; though they
should sally out upon them, in order to beat them out of their trenches,
and drive them from the walls of the city, yet without success.

[Jeremiah 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 32:6</span></span>

And Jeremiah said, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Not that
he said this to Zedekiah; but the prophet, after the above preface,
returns to declare what the word of the Lord was, which came to him at
the time before mentioned.

[Jeremiah 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 32:7</span></span>

Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come unto
thee,.... Hilkiah, the father of Jeremiah, and this Shallum, were own
brothers; so that Jeremiah and Hanameel were brothers' sons, or own
cousins: this coming of Hanameel to Jeremiah being a contingent event,
with respect to second causes, and yet foretold as what would certainly
be, shows that such events are foreknown by the Lord, and are sure to
him:

saying, buy thee my field that is in Anathoth; the place from whence
Jeremiah came, and was but about two or three miles from Jerusalem, and
therefore must be now in the possession of the Chaldean army; wherefore
it may seem very strange in Hanameel to propose it to sale, and stranger
still in Jeremiah to buy it: though something of this kind was done at
Rome, while Hannibal was besieging it; the field where Hannibal pitched
his camp was offered to sale at Rome, and found a buyer (t); but then he
that bought it was in high spirits, and in a strong belief that the city
would not be taken, and that the enemy would be obliged to quit the
siege; but Jeremiah knew, and firmly believed, on the other hand, that
the city of Jerusalem, and all the country round it, would fall into the
hands of the king of Babylon. Moreover, Anathoth was a city of the
priests, and the fields adjoining to it belonged to them; as some of
them did to Abiathar the priest in his time, [Kg1
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#026); and such fields as belonged to
the priests and Levites were not to be sold, according to the law in
[Lev 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034); to which it is answered,
that this was not arable land, which the Levites might not possess; but
some meadow, orchard, or garden, in the suburbs of the city, which
though it might not be sold to strangers, yet might be sold among
themselves; though it is more probable that this was a field that came
fro, in some of his ancestors by his mother's or grandmother's side, and
so might be disposed of; as it seems certain to be lawfully done, not
only as it was the will of God, who could indeed dispense with his own
law, was that in the way, but since it was a matter of right, and
incumbent on him, as follows:

for the right of redemption is thine to buy it; that is, had it been
sold to another, it would have lain upon him to have redeemed it, as
being next of kin, that so it might not pass to another tribe and
family.

\(t\) Florus, l. 2. c. 6.

[Jeremiah 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 32:8</span></span>

So Hanameel mine uncle's son came unto me,.... Freely and voluntarily,
of his own accord; though it was determined he should, as it was
predicted he would; for God's decrees do not infringe the liberty of the
will: this man came from Anathoth, very probably, to Jerusalem, to the
place where the prophet was:

in the court of the prison, according to the word of the Lord; which had
been made known before to Jeremiah:

and said unto me, buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth,

which is in the country of Benjamin; it belonged to that tribe:

for the right of inheritance is thine; the reversion of this field; it
would come to him after the death of his cousin, as being next heir:

and the redemption is thine; buy it for thyself; since, if it was sold
to another, he, according to law, was obliged to redeem it; and
therefore it was much better to buy it at once for himself:

then I knew that this was the word of the Lord; that it was the word of
the Lord which came to him before, and that it was the will of the Lord
that he should make this purchase; since there was such an exact
agreement between the prophecy and the event.

[Jeremiah 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 32:9</span></span>

And I bought the field of Hanameel mine uncle's son; that was in
Anathoth,.... The prophet agreed with his cousin to take his field of
him, at a certain price hereafter mentioned; which may seem strange in
one that was a poor prophet, now a prisoner, and the land just going to
be subject to the Chaldeans: but the design of this was to show that
there would be a return from captivity, when houses and fields should be
bought and sold again, of which this was a pledge:

and weighed him the money; agreed upon, which was reckoned not by tale,
but by weight:

even seventeen shekels of silver; which, reckoning a shekel at half a
crown, were no more than two pounds, two shillings, and sixpence; a
small sum of money to make a purchase of a field with; though this may
be accounted for by the scarcity of money, the field in the hand of the
enemy, there being only his kinsman's life in it, the prophet bought the
reversion, being his of right; and, besides, it might be only an orchard
or garden that is so called. In the Hebrew text it is, "seven shekels
and ten pieces of silver": and Kimchi and Ben Melech say, that by
"shekels" are meant minas or pounds; and by "pieces of silver", selahs
or shekels: and so the Targum renders it,

"seven minas, and ten shekels of silver.''

Now a minah or maneh, according to [Eze
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012); was equal to sixty shekels, and
so of the value of seven pounds, ten shillings; seven of these made
fifty two pounds, ten shillings; and the other ten shekels being one
pound, five shillings, the whole amounted to fifty three pounds, fifteen
shillings, which would purchase a considerable field.

[Jeremiah 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 32:10</span></span>

And I subscribed the evidence,.... Or, "wrote in a book" (u); the
instrument or bill of sale, the deed of purchase; which described the
field sold, and expressed the condition on which the purchase was made;
and by subscribing it he agreed to it, and laid himself under obligation
to perform it:

and sealed it; for the further confirmation of it:

and took witnesses; to be present at the payment of the money, and to
sign the deed likewise:

and weighed him the money in the balances; this he did a second time; he
weighed it first before Hanameel himself, and then before the witnesses;
everything was done fairly, and with great exactness.

\(u\) "et scripsi in libro", V. L. Munster, Pagninus, Montanus; "in
libello", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 32:11</span></span>

So I took the evidence of the purchase,.... The deed of purchase, the
book or bill of sale, the instrument of the bargain, as before
mentioned:

both that which is sealed, according to the law and custom; which was
both sealed by the buyer and seller, and was sealed up, and not to be
looked into by everyone, only when there might be a necessity; this was
the original copy:

and that which was open; the counter part or copy of the former, which
though signed and sealed as the other, yet not sealed up, but was open
and exposed to view; either for the relations to see what was done, as
some; or for the judges, as others, to ratify and make authentic: or, as
is most probable, this copy was laid up in some public register, to have
recourse unto upon any occasion; however it was, it was according to the
laws and customs of those times, which Jeremiah carefully attended to:
or, as others, it lay open for the witnesses to sign; so there are three
distinct things; first the written contract; then that as signed and
sealed by buyer and seller, according to law; and then as signed, but
not sealed, by the witnesses.

[Jeremiah 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 32:12</span></span>

And I gave the evidence of the purchase,.... Both that which was sealed
and that which was open; both the original and the copy; or the whole,
as signed, sealed, and witnessed:

unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah; this Baruch, as
appears from other places in this book, was one that attended on
Jeremiah, was his scribe or amanuensis, and did business for him of one
kind or another, and is described here by his pedigree; and it was the
more necessary now to make use of him in this affair, because the
prophet was confined, and could not go out of the court of the prison;
to him he gave the above deed:

in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle's son; of whom the purchase was
made: the word "son" is not in the text, which has led some to think
that both were present at this bargain, both the uncle and the uncle's
son; or that Hanameel was both uncle and uncle's son to Jeremiah, as
Jarchi; but there is no need to suppose that; the word "son" may easily
be supplied from what is before said:

and in the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the
purchase; the same that the prophet subscribed; so that the book the
witnesses subscribed was not a separate book, as some have thought; for
there was but one book or deed in all, besides the copy that was taken
of it:

before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison; where Jeremiah
was; and who probably came to visit him, and to hear the word of the
Lord from his mouth; unless we can suppose that these were fellow
prisoners, or were set as spies upon him, to watch him what he said and
did.

[Jeremiah 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 32:13</span></span>

And I charged Baruch before them,.... Before his kinsman, the witnesses
of the deed, and the Jews that were in the court:

saying, as follows:

[Jeremiah 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 32:14</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel,.... The order to do the
following is ushered in in this solemn manner, partly that Baruch might
more strictly observe it, and act according to it; and partly that the
persons before whom it was given might take the greater notice of it,
and believe that there was something intended by it of moment and
importance:

take these evidences; or "books" (x); the deeds of purchase:

this evidence of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence
which is open; both the original and the copy:

and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days; it
seems, though it is not said, that this earthen vessel, with these deeds
in it, were to be put under ground, and very probably in some part of
the field that was bought: had these writings been laid up in a chest or
box, they might have been stolen and destroyed; and had they been laid
in the earth by themselves, they would have rotted and consumed; but
being put into a dry earthen vessel, they might be preserved from the
injury of the air and the moistness of the earth; and so might continue
many days, even many years, to the end of the captivity, as it was
designed they should; when Jeremiah's heirs, having some him of them
where they were deposited, might take them up and claim the estate;
though something more useful and instructive than this was designed by
it, as appears by the following words:

\(x\) "libellos hos", Cocceius, Schmidt; "literas has", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 32:15</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,.... Who is the Lord
God Almighty, and can do what he pleases; and is the covenant God of his
people, and therefore will do them good by all his providences in the
issue of things:

houses, and fields, and vineyards, shall be possessed in this land; or
"bought" (y) in it; of which the prophet's buying this field was a
pledge and earnest; signifying, that though the city now besieged should
be taken, and the people carried captive, yet they should return to
their own land, and purchase and enjoy houses, fields, and vineyards
again, as at the present time.

\(y\) "ementur", Cocceius, Piscator; "vedentur", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 32:16</span></span>

Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the
son of Neriah,.... When he had finished his worldly business, and which
yet was by a divine order, and to answer a divine purpose, then he
betook himself to prayer; and it is proper we should be quite free from
worldly cares and concerns when we enter upon religious duties,
particularly prayer to God; when the soul ought to be separated from the
world and the things of it, and wholly devoted to God:

I prayed unto the Lord; either for further information in this matter,
of the use and design of buying the field; and how this part of the
prophecy, signified by it, concerning the Jews buying and possessing
houses and fields, can be made to agree with the other prophecy, that
the city should be delivered into the hands of the Chaldeans; or, at
least, that he might be able to answer the cavils and objections made by
the Jews to it: that he was in some puzzle, perplexity, and distress,
appears by his prayer, which begins,

saying, as follows:

[Jeremiah 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 32:17</span></span>

Ah Lord God!.... Which the Vulgate Latin version repeats three times,
"Ah, ah, ah", as being greatly distressed with the trouble that was
coming upon his people; and, it may be, not without some doubts and
temptations about their deliverance; or, at least, was pressed in his
mind with the difficulties and objections started by the Jews that were
with him in the court:

behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and
stretched out arm; with great propriety is the making of the heaven and
the earth ascribed to the mighty power of God; for nothing short of
almighty power could have produced such a stupendous work as the
heavens, with all the host of them, sun, moon, and stars, the
terraqueous globe, the earth and sea, with all that in them are; and all
this produced out of nothing, by the sole command and word of God: and
with great pertinency does the prophet begin his prayer with such a
description of God; both to encourage and strengthen his faith in him
touching the fulfilment of the above prophecy, and to stop the mouths of
the Jews, who objected the impossibility of it: wherefore it follows,

and there is nothing too hard for thee; or "hidden from thee" (z); so
the Targum; which his wisdom and knowledge did not reach, or his power
could not effect: or which is "too wonderful for thee" (a); there is
nothing that has so much of the wonderful in it, as to be above the
compass of his understanding, and out of the reach of his power, as such
things be, which are beyond the power and skill of men; but there is no
such thing with God, whose understanding is unsearchable, and his power
irresistible; with him nothing is impossible; and who can think there is
that observes that the heaven and earth are made by him?

\(z\) "non est absconditum a te quicquam", Pagninus; "non potest
occultari tibi ulla res", Junius & Tremellius. (a) "Non mirabile est
prae te ullun verbum", Schmidt; "non est ulla res abscondita a te, sive
mirabile", Calvin; "non mirificabitur a te ullum verbum", Montanus.

[Jeremiah 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 32:18</span></span>

Thou showest lovingkindness unto thousands,.... Not to thousands of
persons only, but to a thousand generations, even such that love, fear,
and serve him; see [Exo 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006); this is
very properly added, for the further strengthening of faith; for though
the omnipotence of God assures us that there is nothing but what he can
do, yet it gives us no certain encouragement he will do this, or that,
or the other, in a favourable and gracious manner; but this his loving
kindness, experienced by a multitude of persons in all ages, gives
reason to hope for:

and recompensest the iniquities of the fathers into the bosom of their
children after them; it is added in the decalogue, from whence these
words are taken, "of them that hate me", [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); and here the Targum adds,

"when they go on to sin after them;''

when they imitate their fathers in their wickedness, and commit the same
sins they have done, and continue in them; wherefore, having tilled up
the measure of their fathers' sins, they receive a just and full
recompence of them into their bosom; which denotes both the certainty of
it and the fulness of it: the prophet formed in his mind just notions
and ideas of the divine Being, as being not only gracious and merciful,
but holy, just, and righteous; and it may be he strikes at the Jews, who
might complain of God, as they sometimes did, for being punished for
their fathers' sins, as if they themselves were innocent and guiltless:

the Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of hosts is his name: "great" in all
the perfections of his nature, and greatly to be praised, loved, and
feared; "mighty" to do whatsoever he pleases; and who, agreeably to his
name, has all the hosts and armies of heaven and earth at his command;
and what is it that he cannot do?

[Jeremiah 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 32:19</span></span>

Great in counsel, and mighty in word,.... Counsel belongs to him, and he
does all things after the counsel of his will, all things in nature,
providence, and grace; and such a display of his wisdom is there in all,
that show him to be excellent in counsel; to excel all others; not only
to be great, but to be the greatest in counsel; and who regularly and
perfectly performs all that he has wisely contrived; his wisdom and his
power are equal to each other; he forms the scheme of all that he does
with the greatest wisdom, and accomplishes by his power all that he has
purposed in his eternal mind; see [Isa
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029);

for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men; all their
thoughts, schemes, devices, and purposes; all their words and actions,
every step they take, whether good or bad, they are all before ham, and
manifest to him; he is God omniscient as well as God omnipotent; and he
does not look upon men, and their ways and works, as an idle spectator
or indifferent person, as unconcerned at what they do, letting them pass
without calling them to an account for them, or without passing any
judgment on them, or sentence concerning them; no, he is the Judge of
all the earth, and he sits in the heavens and observes what is done on
earth:

to give everyone according to his ways, and according to the fruit of
his doings: good things to good men for Christ's sake; and evil things
to evil men, according to the just demerit of their sins and
transgressions.

[Jeremiah 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 32:20</span></span>

Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this
day,.... The prophet here descends to particular instances of the power,
wisdom, and goodness of God; and begins with the miracles wrought in
Egypt, the plagues inflicted on the Egyptians for refusing to let Israel
go; these were set among them, they were true and real things, and
obvious to everyone's view; there was no deception in them, they were
plain to the senses of men; and the remembrance of them continued among
the Egyptians to the times of the prophet; the tradition of what was
done was handed down among them to that age: for that any marks of these
things remained is not to be supposed; the tracks of Pharaoh's chariot
wheels to be still seen in the Red sea must be rejected as fabulous,
though Orosius relates it:

and in Israel, and amongst other men: that is, signs and wonders were
set among the Israelites, or wrought for them; such as bringing them out
of Egypt; leading them through the Red sea as on dry land; feeding them
in the wilderness with manna and quails; subduing their enemies, and
settling them in the land of Canaan; and in other nations very wonderful
things have been done in one age or another: or else the meaning is,
that the miracles done in Egypt were not only remembered there to this
time, but also by the Israelites, and by other men, to whom the
knowledge of these things came; on account of which God was more or less
everywhere glorified, as follows:

and hast made thee a name as at this day; that is, got praise, honour,
and glory, in Egypt, in Israel, and in other nations.

[Jeremiah 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 32:21</span></span>

And hast brought forth thy people Israel of the land of Egypt,.... As he
promised Abraham, some hundreds of years before, that they should come
out from thence; and where they had been as bondsmen, though they were
the Lord's peculiar people, whom he had chose for himself above all
people, and therefore he brought them out of their state of bondage; and
this was his own doing, they could not deliver themselves; the enemy
would not let them go till he was obliged to it by the superior power of
God:

with signs and with wonders; which he wrought for them at the time of
their deliverance, slaying the firstborn; and at the Red sea, and in the
wilderness, after he brought them out of Egypt, and before their
settlement in the laud of Canaan; and so these may be considered as
distinct from the signs and wonders in the land of Egypt before
mentioned:

and with a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm; with great power,
and so delivered the Israelites from them that were stronger than they;
with a mighty hand, that protected his people; and with a long arm, that
reached their enemies, and destroyed them:

and with great terror; with great reverence in the Israelites, who saw
the power and majesty of God; and with great terror to Pharaoh and his
host, when they saw the waters return and overwhelm them; and to all the
nations round about, when they heard of it; see [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034). The Targum is,

"with great vision;''

so a spectacle, as the Syriac version; openly, before the eyes of all.

[Jeremiah 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 32:22</span></span>

And hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their fathers
to give them,.... Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; so that God was faithful to
his word, kept his covenant and oath; and the faithfulness of God is
observed and acknowledged by the prophet, along with other perfections
of God before taken notice of. The land of Canaan was a land of promise,
confirmed by an oath, and was the pure gift of God to the Israelites,
and not any merit of theirs; it was given them by him who had a right to
dispose of it, and could make them a good title to it, and which they
had; though before in the possession of others, who for their wickedness
were driven out:

a land flowing with milk and honey: abounding with plenty of all good
things, for the sustenance and comfort of human life; a very frequent
description of the land of Canaan, and is expressive of the great
kindness and goodness of God to this people.

[Jeremiah 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 32:23</span></span>

And they came in and possessed it,.... After forty years travel in the
wilderness; they entered into it with Joshua at the head of them, and
the Lord with them; giving victory over the Canaanites, who were soon
subdued; and the Israelites with little trouble settled in their land,
which was divided to them by lot, and possessed as their inheritance:

but they obeyed not thy voice; though they promised at Sinai they would,
and though they were so much obliged by the goodness of God to them;
this shows great ingratitude in them:

neither walked in thy law; moral, ceremonial, and judicial, given at
Harsh as the rule of their obedience; but they walked not according to
it:

they have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do; they
were not only deficient in some things, but in everything; they not only
broke some of the laws of God, but all of them; there was not one law,
one command, observed by them as it ought to have been; and yet these
people were always prone to establish their own righteousness, and seek
for justification by it:

therefore thou hast caused all this evil to come upon them; the Chaldean
army, now besieging them; and the famine and pestilence among them;
which, the prophet serves, were but the righteous judgments of God upon
them for their sins.

[Jeremiah 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 32:24</span></span>

Behold, the mounts, they are come unto the city, to take it,.... These
were ramparts or batteries, that were erected against the city, the more
easily to annoy it: some take them to be engines from which they cast
out stones; and others suppose them to be battering rams, used to break
down the walls of the city; be they what they will, they were now
brought near the city to make way for the Chaldeans to enter into it,
and take it:

and the city is given into the hands of the Chaldeans that fight against
it; not only it the purpose of God that if should be, but it was plain
case that he had withdrawn his protection from it, and that the city was
indefensible; and that, humanly speaking, it was impossible it should
hold out long, for the reasons following:

because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence: the
sword of the Chaldeans, without, destroyed those that sallied out upon
them, or endeavoured to make their escape; and the famine and
pestilence, within, made such ravages, and so much weakened them, that
they would never be able to stand it out against the enemy long, but
must surrender:

and what thou hast spoken is come to pass; what was foretold by the
prophets, and by himself, was now fulfilling:

and, behold, thou seest it; and therefore he had no need to observe it
to him, or dwell any longer on this subject; only he hints what follows,
as having some difficulty in it on his own account.

[Jeremiah 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 32:25</span></span>

And thou hast said to me, O Lord God,.... Or, "O Lord God, yet thou hast
said to me" (b); notwithstanding this is the case, the country all
around is in the hand of the enemy, and the city is as good as delivered
up to them, yet thou hast given me such orders, as follows:

buy thee a field for money, and take witnesses; for though these words
were not expressly said to him by the Lord; yet inasmuch as he told him
that his uncle's son would come to him, and propose the selling of his
field to him; and accordingly did come, agreeably to the word of the
Lord; Jeremiah understood it as the will of the Lord, that he should buy
it before witnesses; which he did, as before related:

for the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans; or rather, "though
the city is given" (c), &c. yet thou hast said so: now by this the
prophet suggests, that though he had obeyed the divine order, as he
ought to have done, yet there was some difficulty upon his mind; or
there were some objections Started, by the Jews that were with him, how
these things could be reconciled; that he should be ordered to buy a
field at such a time as this, and thereby signify that fields and
vineyards should be bought and possessed in the land, and yet the city
just going to be surrendered into the hands of the Chaldeans.

\(b\) "tu vero nihilominus dicis mihi", Piscator; "tu tamen dixisti ad
me, Domime Jehovah", Schmidt. (c) "cum tamen urbs tradenda sit",
Schmidt; "quum tamen futurum sit", Piscator; "quum civitas ipsa
traditur", Junius & Tremellius; "cum tamen urbs tradita sit", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 32:26</span></span>

Then came the word of the Lord unto Jeremiah,.... This is an answer to
the prophet's prayer, and particularly to the latter part of it; showing
the consistency of the destruction of the city with his purchase of a
field, and with God's promise of fields and vineyards being purchased
and possessed again; and how each of these would be brought about:

saying; as follows:

[Jeremiah 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 32:27</span></span>

Behold, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh,.... Jehovah, the
self-existent Being, that gives being to all creatures; and is
particularly the God of all men, the Maker and Preserver of them, and
that provides for them; who are called "flesh", to denote their weakness
and corruption, how unworthy of the divine favour, and how unable to
resist his will, or hinder the execution of his purposes: and which is
introduced with a "behold", to excite attention, to take notice of what
was said; to encourage faith, and remove doubts and difficulties; for if
God is Jehovah, the Being of beings; if he is the God and Governor of
the world, and all men in it, what is it he cannot do? as follows:

is there anything too hard for me? suggesting, that though the city of
Jerusalem should be destroyed, and the inhabitants carried captive, yet
he could return them again to their own laud; where they should purchase
fields and vineyards, and possess them as heretofore: or, "is there
anything hidden from me?" (d) so the Targum and Syriac version; can
anything unforeseen arise to hinder the fulfilment of promises and
prophecies? nothing can; since all things are in one view before the
Lord continually; or, "is there anything too wonderful for me?" (e) that
which is too wonderful for men, beyond their comprehension, and so their
faith; yet it is not so with God.

\(d\) "celabitur, vel occultabitur", Vatablus; "an mihi occultari possit
ultra res", Junius & Tremellius. (e) "Num prae me mirabile erit ullum
verbum", Schmidt; "nunquid a me mirificabitur omne verbum", Montanus.

[Jeremiah 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 32:28</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord, behold, I will give this city into the
hand of the Chaldeans,.... As he had foretold by the prophet, and was
just now going to be fulfilled. Here the Lord repeats and confirms the
first of the two things which seemed contradictory; the destruction of
the city by the Chaldeans, who were now besieging it, and into whose
hands it would certainly come:

and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; who was now before
it with his army:

and he shall take it; and become master of it: or, "I will give it to
him, that he may take it" (f); which he could not do, notwithstanding
his powerful army, had not the Lord delivered it into his hands.

\(f\) "ut capiat eam", Junius & Tremellius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 32:29</span></span>

And the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come,.... Or
rather "shall enter", as Aquila renders it; for they were come to it
already, and were fighting against it, battering the walls, and throwing
in their arrows, and putting to the sword such as came out, or were
within their reach:

and set fire on this city; as they did, [Jer
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#008);

and burn it, with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense
unto Baal; or "especially the houses" (g), or "even the houses"; the
houses particularly mentioned in the history of the destruction as
burnt; and which, very probably, are here intended; besides the Lord's
house, and all the houses in Jerusalem, were the king's house, and the
houses of the great men or princes; and which, Kimchi thinks, were
higher than others; on which therefore they burnt incense to Baal;
wherefore it was a just retaliation, upon them that they should be burnt
with fire:

and poured out drink offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger;
to other gods besides the true God; to strange gods, and to other gods
besides Baal; which was done as if they really designed to provoke the
Lord; as if they had it in view to affront him; and, if they had, they
could not have taken a more effectual method; though this is to be
understood, not intentionally, but eventually; not what was their
design, though it looked like it, but what was the effect of their
idolatry.

\(g\) "imprimis domos", Schmidt; "nempe domos", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 32:30</span></span>

For the children of Israel and the children of Judah,.... The former are
mentioned, as well as the latter, though they had been carried captive
some years ago, to justify the dealings of God with them; and besides,
there were some of the ten tribes that remained, and were mingled with
the tribes of Judah and Benjamin: of all which it is said, that they

have only done evil before me from their youth; from their infancy,
being conceived in sin, and shapen in iniquity; and so being destitute
of the grace of God, did nothing else but sin all their days, as is said
of the men of the old world, [Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005).
Some understand this, from the time of their becoming a people, a body
politic; or from the time of their coming out of Egypt, and being in the
wilderness, when their idolatry began, they brought out of Egypt; or
from the time of the judges:

for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work
of their hands, saith the Lord; with their idols, made by their own
hands; these they worshipped instead of their Creator and Benefactor;
which must be very provoking indeed!

[Jeremiah 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 32:31</span></span>

For this city hath been tame as a provocation of mine anger and of my
fury,.... Or, "upon mine anger, and upon my fury this city was to me"
(h); that is, it was upon his heart, and in his mind and purpose, being
provoked to anger and wrath by their sins, to have destroyed it long
ago, though he had deferred it to this time; the inhabitants of this
city had been always a provoking people to him; and he had thought to
have poured out his wrath and fury upon them:

from the day they built it, even unto this day: when built and inhabited
by the idolatrous Canaanites; possessed by the Jebusites; rebuilt by
David; beautified with the temple and other stately buildings by
Solomon, who was drawn it, to idolatry by his wives. It is a tradition
of the Jews, mentioned both by Jarchi and Kimchi, that the same day that
the foundation of the temple was laid, Solomon married Pharaoh's
daughter; and which was the foundation of his idolatry; and which was
more or less practised in every reign afterwards, to this time; and
which so provoked the Lord, that he took up this resolution early,
though he did not put it in execution; expressed as follows:

that I should remove it from before my face; as a man does that which is
nauseous and abominable to him; meaning the removing the inhabitants of
it into other lands, or causing them to go into captivity; so the
Targum.

\(h\) "super naso meo, et super ira mea fuit mihi civitas haec",
Montanus; "in furore meo, et in ira mea", Pagninus, Vatablus.

[Jeremiah 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 32:32</span></span>

Because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of
Judah,.... His anger and fury were because of their sins, and so his
carrying them captive:

which they have done to provoke me to anger; which was done, as if they
had done it on purpose to provoke him; and which was done, not by a few,
but by them all; not by the lower people only, but by men of every rank
and order; as follows:

they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets;
that is, their false prophets, as the Targum; yea, all the inhabitants
of the land, both in city and country:

and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: the "metropolis"
of the nation; the seat of the kings of Judah; and where the temple was,
the priests ministered, and the prophets taught, and the people came up
to worship.

[Jeremiah 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 32:33</span></span>

And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face,.... When he
reproved them for their sins; called them to repentance; instructed them
in their duty; and warned them of the dangers they exposed themselves
to; instead of turning the face to him, as scholars to their masters,
and as subjects to their prince, to listen to what was said to them;
they turned their backs or necks, the hinder part of them; expressive of
contempt, and showing great rudeness and irreverence:

though I taught them, rising up early, and teaching them; by his
prophets, as the Targum; whom he sent to them early in the morning; or
in the early time of their life; or when they first began to practise
idolatry; so careful was the Lord of them; so diligent to instruct them,
and prevent their ruin:

yet have not hearkened, to receive instruction; or "correction" (i); so
as to repent of their sins, reform and amend; see [Jer
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013).

\(i\) "disciplinam", Cocceius; i.e. "correctionem", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 32:34</span></span>

But they set their abominations,.... Their idols, which were abominable
to the Lord, and ought to have been so to them: these they placed

in the house (which is called by my name), to defile it; in the temple;
as by Ahaz, Manasseh, and others: see [Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030).

[Jeremiah 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 32:35</span></span>

And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the
son of Hinnom,.... Or "the high places of that Baal (k), which is in the
valley of the son of Hinnom"; to distinguish him from other Baalim; and
who seems to be the same with Molech after mentioned; and the
signification of their names agree; the one is lord or master; the other
king:

to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire unto
Molech: the phrase, "through the fire", is not in the text; but is well
enough supplied from other places, where it is. Some think that their
infants were not burnt to death with fire, but only were held over the
flame by way of lustration; or were made to pass between two fires, and
so were purified and dedicated to the idol:

which I commanded them not, neither came it into my mind that they
should do this abomination; See Gill on [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031);

to cause Judah to sin; which Abarbinel understands of the children of
Israel, who first began this practice, and seduced and drew the children
of Judah into it; but rather it seems to intend the kings, princes,
priests, prophets, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, who, by their example,
led the people of the Lord into the same practice.

\(k\) "quae in valle", Montanus; "excelsa Baal qui erat in valle",
Calvin.

[Jeremiah 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 32:36</span></span>

And now therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel,

concerning this city,.... Here begins the confirmation of the other part
of the prophecy concerning the return of the Jews to their city and
country, when they should again buy and possess fields and vineyards;
which was thought impossible, supposing the destruction of the city; or
however not easily reconcilable with it; but this is as strongly
affirmed as the former; for though they had sinned so heinously, and had
provoked the wrath of God to such a degree, that the destruction of
their city was inevitable, of which they were now sensible themselves;
"yet now, notwithstanding" (l), for so it is ushered in; and thus the
words may be rendered, "thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel"; who is
Jehovah, with whom nothing is impossible; and continues the covenant God
of his own people, his spiritual Israel; for whose sake he does great
and wonderful things; he says, "concerning this city", the city of
Jerusalem, now besieged by the Chaldeans:

whereof ye say, it shall be delivered into the hand of the king of
Babylon, by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; for, by
these things, by the consumption that was made by them, they saw their
case was desperate; and that there was no avoiding falling into the
hands of the Chaldeans; wherefore, for the comfort of the Lord's own
people among them, the following things are said; most of which respect
the Gospel dispensation, either the beginning or latter end of it.

\(l\) "attamen num ideo", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 32:37</span></span>

Behold, I will gather them out of all countries,.... At the end of the
seventy years' captivity; and which will have a greater accomplishment
in the latter day, when the Jews shall be converted, and gathered from
their present dispersion all over the earth:

whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great
wrath: or "whither I shall drive them", or "shall have driven them" (m);
for as yet they were not thus driven and dispersed. A heap of words is
made use of to express the greatness of the Lord's indignation at them
for their sins, the cause of their expulsion out of the land:

and I will bring them again unto this place; the city of Jerusalem; as
they were at the end of the seventy years' captivity; and when the
promise was fulfilled, that they should purchase and possess fields and
vineyards; and as they will likewise at the time of their conversion in
the latter day:

and I will cause them to dwell safely; which yet they did not for any
continuance after their return from Babylon; being, as Jerom observes,
often molested by the Persians, Macedonians, and Egyptians; and at last
destroyed by the Romans: their troubles in the times of the Maccabees
are very notorious; so that this refers either to the first times of the
Gospel, and to the Jews that then believed in Christ; or rather to times
yet to come, and which are prophesied of at [Jer
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037).

\(m\) "quo dispulero eos", Schmidt; "quo depulero ipsos", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 32:38</span></span>

And they shall be my people, and I will be their God. A comprehensive
summary of the covenant of grace, which shall be made known to the Jews
at the time of their conversion, and the blessings of it applied to
them, and bestowed on them; though now a "loammi", [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009), is written upon them; see [Jer
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021).

[Jeremiah 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 32:39</span></span>

And I will give them one heart and one way,.... "One" and the same
heart; the same heart to one as to another; gracious souls, truly
converted persons, be they Jews or Gentiles, have the same experience;
they have all, more or less, a sight and sense of sin, and the evil of
it; are brought off of their own righteousness; are led to Christ alone
for life and salvation; are made partakers of precious promises; and all
have their temptations, afflictions, and trials, and can sympathize with
one another: and they have the same things put into their hearts; the
laws of God are written there; the doctrines of the Gospel have a place
there; Christ is formed in them; the graces of the Spirit are implanted,
faith, hope, love, fear, humility, and other graces. Their heart, given
them at conversion, is a sincere and upright heart, not a double one;
they become Israelites indeed; their faith is unfeigned; their hope is
devoid of hypocrisy; their love is without dissimulation; their
repentance is genuine; and they serve God uprightly with true hearts. It
is also single and alone for God; he has the whole of it; their
understandings are enlightened with the knowledge of him; their
affections and desires are towards him: their wills are subject to him;
their eye is single to his glory; their hearts are not divided between
him and another object of worship; and they are also one towards
another, as the first Christians were of one heart and of one soul, [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032); and such a heart is a new heart,
and the gift of God: "one way" is also promised: one way of salvation,
which is Christ; the one and only way of access to God; of acceptance
with him; of justification before him; and of forgiveness of sin; the
only true way into a Gospel church state, and to eternal glory and
happiness; and which is the more excellent way; the good old way; the
new and living one: one way of worship may also be intended; one Lord is
to be obeyed and worshipped; one doctrine and scheme of faith to be
received; one baptism to be administered, in one and the same way, to
one and the same subjects, and in one and the same name; one true
spiritual manner of worship, all shall come into in the latter day; and
there will be no more parties among those that are called Christians;
the Jews, when converted, will have no divisions nor different
denominations among them; see [Eph
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004), [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009);

that they may fear me for ever; both internally and externally; the one
heart will be given them to fear and reverence him inwardly; and the one
way of worship to fear or serve him outwardly, and in which they shall
always continue; there will be no apostasy from the true grace of God,
and no defection from his worship to superstition and idolatry:

for the good of them, and of their children after them; unity of heart;
sincerity and uprightness of soul; a walking in the way of the Lord;
having his fear before their eyes, and on their hearts, will issue in
their spiritual good here, and in their eternal happiness hereafter; and
even their posterity will reap some advantage by their good instructions
and example.

[Jeremiah 32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jer 32:40</span></span>

And I will make an everlasting covenant with them,.... Which is made
known and manifest at conversion; when the grace of it is applied; the
blessings of it bestowed; and the promises of it made good; and
therefore said to be made; for otherwise the covenant of grace here
spoken of was made from all eternity with Christ, and his people in him;
as appears from his being set up as the Mediator so early, and from the
blessings and promises of it being of such a date. It is founded on the
everlasting love of God, and is according to his eternal purpose; and is
no other than an eternal transaction between the Father and the Son
concerning the salvation of his elect; and which will last for ever, and
never be antiquated, as the covenant under the former dispensation was;
and which shows that this respects Gospel times:

that I will not turn away from them to do them good; he may withdraw his
gracious presence for a while; but he never turns from his love and
affections to his people; nor from his gracious purposes concerning
them; nor from his promises to them; nor from his gifts bestowed on
them; or so as to utterly leave them and forsake them, or cease to do
them good: he has laid up goodness for them; he has bestowed much on
them whom he has called by his grace; he has given himself to them as
their God and portion; his Son as their Saviour and Redeemer, and all
good things with him; his Spirit as their Sanctifier, with his gifts and
graces; and he has wrought a good work in them; and he will continue to
do them good, by fresh discoveries of his love; by granting his gracious
presence; by carrying on his work of grace; by supplying their wants,
and making all things work together for their good. The Targum is,

"my Word shall not turn away, &c.''

but I will put my fear in their hearts; which is not naturally in the
hearts of then; and, where it is, it is put there by the grace of God,
and as a blessing of the covenant; it appears in those who are brought
to a true sight of sin, in their humble sense of themselves, and
dependence on the Lord; and in a reverent affection for him: and in a
true and spiritual worship of him; and which is a security from a final
and total apostasy from him, as follows:

that they shall not depart from me; not but that they may and do sin
against God; and there may be a partial departure from him in those that
truly fear him; but not a wicked, final, and total one: the fear of God
influences them to cleave close unto him; and the power of God keeps
them from departing from him, from his doctrines, worship, and
ordinances, from his people, and a profession of his name.

[Jeremiah 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jer 32:41</span></span>

Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good,.... His covenant people,
to whom he gives one heart and one way, and who have his fear implanted
in them, and shall never depart from him, but persevere to the end:
these he loves with a love of complacency and delight; he rejoices over
them, not as considered in themselves, but as in Christ; he rejoices
over them, as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride; and which does not
merely lie in expression, but appears in fact; he does them good, and
with the utmost joy and pleasure; he delights in showing mercy to them,
beautifies them with salvation, and takes pleasure in their prosperity;
he has taken up good thoughts and resolutions concerning them in his
heart; has promised good things to them in his covenant; has provided
good things for them in his Son, and bestows them on them in
regeneration; and constantly supplies them with his grace, and will
withhold no good thing from them, till he has brought them to glory; all
which he does cheerfully and with the utmost delight The Targum is,

"my Word shall rejoice over them;''

the essential Word, Christ; he was rejoicing in them, and his delights
were with them from eternity; he rejoices over them, as his lost sheep
found at conversion; and they shall be his joy and crown of rejoicing to
all eternity; and it was for the joy of having them with him that he
endured so much for them in the redemption of them:

and I will plant them in this land assuredly; or "in truth", or "in
stability and firmness" (n); for it does not seem so much to relate to
the truth of the promise, and the assurance that may be had of the
fulfilment of that, as to the reality and constancy of the blessing
itself. A Gospel church state was first planted in Judea, and from
thence has been spread into other parts, and has never been rooted out
of the world since; and when the Jews, upon their conversion, are
settled in their own land again, they will never more be removed:

with my whole heart and with my whole soul. Grotius thinks these clauses
are to be connected with the former part of the verse, that God will
rejoice over them to do them good with all his heart and soul; but this
the accents will not admit of; but the meaning is, that he will do this
particular good for them, as well as all others, in the most cordial and
respectable manner, even planting and establishing them in their own
land. The Targum is,

"by my Word, and by my will.''

\(n\) "in veritate", Calvin, Cocceius, Schmidt; "in terra hac firma",
Junius & Tremellius; "in terra hac firma", Grotius.

[Jeremiah 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jer 32:42</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord, like as I have brought all this great evil upon
this people,.... The Chaldean army now besieging them, the famine and
pestilence among them, as well as their captivity, which was just at
hand and certain:

so will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them; in the
preceding verses; as being their God, and they his people; giving them
one heart, and one way; putting his fear into them; causing them to
persevere to the end: rejoicing over them to do them good; and planting
them in the land. God is as faithful to his promises as to his
threatenings; and those who have seen the fulfilment of the one need not
doubt of the accomplishment of the other; for if he has done all the
evil things he threatened to do, which are his acts of justice, his
strange acts, much more will he do the good things he has promised,
which are his acts of grace and mercy, in which he delights.

[Jeremiah 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">jer 32:43</span></span>

And fields shall be bought in this land,.... After the return from the
Babylonish captivity, which this respects; and of which the prophet's
purchasing a field of his uncle's son was a pledge and token; in doing
which, as a right thing, he is confirmed; as well as the cavils and
objections of the Jews removed, who thought the destruction of the city,
and such a practice, irreconcilable; and, moreover, this is mentioned as
a pledge, earnest, and confirmation of the fulfilment of the above
spiritual promises in Gospel times; for the people being returned at the
end of the seventy years' captivity, and purchasing fields and
vineyards, as was predicted, it might be strongly concluded, that since
those temporal blessings promised were made good, spiritual ones would
certainly be fulfilled; though some understand these words, in a
spiritual sense, of the field of the church; for it is in the singular
number, "a field shall be bought" (o); yea, "that field", emphatically,
which was bought by the blood of Christ, and first planted in the land
of Judea, as in [Jer 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041);

whereof ye say, it is desolate without man or beast; so wasted and
destroyed by the enemy, that neither man nor beast are left, but both
carried off by him; and therefore no hope of what is above promised:

it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans; they are become the
possessors of it, and therefore it is all over with us as to buying and
possessing fields and vineyards; but notwithstanding this diffidence and
despair in the present view of things, it follows:

\(o\) "et vel tum emetur ager", Cocceius, Schmidt; "tum comparabitur
ager", Junius & Tremellius.

[Jeremiah 32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jer 32:44</span></span>

Men shall buy fields for money,.... They shall have plenty of money, and
they shall lay it out in land, and carry on husbandry, cultivate the
ground, which had lain long untilled, but now should be manured for
public as well as private good. This some understand of particular
churches planted in Judea, and out of it, throughout the whole world;
and of men's gathering and joining themselves to them by a profession of
that faith which is more precious than gold or silver:

and subscribe evidences, and seal them, and take witnesses; as Jeremiah
had done before, when he bought the field of his uncle's son, [Jer
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#010). This is spiritually understood
by some of the word of God laid hold on by faith; of the sealing of the
Spirit, and of the ordinances of the Gospel:

in the land of Benjamin; where Anathoth was, and Jeremiah's field lay;
and where the same should be done by others as was done by him:

and in the places about Jerusalem; in the suburbs of it, and in the
villages round about it:

and in the cities of Judah; throughout the whole country, divided into
the three following parts:

and in the cities of the mountains; in the hilly country of Judea, where
was Hebron, and other cities, [Luk
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039);

and in the cities of the valley. The Septuagint retains the Hebrew word
"sephela", or the plain, in which were Emmaus, Lydda, Sharon, places
mentioned in the New Testament:

and in the cities of the south; or Nagab, the south part of Judea, which
led to Gaza, [Act 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026). This division
of Judea into the mountains, valley, and south, exactly agrees with the
account of it in [Jos 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021). Some
understand this of the Gospel going out of Jerusalem after the day of
Pentecost, not only to the places near that city, but to Samaria, and
the cities of the south towards Egypt, and so into all the world:

for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord; their
temporal captivity from Babylon, and their spiritual captivity from sin,
Satan, and the law.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 33](jer033)

</div>
