<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer046)  [Next](jer048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 47:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 47

This chapter contains a prophecy of the destruction of the Philistines
chiefly; and also of the Tyrians and Zidonians. The title of the
prophecy, [Jer 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001); the instruments
of this destruction, who are compared to overflowing waters; which would
cause great lamentation in the inhabitants of the places where they
should come, [Jer 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002); the noise of
their horses and chariots would be so terrible, as to make parents flee
and leave their own children, [Jer
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003); at the same time Tyre and Zidon
would fall into the hands of the enemy, and have no helper, [Jer
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004); particular places in Palestine
are mentioned, that should be destroyed, [Jer
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005); and all this owing to a
commission the Lord gave to the sword, and which therefore would
continue to ravage, [Jer 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 47:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the
Philistines,.... As the former prophecies were against the Egyptians,
the friends and allies of the Jews, in whom they trusted; this is
against the Philistines, the near neighbours of the Jews, and their
implacable enemies: the time of this prophecy was,

before Pharaoh smote Gaza; one of the five cities of the Philistines, a
very strong and fortified place, as its name signifies; See Gill on [Act
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026). The Jews, in their chronicle,
say (t) this was fulfilled in the eighth year of Zedekiah, when Pharaoh
came out of Egypt, while the Chaldeans were besieging Jerusalem; which
they hearing of, broke up the siege, and went forth to meet him; upon
which he went to Gaza, and destroyed that, and returned to Egypt again.
Both Jarchi and Kimchi make mention of this, but say it was in the tenth
year of Zedekiah; and which, no doubt, is the truest reading, since the
Chaldean army did not come up against Jerusalem until the ninth year of
his reign. But it is more likely that this Pharaoh was Pharaohnecho, and
that he fell upon Gaza, and smote it, either when he came to Carchemish,
or when he returned from thence, after he had slain Josiah. Now this
prophecy was delivered out before anything of this kind happened, and
when the Philistines were in the utmost peace, and in no fear or
expectation of destruction; and the smiting of this single city by the
king of Egypt is foretold, as the forerunner and pledge of a greater
destruction of the land by the king of Babylon, next mentioned.

\(t\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 26. p. 75.

[Jeremiah 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 47:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, behold, waters rise up out of the north,....
Meaning an army of men, which should come in great numbers, and with
great force and rapidity, like an overflowing flood. So the Targum,

"behold, people shall come from the north;''

that is, from Chaldea, which lay north of Palestine:

and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the land, and all
that is therein; or, "the fulness of it" (u); the land of the
Philistines, and carry off the men and cattle, and all the riches
thereof;

the city, and them that dwell therein; not any particular or single
city, as Gaza; but the several cities of Palestine, and the inhabitants
of them:

then the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl;
not being able to do anything else; not to defend themselves, their
families, and property; and seeing nothing but ruin and destruction
before their eyes.

\(u\) "et plenitudinem ejus", Schmidt, &c.

[Jeremiah 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 47:3</span></span>

At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses,.... The
noise of the cavalry of Nebuchadnezzar's army, as they came marching on
towards the country of the Philistines; who, being mounted on strong
prancing horses, made a great noise as they came along, and were heard
at a distance:

at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling, of his wheels; the
rattling and clatter the chariot wheels made; in which rode the chief
officers and generals, with other mighty men: chariots were much used in
war in those times:

the fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of
hands; they should be so frightened at the approach of the enemy, and
flee with much precipitancy to provide for their own safety, that they
should not think of their children, or stay to deliver and save them,
the most near and dear unto them; being so terrified as not to be able
to lift up their hands to defend themselves, and protect their children.
The Targum is,

"the fathers shall not look back to have mercy on their children;''

in their fright should forget their natural affection to them, and not
so much as look back with an eye of pity and compassion on them; so
intent upon their own deliverance and safety.

[Jeremiah 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 47:4</span></span>

Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines,.... The
time appointed by the Lord for their destruction, which should be
universal:

and to cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth; these
were cities in Phoenicia, which bordered on the country of the
Philistines, who were their auxiliaries in time of distress; but now,
being wasted themselves, could give them no help when Nebuchadnezzar
attacked them; as he did Tyre particularly, which he besieged thirteen
years, and at last destroyed it, and Zidon with it:

for the Lord will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of
Caphtor; these last are not put by way of apposition, as if they were
the same with the Philistines, though they were near of kin to them,
coming from Casluhim; who were the posterity of Mizraim, as well as
Caphtorim, [Gen 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013); indeed the
Philistines are said to be brought from Caphtor, [Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007); being very probably taken captive
by them, but rescued from them; and now in confederacy with them, and
like to share the same fate as they. The Targum renders it,

"the remnant of the island of the Cappadocians;''

and so the Vulgate Latin version. Some think the Colchi, others that the
Cretians, are meant. R. Saadiah by Caphtor understands Damiata, a city
in Egypt; which is the same with Pelusium or Sin, the strength of Egypt,
[Eze 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015); and it is usual with the
Jews (w) to call this place Caphutkia, the same with Caphtor, they say;
and, in Arabic, Damiata.

\(w\) Misn. Cetubot, c. 13. sect. 11. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Jeremiah 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 47:5</span></span>

Baldness is come upon Gaza,.... The Targum is,

"vengeance is come to the inhabitants of Gaza.''

It is become like a man whose hair is fallen from his head, or is clean
shaved off; its houses were demolished; its inhabitants slain, and their
wealth plundered; a pillaged and depopulated place. Some understand this
of shaving or tearing off the hair for grief, and mourning because of
their calamities; which agrees with the latter clause of the verse:

Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant of their valley; this was one of
the live cities of the Philistines; it lay north of Gaza. Herodotus (x)
calls Ashkelon a city of Syria, in which was the temple of Urania Venus,
destroyed by the Scythians; said to be built by Lydus Ascalus, and
called so after his name (y). Of this city was Herod the king, and
therefore called an Ashkelonite; it was now destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar,
but afterwards rebuilt and inhabited; and with it were destroyed the
remainder of the cities, towns, and villages, in the valley, adjoining
to that and Gaza; or Ashkelon and Gaza, now destroyed, were all that
remained of the cities of the valley, and shared the same fate with
them. The Targum is,

"the remnant of their strength;''

so Kimchi, who interprets it of the multitude of their wealth and power;

how long wilt thou cut thyself? their faces, arms, and other parts of
their body, mourning and lamenting their sad condition; the words of the
prophet signifying hereby the dreadfulness of it, and its long
continuance.

\(x\) Clio, sive l. 1. c. 105. (y) Vid. Bochart. Phaleg l. 2. c. 12. p.
88.

[Jeremiah 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 47:6</span></span>

O thou sword of the Lord,.... For though it was the sword of the
Chaldeans, yet being appointed and sent by the Lord, and having a
commission from him, and being ordered and directed in his providence to
do his will, it is called his sword:

how long will it be ere thou be quiet? and cease from destroying men;
wilt thou not cease till thou hast no more to destroy?

put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still; and make no more
havoc among the people: these are either the words of the Philistines,
entreating a stop might be put to the ravages of the sword, and that the
war might cease, and the desolations of it; or rather of the prophet,
commiserating their state as a man, though they had been the avowed
enemies of his people; to which the following words of him are an
answer, either to the Philistines, showing why their request could not
be granted, or as correcting himself.

[Jeremiah 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 47:7</span></span>

How can it be quiet,.... There is no reason to believe it will, nor can
it be expected that it should; to stop it is impossible, and to request
that it might be stopped is in vain:

seeing the Lord hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the
seashore? for it had a commission from the Lord to destroy the
inhabitants of Ashkelon, and other places, which lay still more towards
the sea, as Joppa and Jamne; and indeed all Palestine lay on the coast
of the Mediterranean sea:

there hath he appointed it; by an irreversible decree of his, in
righteousness to punish the inhabitants of these places for their sins.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 48](jer048)

</div>
