<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job006)  [Next](job008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 7

In this chapter Job goes on to defend himself in an address to God; as
that he had reason to complain of his extraordinary afflictions, and
wish for death; by observing the common case of mankind, which he
illustrates by that of an hireling, [Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001); and justifies his eager desire of
death by the servant and hireling; the one earnestly desiring the
shadow, and the other the reward of his work, [Job
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002); by representing his present state
as exceeding deplorable, even worse than that of the servant and
hireling, since they had rest at night, when he had none, and were free
from pain, whereas he was not, [Job
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#003); by taking notice of the swiftness
and shortness of his days, in which he had no hope of enjoying any good,
[Job 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#006); and so thought his case
hard; and the rather, since after death he could enjoy no temporal good:
and therefore to be deprived of it while living gave him just reason of
complaint, [Job 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#008); and then he
expostulates with God for setting such a strict watch upon him; giving
him no ease night nor day, but terrifying him with dreams and visions,
which made life disagreeable to him, and death more eligible than that,
[Job 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#012); and represents man as
unworthy of the divine regard, and below his notice to bestow favours on
him, or to chastise him for doing amiss, [Job
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#017); and admitting that he himself
had sinned, yet he should forgive his iniquity, and not bear so hard
upon him, and follow him with one affliction after another without
intermission, and make him the butt of his arrows; but should spare him
and let him alone, or however take him out of the world, [Job
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#019).

[Job 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 7:1</span></span>

Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth?.... There is a set
time for his coming into the world, for his continuance in it, and for
his going out of it; this is to man "on earth", with respect to his
being and abode here, not in the other world or future state: not in
heaven; there is no certain limited time for man there, but an eternity;
the life he will enter into is everlasting; the habitation, mansion, and
house he will dwell in, are eternal; saints will be for ever with
Christ, in whose presence are pleasures for evermore: nor in hell; the
punishment there will be eternal, the fire will be unquenchable and
everlasting, the smoke of the torments of the damned will ascend for
ever and ever; but men's days and time on earth are but as a shadow, and
soon gone; they are of the earth, earthly, and return unto it at a fixed
appointed time, time, the bounds of which cannot be passed over: this is
true of mankind in general, and of Job in particular; see [Job
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001); the word "Enosh" (i), here used,
signifies, as is commonly observed, a frail, feeble, mortal man; Mr.
Broughton renders it "sorrowful man"; as every man more or less is; even
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs, is attended with them, has
an experience of them: this is the common lot of mankind; and if
anything more than ordinary is inflicted upon them, they are not able to
bear it; and these sorrows death at the appointed time puts an end to,
which makes it desirable; now, seeing there is a set time for every
man's life on earth, and there was for Job's, of which he was well
assured; and, by all appearance of things, and by the symptoms upon him,
this time was near at hand; therefore it should not be thought a
criminal thing in him, considering his extraordinary afflictions, and
which were intolerable, that he should so earnestly wish the time was
come; though in his more serious thoughts he determined to wait for it:
some render the words, "is there not a warfare are for men on earth?"
(k) the word being so rendered elsewhere, particularly in [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002); every man's state on earth is a
state of warfare; this is frequently said by the stoic philosophers (l);
even so is that of natural and unregenerate men, who are often engaged
in war with one another, which arise from the lusts which war in their
members; and especially with the people of God, the seed of the woman,
between whom and the seed of the serpent there has been an enmity from
the beginning; and with themselves, with the troubles of life, diseases
of body, and various afflictions they have to conflict and grapple with:
and more especially the life of good men here is a state of warfare, not
only of the ministers of the word, or persons in public office, but of
private believers; who are good soldiers of Christ, enter volunteers
into his service, fight under his banners, and themselves like men;
these have many enemies to combat with; some within, the corruptions of
hearts, which war against the spirit and law of their minds, which form
a company of two armies in militating against each other; and others
without, as Satan and his principalities and powers, the men the world,
false teachers, and the like: and these are properly accoutred for such
service, having the whole armour of God provided for them; and have
great encouragement to behave manfully, since they may be sure of
victory, and of having the crown of righteousness, when they have fought
the good fight of even though they are but frail, feeble, mortal, sinful
men, but flesh and blood, and so not of themselves a match for their
enemies; but they are more than so through the Lord being on their side,
Christ being the Captain of their salvation, and the Spirit of God being
in them greater than he that is in the world; and besides, it is only on
earth this warfare is, and will soon be accomplished, the last enemy
being death that shall be destroyed: now this being the common case of
man, to be annoyed with enemies, and always at war with them, if,
besides this, uncommon afflictions befall him, as was Job's case, this
must make life burdensome, and death, which is a deliverance from them,
desirable; this is his argument: some choose to render the words, "is
there not a servile condition for men on earth" (m) the word being used
of the ministry and service of the Levites, [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003); all men by creation are or ought
to be the servants of God; good men are so by the grace of God, and
willingly and cheerfully serve him; and though the great work of
salvation is wrought out by Christ for them, and the work of grace is
wrought by the Spirit of Christ in them, yet they have work to do in
their day and generation in the world, in their families, and in the
house of God; and which, though weak and feeble in themselves, they are
capable of doing, through Christ, his Spirit, power, and grace: and this
is only on earth; in the grave there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge; when the night of death comes, no man can work; his service,
especially his toilsome service, is at an end; and as it is natural for
servants to wish for the night, when their labours end, Job thought it
not unlawful in him to wish for death, which would put an end to his
toils and labours, and when he should have rest from them:

are not his days also like the days plan hireling? the time for which a
servant is hired, whether it be for a day or for a year, or more, it is
a set time; it is fixed, settled, and determined in the agreement, and
so are the days of man's life on earth; and the of an hireling are few
at most, the time for which he is hired is but and as the days of an
hireling are days of toil, and labour, and sorrow, so are the days of
men evil as well as few; his few days are full of trouble, [Gen
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009); all this and what follows is
spoken to God, and not to his friends, as appears from [Job
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007).

\(i\) "mortali", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "misero et aerumnoso
homini", Michaelis. (k) "militia", Montanus, Tigurine version,
Schultens; so V. L. Targum. (l) Vid. Gataker. Anotat. in M. Antonin. de
seipso, p. 77, 78. (m) "Conditio servilis", Schmidt.

[Job 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 7:2</span></span>

As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow,.... Either the shadow of
some great rock, tree, or hedge, or any shady place to shelter him from
the heat of the sun in the middle of the day, which in those eastern
countries is hot and scorching; and very burdensome and fatiguing it is
for servants and labourers to work in fields and vineyards, or in
keeping herds and flocks in such countries, and at such a time of the
day; to which the allusion is in [Sol
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007) [Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004). Wherefore they "gape" for, or
"pant" after some shady place for refreshment, as the word (n) used
signifies; or for the shadow of the evening, or the sun setting, when
the longest shadow is cast, [Jer 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004);
and when the work of a servant is ended, and he retires to his house for
refreshment and rest: and since now such a shadow in either sense is
desirable, and not unlawful to wish for, Job suggests it ought not to be
charged as a crime in him, that he should importunately desire to be in
the shadow of death, or in the grave, where the weary are at rest; or to
have the night come on him, when he should cease from all his toil and
labour, sorrows and pains:

and as an hireling looketh for the reward of his work; or "for his work"
(o); either for new work, what was set him being done, or rather for the
finishing of it, that he might have rest from it; or for the reward, the
hire due to him upon its being done; so Job intimates he desired death
with the same view, that he might cease from his works, which should
follow him, and when he should have the reward of the inheritance, not
in a way of debt, but of grace: nor indeed is it sinful to look or have
respect unto the recompence of reward, in order to engage to go through
service more cheerfully, or to endure sufferings more patiently, see
[Heb 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#026); for though the hireling is
an emblem of a self-righteous person, that works for life, and expects
it as the reward of his work, and of false teachers and bad shepherds,
that take the care of the flock for filthy lucre's sake, see [Luk
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#019); yet hiring is sometimes used,
in a good sense, of good men, that are hired and allured by gracious
promises and divine encouragements to labour in the Lord's vineyard, and
may expect their reward; see [Mat
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001).

\(n\) "anhelabit", Montanus, Bolducius; "anhelat", Beza, Tigurine
version, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt, Schultens. (o) "opus suum", Beza
Montanus, Bolducius, Schmidt, Schultens.

[Job 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 7:3</span></span>

So am I made to possess months of vanity,.... This is not a reddition or
application of the above similes of the servant and hireling, [Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001); for that is to be understood, and
to be supplied at the end of [Job 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002);
that as those looked for the shadow and payment of hire, so Job looked
for and earnestly desired death, or to be removed out of the world;
besides, the things here instanced in do not answer; for Job, instead of
having the refreshing shadow, had months of vanity, and instead of rest
from his labours had nothing but wearisome nights, and continual
tossings to and fro; whereas the sleep of a labouring man is sweet to
him; and having laboured hard all day, the night is a time of rest to
him; but so it was not with Job; wherefore this "so" refers to the
common state and condition of mankind, in which Job was, with an
addition of extraordinary afflictions upon him: the time of his
afflictions, though but short, seemed long, and therefore is expressed
by months; and some months might have passed from the time his
calamities began to the present; since it must be some time before his
friends heard of them, and more still before they could meet together
and agree upon their coming, and were actually come to him; as also some
time was spent in silence, and now in conversation with him; the Jews
(p) make them to be twelve months: and these months were "months of
vanity", or "empty" (q) ones; such as winter months, empty of all joy,
and peace, and comfort; times in which he had no pleasure, no ease of
body or of mind; destitute of the good things of life, and of the
presence of God and communion with him; and full of trouble, sorrow, and
distress: and these were "given him for an inheritance" (r); were his
lot and portion, which he received as an inheritance from his parents,
in consequence of original sin, the source of all the troubles and
miseries of human life, in common with other men; and which were
allotted him by his heavenly Father, according to his sovereign will and
pleasure, as all the afflictions of the Lord's people are the
inheritance bequeathed them by their Father, and the legacy of their
Redeemer:

and wearisome nights are appointed to me; one after another, in
succession; in which he could have no sleep nor rest, through pain of
body and distress of mind; and so became the more weary, through long
lying down and tossings to and fro, through groans and tears, and much
watching; and these were prepared for him in the purposes of God, and
appointed to him in his counsels and decrees; see [Job
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#014); or they "prepared" or
"appointed" (s); that is, "Elohim", the three Divine Persons.

\(p\) Vid. Misn. Ediot, c. 2. sect. 10. & R. Simeon Bar Tzemach, in loc.
(q) "menses vacuos", V. L. so Tigurine version, Michaelis. (r) "accepi
hereditate", Pagninus, Montanus, Bolducius; so Cocceius, Schmidt,
Schultens. (s) "constituerunt mihi", Pagninus, Bolducius; "mihi
paraverunt", Mercerus; so Schmidt, Cocceius, Schultens.

[Job 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 7:4</span></span>

When I lie down, I say, when shall I arise,.... Or, "then I say", &c.
(t); that is, as soon as he laid himself down in his bed, and
endeavoured to compose himself to sleep, in order to get rest and
refreshment; then he said within himself, or with an articulate voice,
to those about him, that sat up with him; oh that it was time to rise;
when will it be morning, that I may rise from my bed, which is of no
manner of service to me, but rather increases weariness?

and the night be gone? and the day dawn and break; or "night" or
"evening be measured", as in the margin, or "measures itself" (u); or
that "he", that is, God, or "it", my heart, "measures the evening" (w),
or "night"; lengthens it out to its full time: to a discomposed person,
that cannot sleep, the night seems long; such count every hour, tell
every clock that strikes, and long to see peep of day; these are they
that watch for the morning, [Psa
130:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#006),

and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day; or,
"unto the twilight"; the morning twilight; though some understand it of
the twilight or evening of the next day, see [Sa1
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#017); and interpret "the tossings to
and fro" of the toils and labours of the day, and of the sorrows and
miseries of it, lengthened out to the eve of the following day; but
rather they are to be understood either of the tosses of his mind, his
distressed and perplexed thoughts within him he was full of; or of the
tosses of his body, his frequent turning himself upon his bed, from side
to side, to ease him; and with these he was "filled", or "satiated" (x);
he had enough and too much of them; he was glutted and sated with them,
as a man is with overmuch eating, as the word signifies.

\(t\) "tum dixi", Beza, Piscator, Mercerus. (u) So Saadiah Gaon. (w)
"tum admensus est versperam", Schmidt; "extendit", Schultens; "et cor",
Mercerus; so Aben Ezra, Ben Gersom, and Bar Tzemach. (x) "satior",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Schultens.

[Job 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 7:5</span></span>

My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust,.... Not as it would be
at death, and in the grave, as Schmidt interprets it, when it would be
eaten with worms and reduced to dust; but as it then was, his ulcers
breeding worms, or lice, as some (y); these spread themselves over his
body: some think it was the vermicular or pedicular disease that was
upon him, and the scabs of them, which were all over him like one
continued crust, were as a garment to him; or those sores of his,
running with purulent matter, and he sitting and rolling himself in dust
and ashes, and this moisture mingling therewith, and clotted together,
formed clods of dust, which covered him all over; a dismal spectacle to
look upon! a precious saint in a vile body!

my skin is broken: with the boils and ulcers in all parts, and was
parched and cleft with the heat and breaking of them:

and become loathsome; to himself and others; exceeding nauseous, and
extremely disagreeable both to sight and smell: or "liquefied" (z);
moistened with corrupt matter flowing from the ulcers in all parts of
his body; the word in Arabic signifies a large, broad, and open wound,
as a learned man (a) has observed; and it is as if he should say,
whoever observes all this, this long time of distress, night and day,
and what a shocking figure he was, as here represented, could blame him
for wishing for death in the most passionate manner?

\(y\) So Sephorno and Bar Tzemach. (z) "liquefit", Junius & Tremellius;
"colliquefacta est", Piscator, Mercerus. (a) Hinckelman. Praefat. ad
Alcoran. p. 30.

[Job 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 7:6</span></span>

My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle,.... Which moves very
swiftly, being thrown quick and fast to and fro; some versions render it
"a racer" (b) one that runs a race on foot, or rides on horseback,
agreeably to [Job 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025); where, and in
[Job 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007); to it, other similes are
used, to set forth the swiftness and fleetness of man's days; as they
also are elsewhere represented, as swift as a tale told, a word
expressed, or a thought conceived, [Psa
90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009); and so here, by the Septuagint,
are said to be "swifter than speech", though wrongly translated: this is
to be understood, not of his days of affliction, distress, and sorrow;
for these in his apprehension moved but slowly, and he could have been,
glad that they had gone on faster; but either his days in common, or
particularly his days of prosperity and pleasure, these were soon over
with him; and which he sometimes wished for again, see [Job
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001),

and are spent without hope; not without hope of happiness in another
world, but without hope of being restored to his outward felicity in
this; which Eliphaz had given him some him of, but he had no hope
concerning it; see [Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024).

\(b\) Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion in Drusius.

[Job 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 7:7</span></span>

O remember that my life is wind,.... Or, "breath" (c); man's life is in
his breath, and that breath is in his nostrils, and therefore not to be
accounted of, or depended on; man appears by this to be a poor frail
creature, whose life, with respect to himself, is very precarious and
uncertain; it is but as a "vapour", an air bubble, full of wind, easily
broken and dissipated, and soon vanishes away; it is like the "wind",
noisy and blusterous, full of stir and tumult, and, like that, swiftly
passes and sweeps away, and returns not again: this is an address to
God; and so some (d) supply it, "O God", or "O Lord, remember", &c. not
that forgetfulness is in God, or that he needs to be reminded of
anything; but he may seem to forget the frailty of man when he lays his
hand heavy on him; and may be said to be mindful of it when he
mercifully takes it off: what Job here prays for, the Lord often does,
as he did with respect to the Israelites, [Psa
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039),

mine eye shall no more see good: meaning not spiritual and eternal good,
here and hereafter; he knew he should, after this life, see his living
Redeemer even with the eyes of his body, when raised again; that he
should see him as he is, not through a glass, darkly, but face to face,
in all his glory; and that for himself, and not another, and even see
and enjoy things he had never seen before: but his sense is, that he
should see or enjoy no more temporal good; either in this world, being
without hope of any, or in the grave, whither he was going and would
shortly be; and therefore entreats that some mercy might be shown him
while he lived; to which sense the following words incline.

\(c\) "hali us", Cocceius, Michaelis. (d) So Beza, Vatablus, Drusius,
Michaelis.

[Job 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 7:8</span></span>

The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more,.... Or "the eye
of sight" (e); the seeing eye, the most acute and quick sighted eye; so
Mr. Broughton renders it, "the quick eye" (f): this is to be understood
as "after" (g) death, that then the sharpest eye should not see him, he
would be out of the reach of it; which must be taken with a limitation;
for men after death are seen by the eyes of the omniscient God, their
souls, be they in heaven or in hell, and their bodies in the grave; and
as for good men, such as Job, they are at once with him in his immediate
presence, beholding and beheld by him; and they are seen by angels,
whose care and charge their souls become immediately upon death, and are
carried by them into heaven, where they are fellow worshippers with
them; and they are seen by glorified saints, to whose company they are
joined; for if the rich man in hell could see Abraham, and Lazarus in
his bosom, [Luk 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023), then much more
do the saints see one another: but the meaning is, that when a man is
dead, he is seen no more by men on earth, by his relations, friends, and
acquaintance; the consideration of which is a cutting stroke at parting,
see [Act 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025); the state of the dead
is an invisible state, and therefore called in the Greek tongue "Hades",
"unseen"; so the dead will remain, with respect to the inhabitants of
this world, till the resurrection, and then they shall see and be seen
again in the same bodies they now have; for this is no denial of the
resurrection of the dead, as some Jewish writers charge Job with, and
infer from this and some following passages:

thine eyes are upon me, and I am not; am a dead man, a phrase expressive
of death, and of being in the state of the dead, or however of being no
more in this world, see [Gen 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024); not
that the dead are nonentities, or are reduced to nothing; this is not
true of them, either with respect to soul or body; their souls are
immaterial and immoral, and exist in a separate state after death, and
their bodies, though reduced to dust, are not annihilated; they return
to earth and dust, from whence they came; but still they are something,
they are earth and dust, unless these can be thought to be nothing; and
this dust is taken care of and preserved, and will be gathered together,
and moulded, and framed, and fashioned into bodies again, which will
endure for ever: nor is the meaning, that they are nowhere; the spirits
of just men made perfect are in heaven, in paradise, in a state of life,
immortality, and bliss; and the souls of the wicked are in their own
place, in the prison of hell, reserved with devils, to the judgment of
the great day; and the bodies of both are in the graves till the day of
the resurrection; but they are not, and no more, in the land of the
living, in their houses and families, in their shops and business, and
places of trade and merchandise, or in the house of God serving him
there, according to their different stations. And this Job ascribes to
God, "thine eyes are upon me": meaning not his eyes of love, favour, and
kindness, which had respect unto him; and yet, notwithstanding this, as
it did not secure him from afflictions, so neither would it from death
itself; for "though his eyes were upon him" in such sense, yet he "would
not be" (a), or should die; but rather his angry eyes, the frowns of his
countenance, which were now upon him, and might be discerned in the
dispensations of his providence towards him, by reason of which he "was
not" as he was before; not fit for anything, as Sephorno understands it;
or should he frown upon him, one angry look would sink him into the
state of the dead, and he should be no more, who "looks on the earth,
and it trembles", [Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032). Mr.
Broughton renders it as a petition, "let thine eyes be upon me, that I
be no more"; that is, let me die, the same request he made in [Job
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008); but it seems best to interpret it
or the eyes of God's omnipresence and providence, which are on men in
every state and place; and the sense be, either as granting, that though
the eyes of men should not see him after death, yet the eyes of God
would be upon him when he was not, or in the state of the fiend; or
else, that should he long defer doing him good, it would be too late, he
should soon die, and then, though he should look after him, and seek for
him, he should not be in the land of the living, according to [Job
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021); or this may denote the
suddenness of death, which comes to a man in a moment, as Bar Tzemach
observes, in the twinkling of an eye; nay, as soon as the eye of God is
upon a man, that is, as soon almost as a man appears in the world, and
the eye of Divine Providence is upon him, he is out of it again, and is
no more; see [Ecc 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#002).

\(e\) Heb. "oculus visus", Drusius, Piscator; "aspectus", Mercerus; so
Simeon Bar Tzemach. (f) "Ocuium perspicacissimum", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator. (g) Posthac, Tigurine version. (a) "Etiam oculis tuis ad me
respicientibus, me non fore amplius", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Job 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 7:9</span></span>

As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away,.... Which being dispersed
by the wind, or broke up by the sun, is never seen, or returns more; for
though the wise man speaks of clouds returning after the rain, this is
not to be understood of the same clouds, but of succeeding ones, [Ecc
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#002); so pardon of sin is expressed by
the same metaphor, to show that sin thereby is no more, no more to be
seen or remembered, [Isa 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); the
Targum renders it "as smoke", by which the shortness and consumption of
men's days are expressed, [Psa 102:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003);
but by the simile of a cloud here is not so much designed the sudden
disappearance of life as the irrevocableness of it when gone, as the
reddition or application following shows:

so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more; the grave is
the house or long home that all must go to, it being the appointment of
God that all should die, or be in the state of the dead; which is meant
by the grave, since all are not interred in the earth; and this, as
here, is frequently expressed, as if it was man's act being hither
brought; and when it designs an interment in the earth, it is with great
propriety called a going down; and however that be, yet the state of the
dead is a state of humiliation, a coming down from all the grandeur,
honour, and glory of the present state, which are all laid in the dust;
and when this is man's case, he comes up no more from it, that is, of
himself, by his own power; none but Christ, who is God over all, ever
did this; or none naturally, or by the laws of nature, for noticing
short of almighty power can effect this; it must be done in an
extraordinary way, and is no less than a miraculous operation; nor will
this be done until the general resurrection of the just and unjust, when
all that are in their graves shall come forth, the one to the
resurrection of life, and the other to the resurrection of damnation;
excepting in some few instances, as the Shunammite's son, [Kg2
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032); the man that touched the bones
of the prophet Elisha, [Kg2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021); the
daughter of Jairus, [Mar 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041); the
widow of Nain's son, [Luk 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014);
Lazarus, [Joh 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043); and those that
rose at our Lord's resurrection, [Mat
27:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053); this is further explained in
[Job 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#010).

[Job 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 7:10</span></span>

He shall return no more to his house,.... In a literal sense, built or
hired by him, or however in which he dwelt; and if a good man, he will
have no desire to return to that any more, having a better house, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; or in a figurative
sense, either his body, the earthly house of his tabernacle, an house of
clay, which has its foundation in the dust; to this he shall not return
until the resurrection, when it will be rebuilt, and fitted up for the
better reception and accommodation of him; or else his family, to whom
he shall not come back again, to have any concern with them in domestic
affairs, or in part of the business of life, as David said of his child
when dead, "I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me", [Sa2
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023),

neither shall his place know him any more; the place of his office, or
rather of his habitation; his dwelling house, his farms and his fields,
his estates and possessions, shall no more know, own, and acknowledge
him as their master, proprietor, and possessor, these, coming at his
death into other hands, who now are regarded as such; or the inhabitants
of the place, country, city, town, village, and house in which he lived,
shall know him no more; no more being seen among them, he will soon be
forgotten; out of sight, out of mind (b).

\(b\) "Linquenda tellus et domus", &c. Horat. Carmin. l. 2. Ode 14.

[Job 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 7:11</span></span>

Therefore I will not refrain my mouth,.... From speaking and
complaining; seeing, besides the common lot of mankind, which is a state
of warfare, sorrow, and trouble, and is as much as a man can well
grapple with, extraordinary afflictions are laid upon me, which make
life insupportable; and seeing I enjoy no good in this present life, and
am shortly going where no temporal good is to be expected, and shall
never return to this world any more to enjoy any; therefore I will not
be silent, and forbear speaking my mind freely, and uttering my just
complaint, for which I think I have sufficient reason: or "I also will
not refrain my mouth" (c); in turn, as a just retaliation, so Jarchi;
since God will not refrain his hand from me, I will not refrain my mouth
from speaking concerning him; since he shows no mercy to me, I shall
utter my miserable complaints, and not keep them to myself; this was
Job's infirmity when he should have held his peace, as Aaron, and been
dumb and silent as David, and been still, and have known, owned, and
acknowledged the sovereignty of God, and not vented himself in passion
as he did:

I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; or "in the straitness" (d) of
it; he was surrounded on all sides with distress, the sorrows of death
compassed him about, and the pains of hell got hold upon him; he was
like one pent up in a narrow place, in a close confinement, that he
could not get out of, and come forth from; and he felt not only
exquisite pains of body from his boils and sores, but great anguish of
soul; and therefore he determines to speak in and "of" (e) all this, to
give vent to his grief and sorrow, his passion and resentment:

I will complain in the bitterness of my soul; his afflictions were like
the waters of Marah, bitter ones, very grievous and disagreeable to
flesh and blood, and by which his life and soul were embittered to him;
and in and of (f) this he determines to complain, or to utter in a
complaining way what he had been meditating on, as the word (g)
signifies; so that this was not an hasty and precipitate action, but
what upon deliberation he resolved to do; to pour out his complaint
before God, and leave it with him, in a submissive way, would not have
been amiss, but if he complained of God and his providence, it was
wrong: "why should a living man complain?" not even a wicked man, of
"the punishment of his sin", and much less a good man of fatherly
chastisements? We see what the will of man is, what a stubborn and
obstinate thing it is, "I will, I will, I will", even of a good man when
left to himself, and not in the exercise of grace, and under the
influence of it; the complaint follows, by way of expostulation.

\(c\) "etiam ego", Vatablus, Beza, Piscator, Bolducius, Cocceius,
Schmidt, Michaelis, Schultens; "vicissim", Noldius, p. 222. (d) "in
angustia", Junius & Tremellius, Schmidt; "in arcto", Cocceius; "in
angusto", Schultens. (e) "De angustia", Vatablus, Drusius, Mercerus,
Piscator. (f) "de amaritudine", Drusius, Piscator, Mercerus. (g)
"meditabor et eloquar", Michaelis.

[Job 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 7:12</span></span>

Am I a sea, or a whale,.... Like the restless sea, to which very wicked,
profligate, and abandoned sinners are compared, that are continually
casting up the mire and dirt of sin and wickedness; am I such an one? or
like the raging sea, its proud waters and foaming waves, to which fierce
and furious persecutors and tyrannical oppressors are compared; did I
behave in such a manner to the poor and distressed in the time of
prosperity? nay, was I not the reverse of all this, kind and gentle to
them, took their part, and rescued them out of the hands of those that
oppressed them? see [Job 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012); or
like its tossing waves, which attempt to pass the bounds that are set to
them; am I such an one, that have transgressed the laws of God and then,
which are set as boundaries to restrain the worst of men? and am I a
whale, or like any great fish in the ocean, the dragon in the sea, the
leviathan, the piercing and crooked serpent? an emblem of cruel princes,
as the kings of Egypt and Assyria, or antichrist, [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001); see [Psa
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013). The Targum is,"as the Egyptians
were condemned to be drowned in the Red sea, am I condemned? or as
Pharaoh, who was suffocated in the midst of it for his sin, since thou
settest a watch over me?''or, as another Targum,"am I as the great sea,
which is moved to extreme parts, or the leviathan, which is ready to be
taken?''or else the sense is, have I the strength of the sea, which
subsists, notwithstanding its waves are continually heating, and which
carries such mighty vessels upon it, and would bear down all before it,
if not restrained? or of a whale, the leviathan, whose flakes of flesh
are joined together, and his heart as firm as a stone, and as hard as a
piece of the nether millstone, and laughs at the spear, the sword, and
the dart? no, I have not; I am a poor, weak, feeble creature, whose
strength is quite exhausted, and not able to bear the weight of the
chains and fetters of afflictions upon me; or rather the principal thing
complained of, and which he illustrates by these metaphors, is, that he
was bound with the cords of afflictions, and compassed with gall and
travail, and hedged in hereby, that he could not get out, as the church
says, [Lam 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005); or could not get
released from his sorrows by death, or otherwise; just as the sea is
shut up with bars and doors, that its waves can come hitherto, and no
further; and as the whale is confined to the ocean, or surrounded with
vessels and armed men in them, when about to be taken; and thus it was
with Job, and of this he complains:

that thou settest a watch over me? which Jarchi and others understand of
Satan; and though in his hands, he was not suffered to take away his
life; but besides him may be meant all his afflictions, calamities, and
distresses, in which he lay fettered and bound, in which he was shut up
as in a prison, and by which he was watched over and guarded; and from
which he could make no escape, nor get a release.

[Job 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 7:13</span></span>

When I say, my bed shall comfort me,.... When he thought within himself
that he would lie down upon his bed and try if he could get a little
sleep, which might comfort and refresh him, and which he promised
himself he should obtain by this means, as he had formerly had an
experience of:

my couch shall ease my complaint; he concluded, that by lying down upon
his couch, and falling asleep, it would give some ease of body and mind;
that his body would, at least, for some time be free from pain, and his
mind composed, and should cease from complaining for a while; which
interval would be a relief to him, and of considerable service. Some
render it, "my couch shall burn" (h); be all on fire, and torture me
instead of giving ease; and so may have respect to his burning ulcers.

\(h\) "ardebit", Pagninus; so Kimchi in Sepher Shorash. & Ben Melech in
loc.

[Job 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 7:14</span></span>

Then thou scarest me with dreams,.... Not with dreams and visions being
told him, as were by Eliphaz, [Job
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013); but with dreams he himself
dreamed; and which might arise from the force of his distemper, and the
pain of his body, whereby his sleep was broken, his imagination
disturbed, and his fancy roving, which led him to objects as seemed to
him very terrible and dreadful; or from a melancholy disposition his
afflictions had brought upon him; and hence in his dreams he had dismal
apprehensions of things very distressing and terrifying; or from Satan,
in whose hands he was, and who was permitted to distress and disturb him
at such seasons; all which he ascribes to God, because he suffered it so
to be: and now these dreams not only hindered sound sleep, and getting
that ease and refreshment he hoped for from thence, but even they were
frightful and scaring to him, so that instead of being the better for
his bed and his couch, he was the worse; these dreams added to his
afflictions, and in them he suffered much, as Pilate's wife is said to
do, [Mat 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019),

and terrifiest me through visions; spectres, apparitions, and such like
things, being presented to his fancy, while sleeping and dreaming, which
filled him with terror, and sorely distressed him, so that he could
receive no benefit hereby, but rather was more fatigued and weakened.

[Job 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 7:15</span></span>

So that my soul chooseth strangling,.... Not to strangle himself, as
Ahithophel did, or to be strangled by others, this being a kind of death
inflicted on capital offenders; but rather, as Mr. Broughton renders it,
"to be choked to death" by any distemper and disease, as some are of a
suffocating nature, as a catarrh, quinsy, &c. and kill in that way; and
indeed death in whatsoever way is the stopping of a man's breath; and it
was death that Job chose, let it be in what way it would, whether
natural or violent; so weary was he of life through his sore and heavy
afflictions:

and death rather than my life; or, "than my bones" (i); which are the
more solid parts of the body, and the support of it, and are put for the
whole and the life thereof; or than these bones of his, which were full
of strong pain, and which had nothing but skin upon them, and that was
broken and covered with worms, rottenness, and dust; the Vulgate Latin
version renders it, "and my bones death"; that is, desired and chose
death, being so full of pain, see [Psa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010).

\(i\) "prae ossibus meis", Montanus, Tigurine version, Bolducius,
Cocceius, Schmidt, Schultens; so Mercerus, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Job 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 7:16</span></span>

I loathe it,.... Or "them" (k), either his life, which was a weariness
to him, or his bones, which were so painful and nauseous; or rather, "I
am become loathsome", to himself, to his servants, and to his friends,
and even his breath was strange to his wife; or "being ulcerated, I pine
and waste away" (l), and must in course be quickly gone:

I would not live always; no man can or will; there is no man that lives
but what shall see death, [Psa 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048);
Job knew this, nor did he expect or desire it; and this was not his
meaning, but that he desired that he might not live long, or to the full
term of man's life, yea, that he might die quickly; and indeed to a good
man to die is gain; and to depart out of the world, and be with Christ,
is far better than to continue in it. And had Job expressed himself
without passion, and with submission to the divine will, what he says
would not have been amiss:

let me alone; or "cease from me" (m); from afflicting him any more,
having as great a weight upon him as he could bear, or greater than he
could well stand up under; or from supporting him in life, he wishes
that either God would withdraw his afflicting hand from him, or his
preserving hand; either abate the affliction, or dismiss him from the
world:

for my days are vanity; a "breath" (n) or puff of wind; a "vapour", as
Mr. Broughton renders it, that soon vanishes away; days empty of all
that is good, delightful, and pleasant, and full of evil, trouble, and
sorrow, as well as fleeting, transitory, and soon gone, are as nothing,
yea, less than nothing, and vanity.

\(k\) "Aspernor vitam", Piscator; so Jarchi & Ben Gersom. (l) "tabui",
Cocceius; "ulceratus tabesco", Schultens. (m) "cessa a me", Pagninus,
Montanus, Bolducius, Schmidt. (n) "halitus", Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 7:17</span></span>

What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him?.... Man in his best
estate, in his original state, was but of the earth, earthly; a mutable
creature, and altogether vanity; so that it was wonderful God should
magnify him as be did, raise him to such honour and dignity, as to set
him over all the works of his hands, and bestow peculiar marks of his
favour upon him in Eden's garden; but man in his low and fallen estate,
being, as the word here used is generally observed to signify, a frail,
feeble, weak, and mortal creature; yea, a sinful one; it is much more
marvellous that God should magnify him, or make him great, that is, any
of the human race, as he has some, so as "to set his heart upon them",
as Jarchi connects this with the following clause; to think of them and
provide for them in his purposes and decrees, in his council and
covenant, to choose any of them to grace here, and glory hereafter: he
has magnified them, by espousing them to his Son, whereby they share
with him in his glory, and in all the blessings of his goodness; through
the incarnation of Christ, by means of which the human nature is greatly
advanced and honoured; and by their redemption through Christ, whereby
they are raised to an higher dignity, and restored to a greater estate
than they lost by the fall; by clothing them with the rich robe of
Christ's righteousness, comparable to the gold of Ophir, and raiment of
needlework; and by adorning them with the graces of the blessed Spirit;
and, in a word, by taking them into his family, making them his children
and his heirs, rich in grace, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven, and
kings and priests unto him; taking them as beggars from the dunghill, to
sit among princes, and to inherit the throne of glory. The words may be
understood in a different sense, and more agreeably to the context, and
to the scope of Job's discourse, as they are by some (o), of God's
magnifying men by afflicting them; according to which, man is
represented as a poor, weak, strengthless creature, a worm and clod of
the earth; and the Lord as the mighty God, as of great and infinite
power and strength, between whom there is no manner of proportion; God
is not a man, that they should come together, or as if on equal foot;
nor man a match for God; to wrestle with principalities and powers,
which are not flesh and blood, is too much for men of themselves, and
how much less able are they to contend with God? Now Job by this
suggests, that his thought and sentiment of the matter was, and in which
he has a particular view to himself, and his own case; that as on the
one hand it was a demeaning the might and majesty of God, by making
himself a combatant with man; so on the other hand it was doing man too
much honour, as if he was one of more importance and consequence, and
more mighty and powerful than he is; whereas he is unworthy of the
divine notice in any respect, either to bestow his favours, or lay his
afflicting hand upon him; compare with this [Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014). Hence a late learned writer
(p), agreeably to the use of the word in the Arabic language, renders
it, "what is mortal man, that thou shouldest wrestle with him?" strive
and contend with him as if he was thy match, when thou couldest at one
blow, and even at a touch, dispatch him at once?

and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him? have an affection for
him, love him, delight in him, highly value and esteem him; it is
wonderful that God should have such a regard to any of the sons of men;
and yet it is certain that he has, as appears by the good things he has
provided and laid up for them in covenant, by sending his Son to die for
them, by calling and quickening them by his Spirit and grace, and
drawing them with loving kindness to himself; by taking continual care
of them, and keeping them as the apple of his eye: though these words
may be interpreted agreeably to the other sense, "that thou shouldest
set thine heart upon him?" or towards him, to afflict him and chastise
him with afflictions, so Bar Tzemach; or to stir up himself against him,
as Sephorno: and the above late learned writer chooses to render them,
"that thou shouldest set thine heart against him?" (q) and so the Hebrew
(r) particle is used in many other places; see [Eze
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#002); compare with this [Job
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#014), where R. Simeon Bar Tzemach (s)
thinks Elihu has respect to this passage of Job, and reproves him for
it.

\(o\) So Simeon Bar Tzemach, Sephorno, Mercerus, Diodati, Schultens. (p)
Schultens. (q) "et quod intendas cor tuum". (r) "Adversus eum". ibid.
(s) Vid. Noldii Ebr. Partic. Concord. p. 57.

[Job 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 7:18</span></span>

And that thou shouldest visit him every morning,.... That is, "daily",
continually, as Aben Ezra interprets it; either in a way of love, grace,
and mercy; so God has visited men, by raising up and sending his Son to
be a Redeemer of them; the Son of God has visited them, as the dayspring
from on high, by his incarnation and appearance in this world; see [Luk
1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068); and the Lord visits them, by
calling them by his grace, see [Act
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014); by communing and conversing
with them in a free and friendly manner; by helping right early, and by
renewing his mercies to them every morning, all which is matter of
admiration: or else the word may be taken in a different sense, as it
sometimes is, either for punishing man for sin, as in [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); or for chastising the Lord's
people, which is a visiting them, though in a fatherly way, and in love,
and which is often and frequently done, even every morning, see [Psa
89:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#032); and so the sense agrees with
the former, though by some given with this difference thus, "what is
man, that thou shouldest magnify him?" or make him great both in things
temporal and spiritual, as he had made Job in the time of his
prosperity, which he may have respect unto; having been the greatest man
in all the east, with respect to both characters, whereby it was plain
he had interest in the love and affections of the heart of God; and
"yet, notwithstanding, nevertheless, thou visitest him" (t), with
afflictions and chastisements continually; which may seem strange, and
look like a contradiction, that thou shouldest:

and try him every moment? by afflictive providences; in this way the
Lord often tries the faith and patience, the fear and love, the hope and
humility of his people, and all other graces, whereby they appear and
shine the brighter, which was Job's case, see [Job
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#010); and which he doubtless had in
view in all he had said, and more particularly expostulates about in the
following verses.

\(t\) "et tamen, nihilominus visitas eum", Michaelis.

[Job 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 7:19</span></span>

How long wilt thou not depart from me,.... From wrestling and contending
with him, and afflicting of him; the Lord was too hard a combatant for
job, and therefore he chose to be rid of him, and was impatient of it;
or "look off from me" (u); so Mr. Broughton renders it, "how long wilt
thou not look from me?" this is to be understood not of a look of love,
which Job would never have desired to have averted from him; but a
frowning and angry look, such as the Lord put on in this dispensation of
his providence towards him; the allusion may be to that sharp and
constant look, which antagonists in wrestling have upon each other while
conflicting together, and so the metaphor before used is still carried
on:

nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? some think Job has
reference to his disease which affected his throat, that being so dried
up, or having a quinsy in it, that he could not swallow his spittle, or
it was with great difficulty he did it; or rather it is a proverbial
expression, signifying that his afflictions were incessant, that he had
no respite nor intermission, had not space enough given him to swallow
down his spittle, or take his breath, as in [Job
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018); so Schultens observes, that with
the Arabians this was a proverbial form of speech, when they required
time for anything, "give me time to swallow my spittle"; or when they
had not proper time, or any intermission, used to say, "you will not
give me time to swallow my spittle"; and one being asked a multitude of
questions, replied, "suffer me to swallow my spittle", that is, give me
time to make an answer: or the sense is, that his antagonist in
wrestling with him held him so fast, and kept him so close to it, and so
twisted him about, and gave him fall upon fall, so that he had no time
to swallow his spittle; or he so collared him, and gripped him, and
almost throttled him, that he could not swallow it down; all which
intends how closely and incessantly Job was followed with one affliction
upon another, and how severe and distressing they were to him.

\(u\) "respicis a me?" Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt,
Michaelis; "avertis oculum a me?" Schultens.

[Job 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 7:20</span></span>

I have sinned,.... Some render it, "if I have sinned" (w); be it so that
I have, as my friends say, yet since there is forgiveness with thee, why
should I be so afflicted as I am? but there is no need of such a
supplement, the words are an affirmation, I have sinned, or I am a
sinner; not that he owned that he had been guilty of any notorious sin,
or had lived a sinful course of life, on account of which his
afflictions came upon him, as his friends suggested; but that he was not
without sin, was daily guilty of it, as men, even the best of men,
ordinarily are; and being a sinner was not a match for a holy God; he
could not contend with him, nor answer him for one sin of a thousand
committed by him in thought, word, or deed; and therefore desires him to
desist and depart from him, see [Luk
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008),

what shall I do unto thee? this he said, not as one in distress of mind
on account of sin, and under the load of the guilt of it, inquiring what
he must do to make satisfaction for it, how and what way he could be
saved from it; for he knew that nothing done by him in a ceremonial way
by sacrifices, nor in a moral way by the performance of duties, could
take away sin, or atone for it, or save him from it; he knew this was
only by his living Redeemer, and whom he knew and determined should be
his salvation, and he only; see [Job
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030); but rather as it may be
rendered, "what can or ought I do unto thee?" (x) that is, more than I
have done, namely, to confess my sin unto thee; what more dost thou
require of me? or what more can be done by me, than to repent of my sin,
acknowledge it, and beg pardon for it? as he does in [Job
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021), or "what can I do unto thee?"
thou art all over match for me, I cannot struggle and contend with thee,
a sinful man with an holy God:

O thou preserver of men? as he is in a providential way, the supporter
of men in their lives and beings; or, "O thou keeper of men" (y), as he
is, not only of Israel, but of all others, and that night and day;
perhaps Job may refer to his setting and keeping a watch over him, [Job
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#012); and enclosing and hedging him
all around with afflictions, so that he could not get out of the world
as he desired; or, "O thou observer of men" (z), of their words, ways,
works, and actions, and who kept such a strict eye upon him while
wrestling with him, and therefore what could he do? or, "O thou Saviour
of men" (a), by whom only I can be saved from the sins I have been and
am daily guilty of:

why hast thou set me as a mark against thee? as a butt to shoot thine
arrows at, one affliction after another, thick and fast, see [Job
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#012) [Lam
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#012); the words I think may be
rendered, "why hast thou appointed me to meet thee", or "for a meeting
with thee?" (b) as one man challenge, another to meet him in such a
place and fight him: alas! I am not equal to thee, I am a mere worm, not
able to contend with thee the mighty God, or to meet thee in the way of
thy judgments, and to endure the heavy strokes of thy angry hand; and so
Bar Tzemach paraphrases it,"thou hast hated me, and not loved me; that
thou hast set, or appointed me to meet thee, as a man meets his enemy in
the time of his wrath, and he stirs up against him all his fury:''and to
the same sense, and much in the same words, Jarchi interprets it:

so that I am a burden to myself? weary of his life, through the many
pressing and heavy afflictions upon him, as Rebekah was of hers, because
of the daughters of Heth, [Gen 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046).
The reading which we follow, and is followed by the Targum, and by most
interpreters, Jewish and Christian, is a correction of the scribes, and
one of the eighteen places corrected by them; which is no argument of
the corruption of the Hebrew text, but of the contrary; since this was
only placed in the margin of the Bible, as the Masorites afterwards did
with their various readings, showing only what was their sense of this,
and the like passages; and as an instruction how in their opinion to
understand them, still retaining the other reading or writing; and
which, according to Aben Ezra, may be rightly interpreted, and is, "so
that I am a burden to thee" (c); and which is followed by some,
signifying, as Job thought at least, that he was so offensive to him
that he could not bear him, but treated him as an enemy; was weary of
him, as God is said to be of sinners and their sins, and of the services
and duties of carnal professors, see [Isa
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014); so Abendana interprets it,"thou
hast set me for a mark unto thee, as if I was a burden to thee.''

\(w\) Vatablus, Drusius, Schmidt; so Sept. Syr. & Ar. (x) "quid faciam
aut facere possum tibi", Michaelis; "debeam", Schmidt. (y) "custos
hominum". V. L. Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus. (z)
"Observator", Schultens. (a) "Sospitatur", Codurcus; "servator",
Drusius, Schmidt, Michaelis. Vid. Witsii Oeconom. Foeder. l. 4. c. 3.
sect. 30. (b) "in occursum tibi", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Drusius.
(c) , Sept. "et tibi", Beza, Grotius.

[Job 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 7:21</span></span>

And why dost thou not pardon my transgression,.... Or "lift it up" (d);
every sin is a transgression of the law of God, and the guilt of it upon
the conscience is a burden too heavy to bear, and the punishment of it
is intolerable; pardon lifts up and takes away all manner of sin, and
all that is in sin; it takes off the load of sin from the conscience,
and eases it, and loosens from obligation to punishment for it, which
comes to pass in this manner: Jehovah has taken lifted up sin from his
people, and has put and laid it, or caused it to meet on his Son, by the
imputation of it to him; and he has voluntarily taken it on himself, and
has bore it, and has taken it away by his blood and sacrifice, which
being applied to the conscience of a sinner, lifts it up and takes it
from thence, and speaks peace and pardon to him; it wholly and entirely
removes it from him, even as far as the east is from the west; and for
such an application Job postulates with God, with whom there was
forgiveness, and who had proclaimed himself a God pardoning iniquity,
transgression, and sin; and which he does when he both removes the guilt
of it from the conscience, and takes away all the effects of it, such as
afflictions and the like; in which latter sense Job may well be
understood, as agreeing with his case and circumstances:

and take away mine iniquity? or "cause it to pass away" (e) from him, by
applying his pardoning grace and mercy to his conscience, and by
removing his afflicting hand from him:

for now shall I sleep in the dust; having sin pardoned, and the hand of
God removed; I shall depart out of the world in peace, lie down in the
grave, and rest quietly till the resurrection; there being in the bed of
dust no tossings to and fro as now, nor a being scared with dreams and
terrified with night visions. Mr. Broughton renders it, "whereas I lie
now in the dust"; as if it referred to his present case, sitting as a
mourner in dust and ashes, and his flesh clothed with clods of dust; or,
in a figurative sense, lying in the dust of self-abhorrence; but the
former sense seems best:

and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be; meaning not
in the morning of the resurrection, for then he will be found; but it is
a figurative way of speaking, as Bar Tzemach observes, just as one goes
to visit a sick man in a morning, and he finds him dead, and he is not
any more in the land of the living: many interpreters understand this as
Job's sense, that he should quickly die; he could not be a long time in
the circumstances he was; and therefore if the Lord had a mind to bestow
any good thing on him in the present life, he must make haste to do it,
since in a short time he should be gone, and then, if he sought for him,
it would be too late, he should be no more; but the sense is this, that
when he lay down in the dust, in the grave, he should be seen no more on
earth by any man, nay, not by the eye of God himself, should the most
early and the most diligent search be made for him. Mr. Broughton takes
it to be a petition and request to die, rendering the words,"why dost
thou not quickly seek me out, that I should be no more?''and to which
others (f) agree.

\(d\) "tolles", Montanus, Beza, Drusius, Mercerus, Michaelis. (e)
"transire facies", Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius. (f) So Junius &
Tremellius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 8](job008)

</div>
