<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job007)  [Next](job009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 8

In this chapter Bildad enters the discussion with Job; proceeding upon
the same lines as Eliphaz, he reproves him for his long and loud talk,
[Job 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001); asserts the justice of God
in his providence, of which the taking away of Job's children by death
for their transgression was an instance and proof, [Job
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003); and suggests, that if Job, who
had not sinned so heinously as they had, and therefore was spared, would
make his submission to God, and ask forgiveness of him, and behave for
the future with purity and uprightness, he need not doubt but God would
immediately appear and exert himself on his behalf, and bless him and
his with prosperity and plenty, [Job
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005); for this was his ordinary way of
dealing with the children of men, for the truth of which he refers him
to the records of former times, and to the sentiments of ancient men,
who lived longer, and were more knowing than he and his friends, on
whose opinion he does not desire him to rely, [Job
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008); and then by various similes used
by the ancients, or taken from them by Bildad, or which were of his own
inventing and framing, are set forth the short lived enjoyments, and
vain hope and confidence, of hypocrites and wicked men; as by the sudden
withering of rushes and flags of themselves, that grow in mire and
water, even in their greenness, before they are cut down, or cropped by
any hand, [Job 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#011); and by the
spider's web, which cannot stand and endure when leaned upon and held,
[Job 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#014); and by a flourishing tree
destroyed, and seen no more, [Job
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#016); and the chapter is concluded
with an observation and maxim, that he and the rest of his friends set
out upon, and were tenacious of; that God did not afflict good men in
any severe manner, but filled them with joy and gladness; and that he
would not long help and prosper wicked men, but bring them and their
dwelling place to nought; and this being the case of Job, he suggests
that he was such an one, [Job 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020).

[Job 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 8:1</span></span>

Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said. This was the second of Job's
friends that came to visit him, [Job
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011); and is mentioned next to Eliphaz
there, and takes his turn in this controversy in the same side; which no
doubt was agreed upon among themselves, as well as the part each should
bear, and the general sentiment they should pursue, which was the same
in them all. Some have observed, that Job's friends were like the
messengers that brought him the tidings of his losses, before one had
done speaking another came; and so as soon as one of his friends had
delivered his discourse, and before Job could well finish his reply, up
starts another to charge him afresh, as here Bildad did, who said as
follows.

[Job 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 8:2</span></span>

How long wilt thou speak these things?.... Either what he had delivered
in the "third" chapter in cursing the day of his birth, and wishing for
death, in which sentiments he still continued, and resolutely defended;
or those expressed in the "two" preceding chapters, in answer to
Eliphaz; this he said, as wondering that he should be able to continue
his discourse to such a length, and to express himself with such
vehemence, when his spirits might be thought to be so greatly depressed
by his afflictions, and his body enfeebled by diseases; or as angry with
him for his blasphemy against God, as he was ready to term it, his bold
and daring speeches of him, and charge of unrighteousness on him, and
for his disregard to what Eliphaz had said, his contempt of in and
opposition to it; or as impatient at his long reply, wanting him to
cease speaking, that he might return an answer, and therefore breaks in
upon him before he had well done, see [Job
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#002); or as despising what he had
said, representing it as idle talk, and as mere trifling; and so some
render the words, "how long wilt thou trifle after this sort?" (g) or
throw out such nonsense and fabulous stuff as this?

and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?
blustering, boisterous, and noisy, to which passionate words, expressed
in a loud and sonorous manner, may be compared; and so we say of a man
in a passion and rage, that he "storms". Bildad thought that his
speeches were hard and rough, and stout against God, and very indecent
and unbecoming a creature to his Maker, and not kind and civil to them
his friends; and yet they were like wind, vain and empty, great swelling
words, but words of vanity; they were spoken, and seemed big, but had
nothing solid and substantial in them, as Bildad thought.

\(g\) "nugaberis haec", Cocceius; "talia", Tigurine version; "talk after
this sort?" Broughton.

[Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 8:3</span></span>

Doth God pervert judgment?.... In his dealings with men in the way of
his providence; no, he does not; here Bildad opposes himself to Job, who
he thought had charged God with injustice in dealing with him, and his
children, in the manner he had done: the same thing is intended in the
following question:

or doth the Almighty pervert justice? for judgment and justice are the
same, and often go together in Scripture, as being done either by God or
men, when righteousness is executed by them, and this is never perverted
by the Lord; there is no unrighteousness in him, neither in his nature,
nor in his ways and works, either of providence or of grace; he is the
Judge of all the earth, that does and will do right; to subvert a man in
his cause, he approves not of in others, and will never do it himself;
to justify the wicked, and condemn the just, are both an abomination to
him, and therefore neither of these can ever be thought to be done by
him; for though he justifies the ungodly, he does not justify their
ungodliness, nor them in it, but from it, and that by the perfect
righteousness of his Son; whereby the law is fulfilled, and justice
satisfied, and so he is just while he is the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus; though he is gracious and merciful, he is also
righteous, and will not clear the guilty, or pardon sin without
satisfaction to his justice; and such as are truly just or righteous, he
never condemns here or hereafter; he may afflict them, but he delivers
them out of their afflictions, nor are they ever forsaken by him; and,
on the contrary, he punishes wicked men in this world, and in that to
come, as he has the angels that sinned, the old world, Sodom and
Gomorrah, and many others, and all wicked men will be punished with
everlasting destruction; yea, even so strict is his punitive justice,
that the sins of his own people being laid and found on his Son as their
surety, he has most severely punished him for them; he awoke the sword
of justice against him, spared him not, but delivered him to death for
us all; and though he forgives the iniquities of his children, he takes
vengeance on their inventions, and chastises them for their sins, that
they may not be condemned with the world; and, on the other hand, he is
not unrighteous to forget their work and labour of love, which he
rewards in a way of grace, as well as it is a righteous thing with him
to render tribulation to them that trouble them: the righteousness of
God is known by the judgments he executes on wicked men, and especially
will be manifest in his judgments on antichrist; and though the justice
of God in the course of his providence, in some instances, may not now
be so clear, his judgments will be made manifest, and especially at the
great day of judgment, when everything shall be brought to account, and
God will judge the world in righteousness; all which, we may be assured
of, is and will be executed by him, from the consideration of his nature
and perfections, and particularly from the name he goes by in this
passage, being El, the mighty God, who is able to save and to destroy,
to save the righteous, and destroy the wicked; and is Shaddai, all
sufficient, stands in need of nothing; nor can he receive anything that
is not his own, and therefore incapable of being bribed to the
perversion of justice and judgment.

[Job 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 8:4</span></span>

If thy children have sinned against him,.... As no doubt they had, and,
as Bildad thought, in a very notorious manner, and therefore were
righteously punished for them; this instance is produced as a proof of
God's not perverting, but doing justice, and the rather, because it was
on account of this that it was supposed that Job charged, or was ready
to charge, God with injustice; this was so far from it, that it was a
righteous thing to do it, "if" or "seeing" his children had sinned; or
"because" they have sinned, or "though" they have sinned, as the words
(h) are by some differently rendered; and either way shows that God did
not pervert justice, but acted agreeably to it. Mr. Broughton renders
them, "as thy children have sinned against him, so hath he sent them
into the hand of their trespass"; as a righteous retaliation for it:
that Job's children had sinned, there is no question to be made of it;
they were born in sin, though born of godly parents; and though they had
a religious education, yet no doubt were guilty of sin in their younger
years, as well as when grown up; and even though good men, as there may
be reason to conclude they were, yet daily sinning, for there are none
without sin; and also it is true, that all sin is against God, contrary
to his nature and will, a breach and transgression of his law, and an
act of hostility against himself, and a trampling under foot, or at
least a neglect, of his legislative power and authority, which is an
aggravation of it; yet it does not appear that Job's children were
guilty of any notorious sins or atrocious crimes, or lived a sinful
course of life, for which the judgments of God came upon them; nor is it
a clear case that they were taken away by death in the manner they were
on account of their sins, but rather purely for the trial of Job's
integrity, faith, and patience:

and he have cast them away for their transgression; or "by the hand of
it" (i); by means of it, because of it, being provoked with it. Bildad
represents them as abandoned sinners, as castaways and reprobates,
rejected of God with abhorrence, and utterly ruined. Some render it,
"hath sent them into the hand of their transgression" (k), or trespass;
that is, delivered them up to the power and dominion of sin, gave them
up to their hearts' lusts, and to vile affections, to do things not
convenient, and which they pursued to their ruin; the Targum is,"he sent
them into the place of their transgression (l);''into hell, which their
transgressions deserved, and for which they were fitted by them. Some a
little more mildly render the words, "he sent them away" (m); that is,
dismissed them out of the world, took them out of it by death; which
dismission is sometimes in peace, as good old Simeon prayed for, and
sometimes in wrath, as Saul was taken away, see [Luk
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029); the latter is the meaning here.

\(h\) "quandoquidem", Michaelis; "quia", Vatablus; "etiamsi", V. L. (i)
"in manu iniquitatis suae", V. L. so Montanus, Cocceius. (k) "In manum
transgressionis ipsorum", Piscator, Beza, Schmidt, Michaelis, Schultens;
"in potestatem defectionis ipsorum", Junius & Tremellius. (l) So Munster
(m) "et dimisit eos", Drusius; "e mundo", Pagninus, Vatablus; so Gersom.

[Job 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 8:5</span></span>

If thou wouldest seek unto God betimes,.... Here Bildad seems to think
more mildly, and speak more kindly to Job, that though he had sinned,
yet not in so gross a manner as his children, since he was spared, and
they were not; and therefore if he would apply himself to God, and
supplicate his grace and mercy, and live a godly life, it might yet be
well with him, and he be restored to his former or to better
circumstances; his sense is, that he would advise him, as Eliphaz had
done before, [Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008); to seek unto
God "by prayer", as the Targum adds, and of which it is explained in the
next clause, and that he would do this "betimes", or "in the morning"
(n); which is a proper time for prayer, and was one of the seasons good
men in former times made use of for that purpose; see [Psa
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003); or that he would seek him in the
first place, and above all things, take the first opportunity to do it,
without any procrastination of it, and that with eagerness and
earnestness, with his whole heart and soul; for God is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him, and those that seek him early shall find
him:

and make thy supplication to the Almighty: not pleading any merit of his
own, as deserving of any blessing on account of what he had done; but
ask what he should as a favour, as a free gift, in a way of grace and
mercy, as the word (o) signifies; call for the pity of the Almighty, as
Broughton renders it.

\(n\) "mane quaesieris", Pagninus, Piscator, Mercerus. (o) So Schmidt in
loc.

[Job 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 8:6</span></span>

If thou wert pure and upright,.... By which he tacitly intimates that he
was neither; though the character given of him is, that he was perfect
and upright, feared God and eschewed evil, and which is confirmed by God
himself, and even after he had been tried by sore afflictions. Bildad's
meaning is, if he was pure in heart, and upright in his life and
conversation, then things would be well with him. Men's hearts are
naturally impure; no man is pure of himself, or can make his heart pure;
nor is there any good man that is so pure as to be entirely free from
sin; but such are pure in heart, who have clean hearts created, and
right spirits renewed in them; or have new hearts and new spirits given
them; have their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and so keep
the faith in a pure conscience; having their hearts purified by faith in
the blood of Christ, whose blood cleanses from all sin; and in this
sense Job was pure, having an interest in a living Redeemer, and in his
blood, and a partaker of his grace; and that he was upright is before
testified of him, though now called in question, an if being put upon
it, as well as on the former, having in the course of his life walked
uprightly, according to the will of God revealed unto him:

surely now; directly at once, without delay, as Sephorno interprets it;
it need not be doubted of, verily so it would be:

he would awake for thee; who though he neither slumbers nor sleeps, yet
seems to be asleep when he suffers his people to be afflicted,
distressed, and oppressed, and therefore they cry unto him to awake to
their judgment, and their cause; see [Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008); the sense is, that he would stir
up and exert himself, and show himself strong on his behalf, and appear
to be on his side, and work deliverance and salvation for him; or awake
his mercy, grace, and goodness, as some Jewish commentators (p)
interpret it; that is, bestow his favours upon him:

and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous; which some
understand of his body, the earthly house of his tabernacle, which if
his soul was pure and upright that dwelt in it, might be called the
habitation of righteousness; which, were this the case, would become
healthful that was now covered with worms, and clods of dust: others
interpret it of the soul, as Aben Ezra and Ben Gersom, the seat of
righteousness, and of all the graces of the Spirit; which is in a
prosperous condition when these graces are in lively exercise, and the
presence of God, and the light of his countenance, and communion with
him, are enjoyed; but rather his dwelling house in a literal sense, and
all his domestic affairs, are here meant; and it is signified that all
would be again in peace and prosperity, and he should enjoy great plenty
of good things should he behave well; and here is a tacit intimation as
if his habitation had not been an habitation of righteousness, but had
been filled with the mammon of unrighteousness, with goods ill gotten,
such as were obtained by rapine and oppression, and neither he nor his
family righteous; a very unjust and iniquitous insinuation: the Targum
paraphrases it, "and, shall make the beauty of thy righteousness
perfect" (q); but Job had a more beautiful righteousness than his own;
his was but as rags, and neither pure nor perfect; even the
righteousness of Christ, which is perfect and beautiful, and makes such
so, that are arrayed with it; see [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002).

\(p\) Gersom, Simeon Bar Tzemach, Sephorno. (q) "pulchritudinent
justitiae tuae", Bolducius.

[Job 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 8:7</span></span>

Though thy beginning was small,.... When, he first set out in the world;
and which though it greatly increased, and he was the greatest man in
all the east, yet Bildad suggests, should he behave well, that was
comparatively small to what it would be with him hereafter; and which
was fact, for he had double of what he before enjoyed; so Mr. Broughton
renders the words, "and thy former state should be little to thy
latter": or rather the sense and meaning is, "though thy beginning
should be small" (r); be it so that it is; or rather that though he
should begin again in the world with very little, as indeed at present
he had nothing to begin with, and when he did it was but with little;
one gave him a piece of money, and another an earring of gold:

yet thy latter end should greatly increase; as it did, for the Lord
blessed his latter end, and he had more than at the beginning, even
double to what he had in his most flourishing circumstances; see [Job
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#011), &c. Bildad seems to have spoken
under a spirit of prophecy, without being sensible of it, and not
imagining in the least that so it would be in fact; for he only affirms
it on supposition of Job's good behaviour for the future, putting it
entirely upon that condition, which he had no great expectation of it
ever being performed.

\(r\) "etsi fuerit", so some in Michaelis.

[Job 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 8:8</span></span>

For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age,.... With respect to the
truth of what he had said, or should say; he does not desire Job to take
his word for it, but inquire how it was in former times; by which it
would appear, that when good men have been in affliction and trouble,
and have behaved well under it, as became them, they have been delivered
out of it, and have been afterwards in more flourishing and comfortable
circumstances, as Noah, Abraham, Lot, and others; and that wicked men
and hypocrites, though they have flourished for a while, yet destruction
has sooner or later come upon them, and they have utterly perished, as
the descendants of Cain, the builders of Babel, and the men of Sodom,
and others; whereas good and upright men are never cast away by the
Lord, no instance can be given of it; all which would appear, if inquiry
was made into what had happened in the "former age" not the "first age",
as the Septuagint version, the age or generation in which the first man
and woman lived; for who were "their fathers", mentioned in the next
clause? but the age or generation preceding that in which Job and his
friends lived; and the knowledge of things done in that might with some
application and diligence be more easily obtained:

and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers; of the fathers of
the men of the former age, who lived in the age preceding that, and from
whom their posterity had received the knowledge of many things by
tradition, as they had received from their fathers that lived before
them and so upwards; things being handed down in a traditionary way from
father to son; and though these fathers were dead, yet, by their
traditions that were preserved, they were capable of teaching and
instructing men; and their sayings and sentiments deserved regard, and
were had in much esteem; but yet being uninspired and fallible men, were
not to be received without examination; for though truth is of the
greatest antiquity, and to be revered on that account, yet error is
almost as old as that; and therefore great care is to be taken how any
thing is received purely upon the score of antiquity; and great pains,
diligence, and circumspection, are necessary to a due search of the
fathers, and coming at their sense and sentiments; and so as to
distinguish between truth and error, and get a true knowledge of facts
done in ancient times; such a search is to be made in like manner as one
would search for gold and silver, and hidden treasures.

[Job 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 8:9</span></span>

For we are but of yesterday (s),.... Which is not to be understood
strictly of the day last past, but of a short space of time backward;
and especially when compared with the antediluvian fathers, who lived
the far greater part of them upwards of nine hundred years; otherwise
Bildad and his two friends were men in years; Eliphaz says, that with
them were the gray headed and very aged men, much older than the father
of Job, and Elihu speaks of himself as a young man, and of them as very
old; see [Job 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010),

and know nothing; which is not to be taken in an absolute sense, for
they knew much of the things of nature, providence, and grace; they were
men of great understanding in things natural, civil, and religious, as
appears by their discourses; but in a comparative sense, or when
compared with the long lived patriarchs, who through the length of their
days had much time and opportunity to make their observations on things,
to learn the arts and sciences, and improve themselves in all useful
knowledge, human and divine; for which reason Job is sent to inquire of
them; whereas they had been but a little while in the world, and knew
but little, to whom might be applied that saying, as now to men since,
"ars longa, vita brevis"; and they knew nothing as it is to be known, or
perfectly, or in comparison of the saints in heaven; for they that know
most here know but in part, see through a glass darkly; but in the other
world they see face to face, and know as they are known. Moreover,
Bildad might say this of himself and his friends, in a modest manner,
having learned to know themselves, their weakness, and their folly; and
the first and great lesson of wisdom is to become fools in men's own
apprehension, in order to be truly wise, having the like sense of
themselves as Agur had, [Pro 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#002); see
[Co1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018); or rather this might be
said as being the sense of Job concerning them, who had a very mean and
indifferent opinion of them; see [Job
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#002); and therefore Bildad would not
have him take their sense of things, but inquire of persons older and
wiser:

because our days upon earth are a shadow; man's time is rather measured
by days than by months and years, being so short; and these are called
"days" on earth, to distinguish them from the days of heaven, which are
one everlasting day, in which there is no night of darkness, either in a
literal or figurative sense, and which will never end; but the days of
this life are like a "shadow", dark and obscure; full of the darkness of
adversity and trouble, as well as greatly deficient in the light of
knowledge; there is nothing in them solid and substantial; the greatest
and best things of this life are but a vain show; in heaven there is a
better and more enduring substance: every thing is mutable and uncertain
here; man is subject to a variety of changes in his mind and body, in
family and outward estate and circumstances: and life itself is but a
vapour, which appears a while and soon vanishes away; or rather like a
shadow, that declines, is fleeting, and quickly gone; see [Ch1
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015).

\(s\) Pindar. Pythia, Ode 8.

[Job 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 8:10</span></span>

Shall not they teach thee, and tell thee,.... That is, the men of the
former age, and their fathers before them, Job is directed to inquire
of, and to prepare for a search into their records and traditions; from
whom he might reasonably expect to be taught and told things that would
be very instructive and useful to him in his present circumstances:

and utter words out of their heart? such as were the effect of mature
judgment and long observation, and which they had laid up in their
hearts, and brought out from their treasure there; and, with the
greatest faithfulness and sincerity, had either committed them to
writing, or delivered them in a traditionary way to their posterity, to
be communicated to theirs; and which might be depended upon as true and
genuine, being men of probity, uprightness, and singleness of heart; who
declared sincerely what they knew, and spoke not with a double heart,
having no intention to deceive, as it cannot be thought they would
impose upon their own children; and therefore Job might safely receive
what they uttered, and depend upon it as truth and fact; and what they
said, as Jarchi observes, is as follows; or what follows Bildad
collected from them, and so might Job, and think he heard them "saying",
as Piscator supplies the text, what is expressed in the following
verses, if not in their words, yet as their sense.

[Job 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 8:11</span></span>

Can the rush grow up without mire?.... No, at least not long, or so as
to lift up his head on high, as the word signifies (a); the rush or
bulrush, which seems to be meant, delights in watery places, and has its
name in Hebrew from its absorbing or drinking up water; it grows in
moist and watery clay, or in marshy places, which Jarchi says is the
sense of the word here used; the Septuagint understands it of the "paper
reed", which, as Pliny (b) observes, grows in the marshy places of
Egypt, and by the still waters of the river Nile:

can the flag grow without water? or "the sedge" (c); which usually grows
in moist places, and on the banks of rivers; this unless in such places,
or if without water, cannot grow long, or make any very large increase,
or come to maturity; so some (d) render it, "if the rush should grow up
without", &c. then it would be with it as follows.

\(a\) "an attollit se", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius; "an
superbiet", so some; Beza, Schultens. (b) Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 11. (c)
"carectum", V. L. "ulva", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt,
Michaelis, Schultens. (d) Sic Bar Tzemach & Belgae.

[Job 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 8:12</span></span>

Whilst it is yet in its greenness,.... Before it is come to its full
height, or to a proper ripeness; when as yet it has not flowered, or is
about it; before the time usual for it to turn and change; it being
without moisture, water, or watery clay, will change:

and not cut down; by the scythe, or cropped by the hand of man:

it withereth before any other herb; of itself; rather sooner than such
that do not require so much moisture; or in the sight and presence of
them, they looking on as it were, and deriding it; a poetical
representation, as Schultens observes: next follows the accommodation of
these similes to wicked and hypocritical men.

[Job 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 8:13</span></span>

So are the paths of all that forget God,.... Who forget that there is a
God; he is not in all, and scarce in any of their thoughts, and they
live without him in the world; who forget the works of God, of creation
and providence, in which there is a glorious display of his being and
perfections; who forget the benefits and blessings of his goodness they
are every day partakers of, and are not thankful for them; and who
forget the word, worship, and ordinances of God, and follow after and
observe lying vanities, idols, and the works of men's hands, and worship
them, being unmindful of the rock of their salvation: now such men, as
well as the hypocrites in the next clause, are like bulrushes and flags,
or sedge, being unfruitful, useless, and unprofitable; and, for their
sensuality and worldly mindedness, standing in the mire and clay of an
unregenerate state, and of carnal and worldly lusts; and though,
especially the latter, may carry their heads high in a profession of
religion, and make a fair show in the flesh while it is a time of
outward prosperity with them, but when tribulation arises on the account
of religion, they are presently offended, and apostatize; being
destitute of the true grace of God, and having the root of the matter in
them, they wither of themselves; they soon drop their profession in the
view of all good men, comparable to herbs and green grass, which abide
in their verdure, when the other are gone and are seen no more:

and the hypocrite's hope shall perish; who are either the same with
those before described, who, being in prosperous circumstances, forget
the God of their mercies they make a profession of, like Jeshurun of
old, or different persons, as Bar Tzemach thinks, the former designing
open profane sinners, these secret ones, under the appearance of good
men: an "hypocrite" is one whose inside is not as his outside, as the
Jews say; who is outwardly righteous, but inwardly wicked; has a form of
godliness, but not the power of it; a name to live, but dead; that makes
a show of religion and devotion, attending the worship and ordinances of
God in an external way, as if he had great delight in him and them, when
his heart is removed far from him: and such have their "hope", for the
present, of being in the favour of God, and of future happiness, which
is founded on their outward prosperity their esteem among men, and more
especially their external righteousness, and profession of religion; but
this will "perish", even both the ground of their hope, the riches and
righteousness, which come to nothing, and the hope that is built
thereupon sinks into despair; if not in life, as it sometimes does, yet
always at death, see [Job 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020);
Bildad seems to have Job in view here, whom he esteemed an hypocrite.

[Job 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 8:14</span></span>

Whose hope shall be cut off,.... The same thing as before, expressed in
different words, and repeated for the certainty of it; signifying that
it should be of no manner of use, should be wholly lost, and issue in
black despair: the word has the signification of loathing, and is
differently rendered, either, "whom his hope shall loathe" (e) or, "who
shall loathe his hope" (f); he shall fret and tease, and vex himself
that he should be such a fool to entertain such a vain hope, or to place
hope and confidence in such vain things, finding himself most sadly
disappointed:

and whose trust shall be a spider's web; or "a spider's house" (g); and
such its web is to it; having made it, it encloses itself in it, and
dwells securely: very fitly is the hope and confidence of an hypocrite
compared to a spider's web, which is a very nice and curious piece of
workmanship, as are the outward works of righteousness, done by
hypocrites they are wrought out and set off to the best advantage, to be
seen of men; yet very slight and thin, and will bear no weight; such are
the best works of carnal professors; they make a fine appearance, but
have no substance, do not flow from principles of grace, nor are done in
the strength of Christ, or to the glory of God; are but "splendida
peccata", as one calls them, and fall infinitely short of bearing the
weight of the salvation of the soul: as the spider's web is spun out of
its own bowels, so the works of such persons are wholly of themselves;
they are their own, done without the grace of God and spirit of Christ;
and such webs are not fit for garments, are too thin to cover naked
souls; insufficient to shelter from divine wrath and vengeance; cannot
bear the besom of justice, one stroke of which will sweep them all away;
and though they may think themselves safe enclosed in them as in a
house, they will find themselves in the issue wretchedly mistaken; for
there is no shelter, safety, and security, in such cobwebs; there is
none but in Christ and his righteousness.

\(e\) "quem abominabitur spes ejus", Montanus; "fastidit", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "cum taedio rejectabit", Schultens. (f) "Quippe
abominabitur spem suam", Schmidt. (g) "domus araneae, vel aranei";
Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Job 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 8:15</span></span>

He shall lean upon his house,.... Either the spider or the hypocrite, or
the hypocrite as the spider; that is, that which is the ground of his
confidence, which is as the spider's house, on that he shall depend,
either on his riches and outward prosperity, which he promises himself a
long continuance of, and from whence he concludes himself to be high in
the favour and good will of God; or on his works of righteousness, his
outward profession of religion, attendance on external worship, and a
round of duties performed by him; in these he trusts, on these he
depends, in such webs he enwraps himself, in such a house he dwells, and
imagines himself safe; which is only making flesh his arm, leaning upon
a broken reed, and building an house upon the sand: the Septuagint
version is, "if he prop up his house", by repeated outward acts of
religion:

but it shall not stand: whether it be riches, these are uncertain
things, of no continuance; there are no riches durable but the
unsearchable riches of Christ and his grace; or whether it be a man's
own righteousness, which he endeavours to establish, or "make to stand",
as the phrase is in [Rom 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003); but in
vain; it is but a sandy foundation to build on; or the hope and
confidence laid upon it is like a house built on the sand, and, when
rain falls, floods come, and winds beat upon it, it falls; and great is
the fall of it, [Mat 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026),

he shall hold it fast; as the worldling does his wealth, his gold and
his silver; but it is snatched out of his hand by one providence or
another, or however at last death obliges him to part with it; and the
self-righteous man holds fast his righteousness, it is his own, he is
fond of, an house of his own building, and cannot bear to have it
demolished; an idol of his own setting up, and to take it away is to
take away his gods; and what has he more? wherefore he holds it as fast
as he can, and will not let it go till he can hold it no longer; or, "he
shall fortify himself in it" (h), as in a castle or strong hold, which
he thinks impregnable, yet will soon and easily be battered down by
divine justice:

but it shall not endure; gold perishes, riches come to nought, wealth is
no enduring substance, nor is a man's righteousness lasting; only
Christ's righteousness is everlasting; true grace endures to eternal and
issues in it; but external gifts, speculative and rational knowledge,
and a mere profession of religion, fail, cease, and vanish away.

\(h\) "roborabit in eam", Montanus, Bolducius; "firmat se", Vatablus; so
the Targum and Ben Gersom.

[Job 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 8:16</span></span>

He is green before the sun,.... Which some understand of the rush or
flag, of which a further account is given, as setting forth more fully
the case of wicked men and hypocrites; but to either of these do not
agree the situation of it in a garden, the shooting forth of its
branches, and the height of it, and its striking its roots deep in stony
places: Cocceius interprets it of the "herb" or grass before which the
flag withers, [Job 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#012); but the same
objections, or most of them, lie against that also; rather, from the
description of it, a tall large tree is designed, to which hypocrites in
their most flourishing circumstances are compared, and yet come to
nothing, [Psa 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035); that is "green"
in its leaves, and looks beautiful, so they in a profession of religion,
which is like green leaves without fruit; they make in it a fair show in
the flesh, take up and him the lamp of a profession, and retain it
bright and fair for a time; or, like a tree full of sap, or "juicy" (i);
or, as Mr. Broughton renders it, "juiceful"; denoting, not a fulness of
the spirit and his grace, or of faith, hope, love, &c. and of
righteousness and goodness, but of, outward prosperity, having as much
as heart could wish, and great plenty of good things laid up for many
years: and this tree is said to be green and juicy "before the sun";
either in the presence and through the influence of it, as hypocrites
flourish, even in a religious way, while the sun of prosperity shines
upon them, and no longer; or openly and publicly, in the sight of all
men, as this phrase is used, [Sa2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011); and as such men do, in the view
of all men, professors and profane, doing all they do to be seen of men,
and before whom they are outwardly righteous, and reckoned good men; or,
"before the sun" rises, as the Targum and Aben Ezra, so hypocrites
flourish, before the sun of persecution arises and smites them, because
of their profession, and then they drop it; see [Mat
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#006),

and his branch shooteth forth in his garden; or "over" (k) it; and
branch may be put branches, which in a flourishing tree spread
themselves to cover a considerable piece of ground: Mr. Broughton
renders it, "and his suckers sprout over his orchard"; all which may
denote the increase of a wicked man, in his family, in his wealth and
substance, and particularly in his posterity, which are as branches and
suckers from him; and Bildad, if these are his own words, may have
respect to Job, and to his large substance and number of children he had
in his prosperity, when he had an hedge set about him, and was enclosed
as in a garden: and whereas the church of God is sometimes compared to a
garden, [Sol 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012); it agrees very well
with hypocrites, who have a place there, and are called hypocrites in
Sion, where they have a name, and flourish for a while: many
interpreters, both Jewish (l) and Christian (m), interpret this, and
what follows, of truly righteous and good men under afflictive
providences, who notwithstanding continue, and are not the worse, but
the better for them; their leaf of profession is always green, and
withers not; and that "before the sun", even of adversity and
affliction; and though that beats upon them, and smites them severely,
they are like green olive trees, or the cedars of God, full of sap, full
of the grace of God, and continually supplied with it; and so patiently
endure temptation and affliction, bear the heat and burden of the day,
and are not careful in the year of drought; see [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006); such are planted in the garden
and house of the Lord by himself and shall never be rooted up; where
their branches spread, and they grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
all divine things, and are filled with the fruits of righteousness.

\(i\) "succosus", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Schultens; "viridis
quidem et succi plenus", Michaelis. (k) "supra", Junius & Tremellius,
Mercerus, Codurcus; "super", Montanus, Piscator, Schmidt, Schultens. (l)
Saadiah Caon, R. Levi, Ben Gersom. (m) Vatablus, Beza, Diodati,
Cocceius, Gussetius, p. 247.

[Job 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 8:17</span></span>

His roots are wrapped about the heap,.... The heap of stones where the
tree stands; it strikes its roots among them, and implicates and twists
them about them, and secures itself and grows up notwithstanding them:
and this expresses the seeming stable state and condition of hypocrites
for a season, who not only flourish, but seem to take root; and who
maintain their ground amidst some difficulties; this fitly agrees with
and describes such hearers of the word, and professors of religion,
comparable to the seed sown on stony ground, [Mat
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005),

and seeth the place of stones; or, "the house of stones" (n); a house
built of stones, high and stately; yet this tree rises higher than that,
overtops and overlooks it; and is represented as viewing it thoroughly,
or looking down upon it, and all around it, being so high and so
spreading; the Targum renders it, implicateth the house of stones;
"platteth", as Mr. Broughton, or twists about them, and so many of the
Jewish writers; but this seems to be designed in the former clause: all
this suits very well with good men, whose "roots are wrapped about the
fountain" (o); as the words may be rendered; about the love of God, in
which they are rooted and grounded, and are like trees planted by rivers
of water, the river of divine love, which refreshes, revives, and makes
them fruitful; and about Christ, the fountain of gardens and well of
living waters; in whom they are rooted and built up, increase, flourish,
and are established; and though they are among stones, and attended with
many difficulties, yet they abide and surmount all; believe in hope
against hope, and see and enjoy, yea, even dwell in the house of stones,
the church of God, built on a rock, against which the gates of hell
cannot prevail.

\(n\) "domum lapidum", Montanus, Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis,
Schultens; so Tigurine version, Codurcus, Junius & Tremellius. (o)
"juxta fontem", Pagninus, Mercerus; so Vatablus, Piscator, Gersom, and
Bar Tzemach.

[Job 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 8:18</span></span>

If he destroy him from his place,.... If the sun when he is risen
strikes the tree with such vehement heat that it withers and utterly
perishes from the place where it grew; or roots it up, so the Targum and
Nachmanides; or, if God destroys the hypocrite from his place, or he is
by one means or another removed out of the garden, the church, being
detested and rejected by good men; or from all his worldly enjoyments,
his honour, credit, and esteem with men, which are all precarious,
fickle, and inconstant; or out of the world, being cut down as a cumber
ground:

then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee; that is, either
the tree shall deny that it ever was planted in such a place, or rather
the place shall deny that the tree ever was planted there; the sense is,
that it shall be so utterly destroyed, that neither root nor branch
shall be left, nor anything to show that it ever grew there; its place
shall know it no more, see [Job 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#010);
or God shall deny the hypocrite, and say he never saw him nor knew him;
he never belonged to him, nor was under his care; he never looked upon
him with a look of love, grace, and mercy; he never had any delight and
pleasure in him, nor regarded him as one of his; he was no tree of his
planting, watering, and keeping, see [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023); this seems most difficult to
accommodate to a good man, and those who carry it that way seem to be
most puzzled with this; some render it, "shall he be swallowed?" or,
"shall anyone in, allow him up?" (p) destroy or root him out of his
place? none shall: the root of the righteous cannot be moved, nor they
from that; not from the everlasting love of God, in which they are
rooted, nor from Christ, in whom they are fixed: others understand this
of the digging up of a tree, and transplanting it to another place,
where it grows as well, or better; and so the people of God, though they
have many stripping providences, and are removed from place to place,
and from one condition to another, so that their former state and place
know them no more; yet all things work together for their good.

\(p\) "num absorbebitur a loco suo?" Beza; "num absorbebit cum quisquam
e loco suo", Diodatus.

[Job 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 8:19</span></span>

Behold, this is the joy of his way,.... Of the state and condition of
the hypocrite, who, while he is in outward prosperity, exults and
rejoices, but his joy is but short, it is but for a moment, [Job
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005); and this is what it comes to at
last, and issues in, even entire destruction from his place; which,
because it may seem strange and wonderful, and is worthy of notice and
consideration, as well as to express a certainty of it, the word
"behold" is prefixed; though this also is understood, by some, of good
men who have much spiritual joy in their present state and condition, be
it what it will; they have joy and peace in believing, even joy
unspeakable, and full of glory; they have joy in the Lord, and in his
ways in which they walk, when they have trouble in the world; they
rejoice and even glory in tribulation, and are cheerful be they where
they will, though removed from their native place and country; and
especially this will be their case when they are transplanted from earth
to heaven, the better and heavenly country:

and out of the earth shall others grow; in their room and stead; where
the tall flourishing tree once stood, but now utterly destroyed, other
trees should grow; signifying, either the children of the hypocrites and
wicked men, that should spring up in their place and imitate them, and
come to the same end; or rather such as were strangers to them, that
should inherit their substance and estates; and it may be good men that
should succeed them, and come into the possession of all their wealth,
even such as were before in mean circumstances, and so may be said to
come "out of the earth": it may be rendered, "out of another dust" or
"earth shall they grow" (q); signifying, that the wicked should be
utterly destroyed, they and theirs; and that such as were of another
family, and as it were of another earth and country, should stand in
their place; see [Job 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016); this may
be interpreted of good men, who, though they die, others are raised up
in their stead; God will have a seed to serve him as long as the sun and
moon endure; though they are forced to fly from their native place,
being persecuted, to strange cities, or removed into the heavenly
regions, yet God raises up others to till up their places, and
oftentimes out of other families, even of the ungodly, to support his
cause and interest; and understanding the whole of truly righteous
persons seems best to connect the sense with the following words.

\(q\) "de pulvere alio", Montanus, Bolducius, Cocceius; so the Targum;
"de terra alia", Pagninus, Mercerus.

[Job 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 8:20</span></span>

Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man,.... A sincere, upright,
good man; one that is truly gracious; who, though he is not "perfect" in
himself, yet in Christ; and though not with respect to sanctification,
which is as yet imperfect in him, yet with respect to justification,
being perfectly justified by the righteousness of Christ, and all his
sins pardoned for his sake: such an one God will never "cast away"; not
out of his sight, being engraven on the palms of his hands, nor out of
his heart's love; or will not "loath" (r) him, as the Targum, or reject
him with abhorrence and contempt; he will not cast him out of his
covenant, which is ordered in all things and sure; nor out of the hands
of his son, where he has put him, and from whence none can pluck; nor
out of his family, where the son abides for ever; or so as to perish
eternally, this would be contrary to his love, to his foreknowledge, and
to his covenant; so far is he from it, that he has the greatest regard
for such, delights in them, admits thereto nearness to himself, sets
them as a seal on his heart, keeps them as the apple of his eye, and
preserves them safe to his kingdom and glory:

neither will he help the evil doers; meaning, not everyone that does
evil, or sins, but such who live in sin, make a trade of sinning, are
frequent and constant in the commission of it; such God will not help,
or "take by the hand" (s), in order to deliver from evil, as Gersom
observes; to help them out of mischief and trouble their sins have
brought upon them; or to strengthen them, support and uphold them, in
their present circumstances, and much less so as to admit them to
fellowship and communion with him: these words, with what follow, are
Bildad's conclusion upon the sayings and sentiments of the ancients,
which may be supposed, and are thought by some, to end at the preceding
[Job 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#019).

\(r\) "abominatur", Vatablus; "aversatur", Beza, Mercerus, Drusius,
Piscator. (s) "nec apprehendit manum", Pagninus, Vatablus, Mercerus,
Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Job 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 8:21</span></span>

Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.
Directing himself to Job; and suggesting, that if he was a perfect,
sincere, and upright man. God would not cast him away utterly, but help
him out of his present circumstances, and restore him to prosperity; and
not leave him until he had filled his heart with so much joy, that his
mouth and lips, being also full of it, should break forth in strong
expressions of it, and in the most exulting strains, as if it was a time
of jubilee with him; see [Psa 126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002);
but Bildad tacitly insinuates that Job was not a perfect and good man
but an evil doer, whom God had cast away and would not help; and this he
concluded from the distressed circumstances he was now in; which was no
rule of judgment, and a very unfair way of reasoning, since love and
hatred are not to be known by outward prosperity and adversity, [Ecc
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#001). Bar Tzemach interprets "laughing"
as at his own goodness, and "rejoicing" as at the evil of the wicked.

[Job 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 8:22</span></span>

They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame,.... The Chaldeans and
Sabeans, who had plundered him of his substance, when they should see
him restored to his former prosperity, beyond all hope and expectation,
and themselves liable to his resentment, and under the displeasure of
Providence: the phrase denotes utter confusion, and such as is visible
as the clothes upon a man's back; see [Psa
132:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#018),

and the dwelling place of the wicked shall come to naught; or, "shall
not be" (t); shall be no more; be utterly destroyed, and no more built
up again; even such dwelling places they fancied would continue for
ever, and perpetuate their names to the latest posterity; but the curse
of God being in them, and upon them, they come to nothing, and are no
more: thus ends Bildad's speech; Job's answer to it follows.

\(t\) "non erit", Pagninus, Mercerus, Drusius, Michaelis.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 9](job009)

</div>
