<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job008)  [Next](job010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 9

This and the following chapter contain Job's answer to Bildad, and in
this he asserts the strict justice at God; which is such, that no man
can be just in his sight, not being able to answer to one charge, or for
one sin, of a thousand he is guilty of, [Job
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#001); and that such are his wisdom and
power, that the most daring man cannot expect to succeed in an
opposition to him, [Job 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004); instances
are given of his power in the works of nature and providence, [Job
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#005); notice is taken of the
imperceptibleness of his actions and motions, and of his sovereignty in
all his ways, [Job 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#011); and of his
fierce wrath and anger, which is such as obliges the proudest of men to
stoop under him; and therefore Job chose not to contend in a judicial
way with him, but in a suppliant manner would entreat him, since his
hand was so heavy upon him, [Job 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013);
he affirms, in direct opposition to Bildad and his friends, and insists
upon it, that God afflicts both the righteous and the wicked; yea, gives
the earth to the latter when he slays the former, [Job
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022); he then observes the shortness
of his days, and complains of his heavy afflictions, [Job
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025); and concludes, that it was in
vain for him to expect his cause to be heard before God, there being no
daysman between them; and wishes that the dread of the Divine Majesty
might be taken from him, and then he would freely and without fear speak
unto him, [Job 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#029).

[Job 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 9:1</span></span>

Then Job answered and said. Without taking notice of Bildad's harsh
expressions and severe censures, or his unfriendliness to him; he enters
directly into the argument, grants some things, confutes others, and
defends himself and his conduct.

[Job 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 9:2</span></span>

I know it is so of a truth,.... That is, that God is just, and does not
pervert justice and judgment, as Bildad had observed, [Job
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003); Job was a man of great natural
parts and capacity; he had a large share of knowledge of things,
natural, civil, and moral; and he was a good man, in whom the true light
of grace shined; and being, enlightened by the spirit of wisdom and
revelation, in the knowledge of divine things, he knew much of God, of
his being and perfections, and of the methods of his grace, especially
in the justification of men, as appears by various passages in this
chapter; he knew that God was just and holy in all his ways and works,
whether of providence or grace; and this he kept in sight amidst all his
afflictions, and was ready to acknowledge it: he knew this "of a truth";
that is, most certainly; for there are some truths that are so plain and
evident that a man may be assured of, and this was such an one with Job;
he had no need to be instructed in this article; he was as knowing in
this point, as well as in others, as Bildad or any of his friends; nor
did he need to be sent to the ancients to inquire of them, or to prepare
himself for the search of the fathers, in order to acquire the knowledge
of this, to which Bildad had advised; yet, though this was so clear a
point, about which there was no room for further contest; but then the
matter is:

how should man be just with God? if not angels, if not man in his best
estate, in which he was vanity when compared with God; then much less
frail, feeble, mortal, sinful men, even the best of men, considered in
themselves, and with respect to their own righteousness: for, to "be
just" is not to be so through an infusion of righteousness and holiness
into men, which in the best of men is their sanctification and not their
justification; but this is a legal term, and stands opposed to
condemnation, and signifies a man's being condemned and pronounced
righteous in a judiciary way; so a man cannot be adjudged, reckoned, or
accounted by God upon the foot of works of righteousness done by him;
since his best works are imperfect, not answerable to the law, but very
defective, and so not justifying; are opposite to the grace of God, by
which, in an evangelic sense, men are justified; these would encourage
boasting, which is excluded in God's way of justifying sinners; and
could justification be by them, the death of Christ would be in vain,
and there would have been no need of him and his justifying
righteousness: especially, it is a certain thing, that a man can never
be "just", or "justified with God", in such a way, or through any
righteousness wrought out by him; that is, either he is not and cannot
be just in comparison of God; for, if the inhabitants of the heavens are
not pure in his sight, the holy angels; and if man, at his best estate,
was altogether vanity when compared with him, what must sinful mortals
be? or not be just at his bar; should he mark their iniquities, enter
into judgment with them, or an action against them, summon them before
him to answer to charges he has to exhibit; they could not stand before
him, or go off acquitted or discharged: or in his account; for his
judgment is according to truth; he can never reckon that a perfect
righteousness which is an imperfect one: or in his sight; for, though
men may be just in comparison of others, or at an human bar, in an human
court of judicature, and in the account of men, and in their sight, to
whom they may appear outwardly righteous, as well as in their own sight;
yet not in the sight of God, who sees all things, the heart and all in
it, every action, and the spring of it; see [Psa
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002) [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020); in this sense, a man can only be
just with God through the imputation of the righteousness of Christ,
accounting that to him, putting it upon him, and clothing him with it,
and so reckoning and pronouncing him righteous through it; and which is
entirely consistent with the justice of God, since by it the law is
fulfilled, magnified, and made honourable, and justice satisfied; so
that God is just, while he is the justifier of him that believes in
Jesus, [Rom 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026).

[Job 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 9:3</span></span>

If he will contend with him,.... If God will contend with man, so
Sephorno; enter into a controversy with him, litigate and dispute the
point in law, whether he is just or not, man cannot answer to the
allegations he will produce; or if man should contend with God, a
potsherd strive with its maker, to what purpose would it be? he could
never avail himself by such a procedure; the match is unequal, there is
no striving or contending with God in a judicial, way:

he cannot answer him one of a thousand; which some understand, that God
will not answer men; he will not vouchsafe to give an answer to such
that plead with him, or talk with him of his judgments in providence, or
pretend to vindicate themselves, their ways, and their works, before
him; but this sense seems contrary to [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001); but the meaning is, that man
cannot answer God; either not one man out of a thousand, that is, none
at all; unless, by one of a thousand, is meant the interpreter, one
among a thousand, even the Messiah, the chiefest among ten thousand; the
one man of a thousand Solomon found upon search; see [Job
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023); he indeed has made himself
responsible for his people, as their surety, and was able to answer for
them; and he has answered for them, and made satisfaction for their
sins; it was exacted, or required, that is, a full payment of their
debts, or a plenary satisfaction for their sins, "and he answered",
according to [Isa 53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007); but rather the
sense is, that a man cannot answer, either one time of a thousand (u),
or one argument to one article exhibited, or to one objection or charge
of a thousand brought against him by the law or justice of God; that is,
for one sin of a thousand he has committed; so Mr. Broughton renders it,
"to one thing of a thousand" (w); this suggests that the sins of men are
numerous; their debts are many, they are more than ten thousand talents,
which they are not able to answer to, or pay off, no, not one of them;
their iniquities are more than the hairs of their head, they cannot be
understood or reckoned: and now a man cannot answer for one of a
thousand, or the millions of sins he is guilty of; he cannot deny them,
he cannot excuse them, he cannot make satisfaction for anyone of them;
they are committed against an infinite Being, and require an infinite
satisfaction, which man cannot give; they are violations of a law, and
injuries to divine justice, that no man is able to atone for; whatever
obedience he is capable of, or does perform, God has a prior right unto
it, and therefore can never answer for former transgressions; this being
the case, sinful man cannot be just with God upon the foot of his works,
which is the thing this observation is made to illustrate: man's
obedience is so short, and God's commandment or law so very broad, that
these two can never be brought to meet, agree together, or answer to one
another; and therefore it may be strongly concluded that a man is
justified, if ever he is justified at all, in the sight of God, by faith
in Christ and his righteousness, without the deeds of the law, [Rom
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028).

\(u\) "una vice ex millibus", Schmidt. (w) "Ad rem unam ex mille", Beza;
"ad unum argumentum ex mille argumentis", Vatablus; so Castalio, Bar
Tzemach.

[Job 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 9:4</span></span>

He is wise in heart,.... Originally, essentially, truly, really, and
perfectly so; he is the only, and the all wise God; his understanding is
infinite; he is able to traverse all the schemes of men, in things civil
or religious, and disappoint all their devices; for though there be ever
so many of them, or be ever so deeply laid, the counsel of the Lord,
that shall stand; for there is no wisdom, understanding, or counsel
against him; and therefore it is in vain to contend with him: he is so
wise and knowing, that he sees and knows all that is in man, or is done
by him, whether in public or in private; there is not a thought in his
heart, nor a word on his tongue, nor an action in his life and
conversation, but what he is thoroughly acquainted with; and everyone of
these he will bring into judgment: how therefore is it possible that
sinful men should be just in the sight of such a wise and holy Being,
upon the score of his own righteousness?

and mighty in strength; he is the most mighty; he is the Almighty; he
has a mighty arm and strong hand; and unless a man had a strong arm like
him, his own right hand can never save him, or his own righteousness
justify him; wherefore, to what purpose is it for a feeble man to
contend and strive with him? and since he is not a man, as he is, how
should they come together in judgment? and what a vain thing must it he
to set a time for it, since, if we speak of strength, lo, he is strong?
see [Job 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#019),

who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered? either by
behaving proudly and insolently to him, as Pharaoh, Sennacherib, and
others, by speaking hard words against him, as the Jews in the times of
Malachi; and such hard speeches ungodly sinners utter against God,
Christ, his Gospel, ordinances, people, ways, and worship, of which they
will be convinced, and for which they will be condemned at the last
judgment; and by bold and daring acts of sin, running upon the thick
bosses of his buckler, giving themselves up to commit all uncleanness
with greediness, and making a covenant with hell and an agreement with
death, and so think themselves safe and secure at all events; but such
never prospered and succeeded as they promised themselves, but came to
ruin and destruction: or "had peace" (x), or "found quietness", as Mr.
Broughton: there is no peace to wicked men, true, solid peace, either
here or hereafter; when they cry "Peace", or promise themselves much of
it, destruction comes; and if God sets home the guilt of sin upon their
consciences, the lead of it is intolerable; it sinks them into despair,
and what then will be the worm that dieth not?

\(x\) "et pacem habuit", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Bolducius; "et pace
frueretur", Cocceius.

[Job 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 9:5</span></span>

Which removeth the mountains,.... This and what follow are instances of
the power of God, and are full proofs of his being mighty in strength;
and may be understood, either literally, not only of what God is able to
do if he will, but of what he has done; and history (y) furnishes us
with instances of mountains being removed from one place to another; and
Scheuchzer (z) makes mention of a village in Helvetia, called Plurium,
which, in 1618, was covered with the sudden fall of a mountain, and
swallowed up in the earth, with 1800 inhabitants, and not the least
trace of it to be seen any more; and in the sacred Scriptures is a
prediction of the mount of Olives being removed from its place, one half
to the north and the other to the south, [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004); and Josephus (a) gives a
relation much like it, as in fact; besides, Job may have respect to what
had been done in his times, or before them, and particularly at the
universal deluge, which covered the tops of the highest mountains and
hills, and very probably washed away some from their places: or else it
may be understood proverbially, of the Lord's doing things marvellous
and surprising, and which are impossible and impracticable with men; see
[Mat 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020); or rather figuratively, of
kingdoms and mighty kings, as the Targum, comparable to mountains for
their height and strength, who yet are removed by God at his pleasure;
see [Zac 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007),

and they know not; when they are removed, and how it is done; it is
imperceptible; either the mountains are not sensible of it, or the
inhabitants of the mountains, as Bar Tzemach; or men, the common sort of
men, the multitude, as Gersom: R. Saadiah Gaon interprets it of removing
the men of the mountains, and they know it not:

which overturneth them in his anger; for the sins or men, which was the
case of the old world: Mr. Broughton renders it, "that men cannot mark
how he hath removed them out of their place in his anger".

\(y\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 83. Wernerus, Palmerius, Theophanes "a
aurus", in Bolduc. in loc. (z) Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 673. (a) Antiqu.
l. 9. c. 10. sect. 4.

[Job 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 9:6</span></span>

Which shaketh the earth out of her place,.... Can do it, and will do it
at the last day, when it shall be utterly broken down, clean dissolved,
and reel to and fro like a drunkard, and be removed as a cottage, and
which John in a vision saw flee away from the presence of him that sat
upon the throne, [Isa 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#019); for this
cannot be understood of earthquakes in common, which are only partial,
and do not remove the earth out of its place, only shake some parts of
it; and this may also refer to the time of the flood, when the earth
received some change and alteration in its situation, as Mr. Burnet in
his Theory of the Earth observes; and the Apostle Peter suggests
something of this kind, when he distinguishes the present earth from the
former, which he says stood out of the water and in it, but the present
earth not so, but is reserved for fire, [Pe2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005),

and the pillars thereof tremble; the centre or lower parts of it, see
[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003).

[Job 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 9:7</span></span>

Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not,.... Either he could do it
if he would, by a word speaking, as he ordered it to stand still in the
times of Joshua, [Jos 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013), and
caused the shadow to return ten degrees it had gone back in the dial of
Ahaz, in the times of Hezekiah, [Kg2
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#011); or else the sense is, it rises
not at any other time and place but when and where he commands it; or he
commands it not to rise in the same place at one time of the year as at
another, and it rises not; or this may be understood of eclipses, or of
its being covered with clouds in tempestuous weather for a considerable
time together, when it seems as if it was not risen: some think this
respects the three days' darkness in Egypt, when the Israelites were
there, [Exo 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#022), which was a little
before, or about the time of Job; or rather it refers to the general
flood, in the times of Noah, when it rained forty days and forty nights,
[Gen 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012), during which time the sun
appeared not, and so seemed as if it was not risen; see [Amo
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009); Herodotus (b) relates, from the
memoirs of the Egyptians, that the sun rose four times out of its usual
course; twice it rose where it now sets, and twice it set where it now
rises:

and sealeth up the stars: either by the light of the sun in the daytime,
which hides them that they are not visible, or by dark clouds and
tempestuous weather in the night; such a season as that was in which the
Apostle Paul and the mariners with him were, when neither sun nor stars
appeared for many days, [Act 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#020),
and so the Targum paraphrases it, and"sealeth up the stars with
clouds;''this may also refer to the time of the flood, during the rain
of forty days and nights, [Gen 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004); or
to the annual motion of the sun through the ecliptic, which makes the
point of the sun's rising and setting vary, and is the reason why some
stars appear in summer and are sealed up in winter, and others that are
seen in winter are not visible in summer; and so Cocceius interprets it.

\(b\) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 149.

[Job 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 9:8</span></span>

Which alone spreadeth out the heavens,.... The expanse, or what we
commonly translate "firmament"; but has its name in the Hebrew language
from its being expanded, spread, and stretched out, over the earth and
all around it; and seems chiefly to design the ether or atmosphere,
which is a fine thin matter and substance spread around us, and which is
sometimes spread with clouds; this is said to be stretched out like a
curtain and a tent to dwell in, tents being made of curtains spread out,
[Isa 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021); and the allusion may be to
a military tent, the pavilion of a general of an army, as Pineda
observes, from whence Jehovah plays his artillery upon his enemies,
thunder, lightning, hailstones, and coals of fire; see [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011); this respects not so much the
first creation, or spreading of the air or the heavens, as the
continuance thereof; God continues to spread them, or to keep them
spread, that they may not be rolled up as a scroll; or folded up as a
garment, as they will be, [Heb 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#012);
and this he does alone, without the help of any creature, angels or men;
any piece of tapestry or carpet, that is large, is not easily spread
alone; but what power must the vast expanse of the heavens require, to
be spread alone and continued so? nothing less than infinite; see [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024); some render it, "which boweth
the heavens" (c), as the same word is rendered in [Psa
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009); which he does when he fills them
with clouds, so that they seem to hang low, and to be inclined towards
the earth:

and treadeth upon the waves of the sea (d); which he did at the first
creation, when the waters that covered the face of the earth were, by
his order, collected into one place, and there shut up, and restrained
from overflowing the earth; and which restraint, as it is an act of
power over them, is designed by treading upon them, and a continued act
may be the rather meant here; see [Gen
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008); and when the waves of it are
lifted up as high as they sometimes are, by strong and stormy winds, the
Lord on high is mightier than they, he treads upon them and represses
them; he rules their raging, stills their noise, and makes them smooth,
calm, and quiet, [Psa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007); this none
but God can do: the Egyptian hieroglyphic of doing a thing impossible
was a man's walking upon water (e); the Heathens chose not to describe
even their god of the sea, Neptune, by walking on it, as being too great
for him, but by swimming (f); of Christ's walking upon the sea, see [Mat
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025); it may be rendered, "the high
places of the sea": the waves of it, when mounted to a great height by
the wind; so Mr. Broughton, "the high waves of the sea", see [Psa
107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025); there is a copy, as the lesser
Massorah observes, which reads, "upon the high places of the cloud" (g),
see [Isa 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014); and Gersom interprets
these high places, of the heavens, and of God's giving rain from thence.

\(c\) "inclinat coelum", Piscator. (d) "super excelsa maris", Pagninus,
Montanus, &c. "summitates maris", Tigurine version; "celsos vertices
maris", Schultens. (e) Orus Apollo, apud Bolduc. (f) Cicero de Natura
Deorum, l. 2. (g) "Legitur et" "pro" i.e. "super excelsas nubes",
Vatablus.

[Job 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 9:9</span></span>

Which maketh Arcturus,.... By which is meant not a single star, but a
collection of stars, as Bar Tzemach and Ben Melech, a constellation;
hence we read of Arcturus and his sons, [Job
38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032). Aben Ezra understands it of the
seven stars, but these are thought to be meant by the Pleiades, later
mentioned; this constellation is about the Arctic or northern pole, in
the tail of the Bear, appears in the beginning of September, and brings
stormy weather, when winter is at hand (h):

Orion and Pleiades; the former of these also is not a single star, but a
constellation; by the help of a telescope no less than two thousand are
numbered, and in Hebrew it is called "Cesil"; hence the month "Cisleu"
has its name, which answers to part of November and part of December, at
which time this constellation is seen, and is attended with stormy
weather; hence Virgil calls it Nimbosus Orion (i): and the latter are
what we call the Seven Stars, sometimes by writers called Vergiliae,
because they appear in the spring; and have their name of Pleiades from
sailing, because at this time of year mariners go out with their ships;
though some say this constellation is not favourable to them, causing
rains and tempests (k); these three divide the whole year:

and the chambers of the south: the stars in the southern hemisphere,
about the Antarctic, or southern pole; and called "chambers", as Aben
Ezra observes, because hidden, and are not seen by those in the other
hemisphere, as if they were in a chamber: now the making of these is
rightly ascribed to God, who made all the stars, [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016); though this may rather regard
the continuance of them in their being, who calls them by name, brings
out their host by number, directs their course, keeps them in their
orbs, and preserves their influence.

\(h\) Sophoclis Oedipus, Tyran. ver. 1147. (i) Aeneid. l. 1. Vid. Horat.
Carmin. l. 3. Ode 27. Epod. 15. (k) "----pleiadum choro Scindente
nubes". Horat. Carmin. l. 4. Ode 14.

[Job 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 9:10</span></span>

Which doth great things past finding out,.... In heaven and earth; great
as to quantity and quality, not to be thoroughly searched out so as to
tell their numbers, nor explain and express the nature of them to the
full; even what he has done, and does in creation, providence, and
grace:

yea, and wonders without number; such as are amazing to men, who cannot
account for them, and so many that they cannot number them. The same
things are said by Eliphaz; see Gill on [Job
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009); and which Job here repeats, to
show that he agreed with him, and was ready to own what was truth,
whenever expressed by him or his friends, and especially such as made
for the glory of the Divine Being.

[Job 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 9:11</span></span>

Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not,.... This is expressive of the
invisibility of God; for though the angels in heaven always behold his
face, and men, in the works of creation, may see his eternal power and
Godhead, and other perfections of it displayed therein; and saints by
faith have a comfortable and delightful view of him, of his countenance,
his love, grace and mercy in his word and ordinances, and especially in
the face and person of Christ, the image of the invisible God, and will
in heaven most clearly see him as he is, in the greater display of his
glory and his grace; yet his essence is invisible, not only not to be
seen with corporeal eyes, but not to be comprehended in the mind:

he passeth on also, but I perceive him not; this "going and passing on",
as, ascribed to God, must be understood in consistence with his
omnipresence; he cannot be thought to move from place to place who is
everywhere, who fills heaven and earth with his presence, and there is
no going from it: local motion cannot be said of him; but this respects
the operations of his providence; he is continually working all around
us, by supporting us in being, and supplying us with what we want, and
so is near us, and yet we see him not: Job experienced the bounties of
his providence, as well as the blessings of his grace, in the time of
his prosperity, and now he felt the weight of his afflicting hand upon
him; but yet, as to his essence, he could not see him; he was sensible
that he was nigh him, and find a concern in all that befell him, but he
could neither see nor comprehend him, nor account for his dealings with
him: he had "passed by" him in his state of nature, and had looked
graciously on him, and had said unto him, Live; he had "passed on" from
him, and hid his face so that he could not see him, nor find him
backward nor forward, on the right hand, nor on the left, where he used
to work, see [Job 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#003).

[Job 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 9:12</span></span>

Behold, he taketh away,.... There are some things God never takes away
from his people; he never takes away his love from them, he always rests
in that towards them, let them be in what condition they will; he never
takes away his grace from them, when once bestowed on them, or wrought
in them; he never takes away his special gifts of grace, particularly
the unspeakable gift of his son Christ Jesus, which is that good part,
when chosen, which shall not be taken away; nor any of the spiritual
blessings wherewith they are blessed in Christ; these are irreversible
and irrevocable: but temporal blessings he takes away at pleasure; so he
had taken away the children, the servants of Job, his substance, wealth,
and riches, and also his bodily health, to which he may have a
particular respect; yea, when it pleases him, he takes a man out of the
world, as the Targum and Gersom interpret it:

who can hinder him? he does what he pleases in heaven and earth; his
will is irresistible, his power is uncontrollable; there is no turning
his mind, nor staying his hand, nor turning it back; when he works, none
can let or hinder. Mr. Broughton translates it, "who shall make him
restore?" (l) if a man takes away what he has no right to, he may be
obliged by law to restore it; but whatever God takes away he has a right
unto, be it relations and friends, health or wealth; if he pleases he
can restore, and does; and as he did to Job, to whom he after gave twice
as much as he had before; but then he is not obliged to do it, none can
force him to it:

who will say unto him, what doest thou? not one that knows what God is,
or that knows himself a creature of his; no person will choose or dare
to ask what God does, or why he does this and not another thing, or why
this in the manner he does it; for he gives no account of his matters to
the sons of men, nor is he obliged to it, and it would be insolent in
them to require it, see [Job 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#013);
this expresses his sovereignty.

\(l\) So Beza, Pagninus, Montanus, Bolducius, Junius & Tremellius,
Cocceius.

[Job 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 9:13</span></span>

If God will not withdraw his anger,.... Or "God will not withdraw his
anger" (m); he is angry, or at least seems to be angry with his own
people, in their apprehension, when he afflicts them and hides his face
from them, or does not immediately appear to their relief and
assistance; but this does not always last, he does not retain or keep
anger for ever; but shows great mercies to them, and with everlasting
kindness has mercy on them, by discovering his love to them, applying
his pardoning grace and mercy, and comforting them with the consolations
of his spirit; but then he is angry with the wicked every day, for their
continual transgressions; and he never withdraws his anger from them,
neither here nor hereafter, but punishes them with everlasting
destruction, and casts them into everlasting fire, to which his wrath
and anger are compared: the consequence of which is:

the proud helpers do stoop under him; or "the helpers of pride" (n), or
helpers of proud men; proud, wicked, and ungodly men, who combine
together and help one another against God, his people, cause and
interest; men of power, rule and government, as Aben Ezra explains it;
civil magistrates, men in authority, who, instead of being terrors to
evil doers, encourage them, and help them forward in their wickedness;
but though both those that help, and those that are helped, may continue
for a while, and be supported, yet they shall sooner or later fall under
the mighty hand of God, his power and wrath, and be crushed by it. Some
regard may be had either to the giants, the men of the old world, who
filled the earth with violence, and were swept away with the flood, [Gen
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#013); or rather to the builders of
Babel, who helped one another to build a tower to make them a name, and
secure themselves, and in opposition to God; but he being angry with
them, made them desist, and they bowed under him, [Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004). Some render it, "the helpers of
Rahab"; that is, of Egypt (o), Rahab being a name of Egypt, [Psa
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004). The devils are meant, whose sin
was pride, and by which they fell, and which they have endeavoured to
promote and cherish among men; but these proud spirits are cast out of
heaven and into hell, where they are reserved in chains of darkness to
the great judgment, [Jde 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006); and are
obliged, whether they will or not, to stoop to the Lord, and even to the
son of God in human nature, which their proud stomachs cannot well bear;
but are forced to it, the anger of God lying upon them, and his wrath,
which will never be withdrawn from them.

\(m\) "Deus non revocabit furorem suum", Pagninus, Beza. (n) "adjutores
superbiae", Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius, Junius & Tremellius, Schmidt,
Michaelis. (o) So Jarchi.

[Job 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 9:14</span></span>

How much less shall I answer him,.... Who is wise in heart, and mighty
in strength, and has done and does the many things before related; who
is invisible, passes by, and onwards insensibly; so that there is no
knowing where to speak to him, or how to guard against him, since he can
come on on every side, at an unawares, and unseen; and who is a
sovereign Being, who can do, and does, whatever he pleases; and
therefore there is no such thing as disputing any point with him, or
calling him to an account for anything done by him: and if the great men
of the earth, proud and haughty tyrants, and those prouder spirits, if
possible, the infernal principalities and powers, are obliged to bend
and stoop to him; how should such a poor, weak, feeble creature as Job
was, enter the lists with him, contend with God, and argue with him
about his dispensations, or answer to any argument, objection, charge,
or article exhibited against him? here Job speaks humbly and meanly of
himself, as he in the whole context before speaks highly of God, between
whom there was no comparison:

and choose out my words to reason with him? suggesting, that should he
pick out words the most fit and proper to be used, and put them together
in the most exact order, and which had the greatest force of persuasion
and strength of reasoning in them, yet they would be of no avail with
God; these could have no influence upon him to turn his mind, or alter
either his purposes or his providences; and therefore concluded it was
best for him to be silent and make no reply; but if he said anything, to
do it in a supplicating way, as follows.

[Job 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 9:15</span></span>

Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer,.... This is not
to be understood of the righteousness of his cause, that Job made no
supposition of, but strongly asserted and determined to hold it fast as
long as he lived; nor of his evangelic righteousness, the righteousness
of faith he was acquainted with, even the righteousness of his living
Redeemer, by which he knew he was, and should be, justified; and by
which righteousness he could and did answer God, as every believer may,
who, making mention of this righteousness, and of this only, such an one
may plead the righteousness of Christ with God as his justifying one,
and hold it up against all charges brought against him; yea, by
presenting this to God by faith, he answers all the demands of the law
of God, both with respect to the precepts and penalty of it, it being
magnified and made honourable hereby, and all that the justice of God
can require, and with which it is entirely satisfied; yea, this
righteousness will answer to God for him in a time to come, in the last
judgment: but Job speaks of his own legal and civil righteousness, as a
good man, and a good magistrate; as the latter, he put on righteousness,
and it clothed him; as the former, having grace, the root of the matter,
in him, as he calls it, it taught him to live soberly, righteously, and
godly; he was a man that feared God, and eschewed evil; and his sense
is, that though he should so well behave in every respect, and so order
his conversation aright before men that they could have nothing to lay
to his charge, yet he would not bring such a righteousness before God,
and pretend to answer him with it; for he knew that such a righteousness
is no righteousness in the sight of God, in the eye of his law, and in
the account of divine justice, being not only imperfect, but impure; not
only rags, but filthy ones, attended with many sins, as well as
imperfections; wherefore no good man will put his cause before God on
such an issue, however he may before men; nay, Job seems to carry this
point yet further, that though he had a sinless righteousness of his
own, and were as righteous as Adam before his fall, or the holy angels
in heaven, yet he would not insist upon such a righteousness before God,
or pretend to answer him with it; for he knew that the inhabitants of
the heavens, and so man in his paradise on earth, in his best estate,
were not pure in his sight, but chargeable with folly and imperfection,
in comparison of him: and when he says he could not "answer" him, his
meaning is not that he would not answer to a question that was asked
him, but that he would not answer him in a judicial way; that, if he
should prefer a bill against him, he would not put in at answer to it,
though he knew nothing by himself, and could not charge himself with
anything wrong in thought, word, or deed; yet if God charged him with
it, he would not reply against him, he would not contradict him, he
would not answer again, or litigate the point with him, but give it up;
because, though he might not know he had done any thing amiss, or there
was imperfection in him, yet God, who was greater than his heart, and
knows all things, is the heart searching and rein trying God, he knew
better than he did, and therefore was determined to submit to him, and
be set down by him what he was:

but I would make supplication to my Judge: that is, to God, the Judge of
the whole earth; and who is particularly the Judge of his own people,
their Patron and Defender, their Judge and Lawgiver, who will save them;
for though he is a just God, and a righteous Judge, yet a Saviour; and
it is one of the privileges of his people that they can come to him, not
only as the God of all grace, and as their God and Father in Christ, but
to him as to God the Judge of all, [Heb
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023); and lay their case before him,
and entreat his protection; and this Job chose to do rather than contend
with him; for by "supplication" prayer is meant, as it frequently is in
both Testaments; and it signifies such prayer as consists of petitions
for grace and mercy, or for things to be bestowed in a way of grace and
mercy; not according to merit, but mercy; not for works of righteousness
done, but through the favour and good will of God; and which prayer is
put up in an humble supplicant manner, acknowledging a man's
unworthiness, that he is not deserving of the least of mercies, nor
expects any on account of any worth or worthiness in him, or his
services; and in such a way a man prevails more with God, and is most
likely to succeed, than by contending with him in a judicial way. Jacob
had power with God and prevailed, but it was by weeping and
supplication, see [Hos 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004); so Mr.
Broughton reads the words,"my would crave pity of my Judge.''Some render
it, "my adversary" (p), the opposite party in a court of judicature,
whom he would not contest with, but supplicate, and in the way make up
matters with him. Job seems resolved to take such a method Christ
advises to in civil cases, [Mat 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024).

\(p\) "in jus me vocanti", Cocceius; "ei qui mecum judicatur", i.e.
"parti meae adversae", Gussetius, p. 880.

[Job 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 9:16</span></span>

If I had called, and he had answered me,.... Mr. Broughton reads the
words, "if I cry, will he answer me?" as if Job had some doubt upon his
mind whether God would vouchsafe to answer him, though he should make
his supplication to him, as he proposed; seeing he had so sorely
afflicted him, and still continued his hand upon him; or the words may
be rendered, "though I have called, and he has answered" (q), in times
past. Job was a praying person, he had often prayed to God in his
closet, and in his family, for himself, and for his children, and for
his friends, and he had found God to be a God hearing and answering
prayer, but seems to question whether he would answer him now, if he did
pray to him:

yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice, or "would
hearken" (r), at this time, and under the present circumstances; or
should he, the mercy would be so great, that he could hardly believe it;
so sometimes through joy men cannot believe what they hear and see, as
the apostles, when Christ appeared to them after his resurrection; or as
it was with the Jews returned from Babylon, they were like them that
dream, they could scarcely tell whether their deliverance was a real
fact, or whether they only dreamed of it, see [Luk
24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041); so Job intimates, that should
he pray to God, and be heard and delivered, it would be so astonishing
and transporting, that at first he should not be able to give credit to
it; or, however, he should not believe that it was for his prayers and
supplications, for any worth and value, virtue and efficacy, there was
in them, that he was heard; but it must be purely for his mercy's sake,
for the sake of the mediation of Christ, and because these prayers were
the breathings of his own spirit: or else the sense is, that though he
had heard and answered him formerly, when he prayed in a supplicating
way, yet if he should contend with him in a judicial way, and insist
upon his own righteousness, and present his supplication to God on that
account, he could never expect to be heard; and, indeed, he could not
believe he should be heard on any account, so long as his present
sufferings lasted; which seems to be the sense of what follows, where he
gives his reasons for such belief, or rather unbelief.

\(q\) "etiamsi clamavi et respondit mihi", Schmidt. (r) "quod
exauditurus esset", Schmidt.

[Job 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 9:17</span></span>

For he breaketh me with a tempest,.... Which rises suddenly, comes
powerfully, and carries all before it irresistibly; hereby signifying
the nature of his present sore afflictions, which came upon him at once,
pressed him down, and utterly destroyed him, against which there was no
standing: perhaps he may have some reference to the storm of wind that
blew down the house, by which his children were destroyed. Schultens
renders it, "a burning tempest" (s), such as is common in the eastern
countries, which Thevenot (t) often makes mention of; which kills a man
at once, and his flesh becomes as black as a coal, and comes off of his
bones, and is plucked off by the hand that would lift him up; with which
a man is broken to pieces indeed, to which Job may allude:

and multiplieth my wounds without cause; referring, it may be, to the
many boils and ulcers upon his body; though it may also respect the
multiplicity of ways in which he had wounded or afflicted him, in his
person, in his family, and in his substance, and which he says was done
"without cause"; not without a cause or reason in God, who does nothing
without one, though it may not be known to men; particularly in
afflicting men, it is not without cause or reason; it he punishes men,
it is for sin; if he rebukes and chastises his people, it is for their
transgressions; to bring them to a sense of them, to humble them for
them, to bring them off from them, or to prevent them, or purge them
away, and to try their graces, wean them from the world, and fit them
for himself: but Job's afflictions were without any such cause intimated
by his friends; it was not hypocrisy, nor any notorious sin or sins he
had been guilty of, and secretly lived and indulged himself in, as they
imagined. Job here suggests his innocence, which he always insisted
upon, and refers his afflictions to the sovereign will of God, and to
some hidden cause in his own breast, unknown to himself and others:
however, so long as he dealt with him after this manner, he could not
believe his prayers were heard by him.

\(s\) "in turbine ardenti", Schultens. (t) Travels, par. 2. B. 1. c. 12.
p. 54. B. 3. c. 5. p. 135.

[Job 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 9:18</span></span>

He will not suffer me to take my breath,.... Which some think refers to
Job's disease, which was either an asthma, or a quinsy in his throat,
which occasioned great difficulty in breathing: I should rather think
the allusion is to the hot burning winds in those countries before
mentioned, which sometimes blew so strongly as almost to take away a
man's breath; so the above traveller (u) reports, that between Suez and
Cairo (in Egypt) they had for a day's time and more so hot a wind, that
they were forced to turn their backs to it, to take a little breath. The
design of Job is to show, that his afflictions were continued, and were
without any intervals; they were repeated so fast, and came so thick
upon him, one after another, that he had no breathing time; the import
of the phrase is the same with that in [Job
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#019),

but filleth me with bitterness; to the full, to satiety, to loathing, as
a man may be with a bitter potion, with wormwood drink, and water of
gall, with bitter afflictions comparable to such, whereby Job's life was
embittered to him, see [Jer 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015).

\(u\) Travels. par. 1. B. 2. c. 34. p. 177.

[Job 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 9:19</span></span>

If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong,.... Or think of it, or betake
myself to that, and propose to carry my point by mere force, as some men
do by dint of power and authority they are possessed of; alas! there is
nothing to be done this way; I am a poor, weak, feeble creature in body,
mind, and estate; I am not able to contend with so powerful an
antagonist on any account, in any way: God is strong, he is the "most
strong" (w), as some render it; he is mighty, is the Almighty; the
weakness of God is stronger than men; there is no disputing with God
upon the foot of strength:

and if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead? If I think and
propose to put things upon the foot of justice, to have the cause
between us issued in that way, I cannot expect to succeed by right, any
more than by might; he is so strictly just and holy, that no
righteousness and holiness of, mine can stand before him; he is God, and
I a man, and therefore not fit to come together in judgment; and he a
pure and holy Being, just and true, and without iniquity, and I a sinful
polluted creature; and besides, there is none superior to him, that I
can appeal unto, none that can appoint a place, or fix a time, for the
hearing of the cause between us, or that can preside in judgment and
determine the matter in controversy; nay, there is not one among the
creatures that can be a daysman, an arbiter or umpire; yea not one that
can be so much as employed as council, that can take the cause in hand,
and plead it, and be a patron for me, and defender of me; so that, let
me take what course I will, I am sure to be nonsuited and worsted, see
[Jer 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019).

\(w\) "robustissimus est", V. L.

[Job 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 9:20</span></span>

If I justify myself,.... Seek for justification by his own
righteousness, trust in himself that he was righteous, say that he was
so, and pronounce himself a righteous man, what would it signify?

mine own mouth shall condemn me; the words of it being sinful, vain,
idle, and frothy; and if a man is to be justified, and condemned by his
words, he may be sure of the latter: indeed, "if any man offend not in
word, the same is a perfect man", [Jam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002); but let a man be as careful as he
can, and keep ever such a guard upon his lips, such is the imperfection
of human nature, that, though a Moses, he will speak unadvisedly with
his lips, at one time or another, and in many things will offend; which
would be his condemnation, if there was no other way to secure from it;
nay, for a sinful man to justify himself, or to say that he is a
righteous man by his own righteousness, and insist upon this before God,
if he is tried upon it he must be condemned; yea, saying he is so is a
falsehood, abominable to God, and enough to condemn him; and besides, a
man that knows himself, as Job did, must be conscious of much sin within
him, however externally righteous he may be before men; so that, should
he say he was righteous, his conscience would speak, or cause his mouth
to speak and contradict and condemn him:

if I say, I am perfect; not in an evangelical sense, as he was; but in a
legal sense, so as to be free from sin, which no man that is perfect in
a Gospel sense is; as Noah, Jacob, David, and others, who were so, yet
not without sin; if therefore a man should assert this, he would not say
that which was right, but what was perverse, as might be proved:

it shall also prove me perverse; to be a wicked man; either he, God,
shall prove, or it, his mouth, as in the preceding clause; for to say
this is to tell a lie, which to do is perverseness, see [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008).

[Job 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 9:21</span></span>

Though I were perfect,.... Really and truly so, not conscious of any sin
in thought, word, or deed; this is only a case supposed:

yet would I not know my soul; I would not own myself to be so before
God; I would not insist upon such perfection in his presence, as what
would justify me before him; since I am sensible the highest perfection
of a creature is imperfection when compared with him: or the sense may
be, should I say I were "perfect, I should not know my own soul"; I
should plainly appear to be ignorant of myself, as all perfectionists
are; they do not know their own souls, the plague of their hearts, the
evil of their thoughts, the vanity of their minds; they do not take
notice of these things, or do not look upon them as sinful; they know
not the nature of sin, and the exceeding sinfulness of it:

I would despise my life; even if ever so innocent, perfect, and just;
his meaning is, that he would not insist upon the continuance of it on
that account; he had no such value for it, such a love of life as to
contend with God upon the foot of justice about it; nor did he think it
worth asking for, so mean an opinion had he entertained of it, see [Job
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#016).

[Job 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 9:22</span></span>

This is one thing,.... Or "one thing there is" (x) in the world, as
Jarchi adds; or "one measure", as the Targum, to good and bad men; one
event alike to the righteous, and to the wicked, [Ecc
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002); so that, as others render it, "it
is all one" (y), whether a man righteous and perfect, or whether he is
not, he is equally liable to be afflicted and distressed: and "this is
one thing, very singular" (z), amazing and astonishing, and very
unaccountable; but so it is, and which he differed from his three
friends about; as to the justice of God, he agreed with them in that;
yea, he believed he was righteous in whatever he did, and even in this,
which was so strange and surprising, though he could not account for it:
and "this is uniform", as Mr. Broughton translates it; either God acts
uniformly in what he does, treating all men alike, good and bad men; or
Job was uniform in his sentiments, he was all of a piece, steady and
constant, retaining the same sense of things, from which he had not
departed, nor could he depart:

therefore I said it; with the greatest confidence and assurance, because
he believed it, and would say it again, seeing no reason at all to alter
his judgment; the thing was quite clear to him, of which he had, at
least as he thought, unquestionable evidence; and the thing he has
respect to is as follows:

he destroyeth the perfect and the wicked; this is thought by some to be
a very bad expression, bordering on blasphemy, and contrary to the
nature and perfections of God, and to the methods of his providence,
[Gen 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023); and that Job speaks in the
person of one destitute of the grace of God: but nothing is more certain
than that this was the real sentiment of his mind, his firm belief, nor
could he be persuaded to the contrary; indeed it may be understood in a
good sense: by a "perfect" man we are to understand a truly good man,
one that has received the grace of God in truth, and is perfectly
justified and pardoned through the blood and righteousness of Christ;
and by a "wicked" man one that is under the influence of his lusts, is
abandoned to them, and never easy but while he is serving them, which he
is continually doing. Now the destruction of these is not to be
interpreted of everlasting destruction; this indeed will be the case of
wicked men, but not of perfect and good men: God by his grace has made a
difference between them in this world, and so he will in the next; the
one will go into everlasting punishment, the other into everlasting
life, and will never come together in the same place or state; nor will
the perfect man be destroyed at all in such sense; the grace of God
within him, and the righteousness of Christ upon him, will eternally
secure him from everlasting wrath and ruin: but it is meant of temporal
destruction; sometimes indeed a remarkable distinction is made between
the one and the other in a time of general calamity, as Noah, a perfect
man, was saved, when the world of the ungodly were destroyed by water,
[Gen 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#023); and Lot, a righteous man,
when Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed by fire, [Gen
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#029); but frequently they fall
together in the same common distress; good and bad men, among the Jews
were alike carried captive into Babylon, signified by Jeremiah's good
and bad figs, [Jer 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002); of good men,
Ezekiel, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, are instances; though
indeed it is on different accounts, and with different views, that the
one and the other are destroyed with a temporal destruction, in their
persons, their health, their families, or in their estates; such
calamities upon good men are not as punishments for their sins, as on
the wicked; but as fatherly chastisements, and for the trial of their
graces, for their spiritual and eternal good, and that they might not be
condemned with the world. Job's view in saying this is to observe, that
a man's state God-ward is not to be judged of by his outward
circumstances, whether he is a good man or a bad man, since they may
both be in the same afflictions and distress, and which he opposes to
the sentiments and sayings of Eliphaz and Bildad, [Job
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007).

\(x\) "unum est", Munster, Mercerus, Schmidt. (y) "Perinde est",
Cocceius. (z) "Singulare enimvero id!", Schultens.

[Job 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 9:23</span></span>

If the scourge slay suddenly,.... Not Satan, as Jarchi and Bar Tzemach;
but any sore calamity which surrounds a man, lashes, cuts, and
distresses him, as a whip or scourge; such as any of God's sore
judgments, the sword, famine, pestilence, or evil beasts, which
sometimes come suddenly, unawares, unthought of, and unexpected; and are
sometimes only chastisements in love, the scourgings of a father, though
generally in wrath and hot displeasure, and are an overflowing scourge,
which carry all before them; and therefore some restrain it to wicked
men, as the Septuagint version; and some understand it as if they were
more mildly and gently dealt with, by being suddenly and at once slain
with such a scourge, in their persons, families, and substance, while
others have their afflictions protracted, and linger long under them, as
in the next clause:

he will laugh at the trial of the innocent; not that are free from sin
entirely; for there are none such, no, not newborn infants; though they
may be comparatively so, yet they are not in an absolute sense, being
conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity: besides, here it means adult
persons, good men, that are truly gracious, sincere, upright, harmless
in their lives and conversations, whose afflictions are "trials" of
their faith and patience, and other graces; and when God is said to
"laugh" at them, who seems to be designed here, this must be understood
consistent with his pity to his people, his sympathy with them under all
their afflictions, he not willingly afflicting or grieving the children
of men; nor can it be thought that he has them in derision and contempt,
or laughs at their calamities, or in reality, as he does at wicked men;
but that he carries it so oftentimes, in the dispensations of his
providence, as if he made no difference between them, but mocked at the
one as well as the other; seemingly giving no heed to their cries; not
hastening to their help and deliverance, but lengthening out their
troubles for the trial of their graces; and so indeed is greatly
delighted with the exercise of them under them, and with seeing them
bear them with so much patience, courage, and greatness of mind and
submission to his will. Some interpret this of a wicked man laughing at
the calamities of the righteous, as the Ammonites and Edomites rejoiced
at the destruction of the Jews; the church's enemy at her fall, and as
the Papists will at the witnesses being slain; but the former sense
seems best; rather the scourge itself laughs at the trial of the
innocent; so Schultens.

[Job 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 9:24</span></span>

The earth is given into the hands of the wicked,.... Either the wicked
one, Satan, as Jarchi and Bar Tzemach, who is the god of this world; or
some wicked tyrant, as Nimrod, or some other known by Job in his time,
to whom he may have respect; or wicked men in general, who for the most
part have the greatest share of the earth, and earthly things, and of
power, dominion, and authority in it; and this they have of God, the
powers that be are ordained by him, and therefore to be obeyed; and what
any have of the earth, and the fulness of it, they have it from him,
whose it is, and who has a right to dispose of it, and therefore being
given by him, they have a proper right unto it; but then it is only the
things of this world which are given them; they have their portion here,
and that is their all; wherefore, as the giving of these is no proof of
a man's goodness, so the taking of them away is no evidence of his
wickedness; love or hatred are not to be known by these things; this is
Job's scope and drift in this and [Job
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023),

he covereth the face of the judges thereof; not Satan, who blinds the
minds of such, that they should not understand justice, and do it, as
the above Jewish writers interpret it; nor the wicked man that is
possessed of riches and wealth, power and authority, who by his
substance bribes the judges, and blinds their eyes, or by his power and
authority awes them, keeps them from executing true judgment, or
discourages persons fit for such an office, and will not advance them,
but lets them lie in, and covers them with, obscurity; or such who are
honest and faithful, and are not to be bribed and browbeaten, these he
either removes from their post, and covers their faces with shame, or
takes them away by death, condemns and executes them as malefactors; it
being usual in former times, as well as in ours, to cover the faces of
such as are executed: but rather this is to be understood of God, who
delivers the earth into the hands of the wicked, suffers them to have
the rule over it, and permits such things to be done, as already
observed; and besides, gives up the judges of the earth to judicial
blindness, so that they cannot discern what is right and just, and do
it, see [Isa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010),

if not, where and who is he? if it is not so as I say, where is the man,
and who is he, that can disprove me, and make me a liar? as Aben Ezra;
let him come forth and appear, and confute me, and teach me otherwise if
he can; or name the place of his abode, and say who he is; or if God
does not do this, give the earth into the hands of wicked men, and cover
the faces of the judges of it, and suffer wicked men to prevail, and the
causes of good men to be subverted, the one to flourish, and the other
to be crushed; who does do it? where is the man that has done or can do
it? certain it is, that it is done; and who but that God that
superintends all things, sits in the heavens, and does whatsoever he
pleases, can do such things as these? or could they be done without his
will and permission? by such mediums Job proves his assertion, that God
destroys the perfect and the wicked; and therefore, by the face of
things in providence, no judgment is to be had of a man's character,
good or bad, and then instances in himself in the following verses.

[Job 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 9:25</span></span>

Now my days are swifter than a post,.... Or "than a runner" (a) in a
race, in order to obtain the prize; or than one that rides post, or runs
on foot to carry a message, such as were Cushi and Ahimaaz; and such are
generally swift of foot, or ride on swift horses, who are so employed;
and yet Job says his days are swifter, or passed away more swiftly thorn
such; meaning either his days in general; or rather particularly his
prosperous days, as Mr. Broughton interprets it; these no sooner came
but they were gone:

they flee away; like a shadow, or a dream, or a tale that is told:

they see no good; or he saw, perceived, or enjoyed no good in them; not
but that he did see and enjoy much good, even much temporal good, which
is what is intended; but this was no sooner had than it was taken away,
that it was as if it had never been; the evil days of trouble and
sorrow, in which he had no pleasure, came so quick upon him.

\(a\) "cursore", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Job 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 9:26</span></span>

They are passed away as the swift ships,.... Those that are lightest
built, and run swiftest. Bar Tzemach thinks such vessels as are rowed
with oars are meant, which may be called "ships of will or desire" (b),
as the words may be rendered, because they may be rowed at pleasure, and
be carried to any place where and when a man thinks fit; whereas those
that are not depend upon the wind, and that must be waited for; or they
design such ships that are so swift in their motion, that they arrive to
the haven as soon as men can well wish for and desire. Some render it
"pirate ships", or "ships of enmity" (c); such as are designed for spoil
and plunder, and which are light ones, not loaded with goods, and
therefore move swiftly: the Targum is,

"ships burdened with precious fruits;''and the Vulgate Latin version
is,"ships carrying apples:''now ships loaded with such sort of goods,
with perishing commodities, are obliged to make their port as soon as
possible. Some leave the word untranslated, and call them "ships of
Ebeh" (d); which, according to Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and others, is either
the name of a place, or of a river in Arabia, which ran with a rapid
stream, and in which ships were carried with great celerity. Bolducius
relates from a traveller of his acquaintance, who finished his travels
in 1584, that he saw such a river about Damascus, not far from the
sepulchre of Job; but that must be the river Chrysorrhoas, now called
Barrady; but there were two rivers of this name Ebeh; one near Cufa, and
another in Wasith, a country of Babylon, as Golius observes (e). Others
take the word to have the signification of reed or papyrus, which grew
on the banks of the Nile, and of which ships were made; see Gill on [Isa
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001); and render the words "ships of
reeds" or "of papyrus" (f), and which, being light, were very swift:

as the eagle that hasteth to the prey; the eagle is the swiftest of
birds, and therefore persons and things exceeding swift are compared
unto them, see [Hab 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008); and it flies
the most swiftly when being hungry, and in sight of its prey, and is
nearest to it, and flaps upon it, which is the thing referred to, and so
may be rendered, "that flies upon the prey" (g). Job uses these
metaphors, which are the most appropriate, to show how fleeting his days
of prosperity were, and how soon gone: and a climax may be observed in
the words; a runner, though he runs swiftly, a ship moves faster than
he, and an eagle, just about to seize its prey, flies swifter than that.

\(b\) "navibus desiderii", Mercerus, Drusius, Schmidt; so Ben Gersom.
(c) "Naves inimicitiarum, i.e. "piraticae, vel hostiles"; as some in
Drusius; so Broughton. (d) "Navibus Ebeh", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Bolducius, Codurcus. (e) Lexic. Arab. p. 2. (f) "Naves arundinis",
Michaelis, "navibus papyraceis", Schultens, Ikenius, in ib. (g)
"involans in escam", Junius & Tremellius; "involat in escam", Piscator,
Schultens.

[Job 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 9:27</span></span>

If I say, I will forget my complaint,.... The cause of it, the loss of
his children, servants, substance, and health, and endeavour to think no
more of these things, and cease complaining about them, and attempt to
bury them in oblivion, and change his note:

I will leave off my heaviness; his melancholy thoughts, words, airs, and
looks; or "forsake my face" (h), put on another countenance, a more
pleasent and cheerful one; the Jewish commentators generally interpret
it, "my anger", either at the dispensations of Providence, or at his
friends:

and comfort myself; that things were not worse with him than they were;
or strengthen (i) himself, as the word is rendered in [Amo
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#009); against his fears, and troubles,
and dejection of mind, determining to take heart, and be of good
courage, and not sink, and succumb, and faint under his burdens: none
but God, Father, Son, and Spirit, can give comfort to distressed ones,
whether on temporal or spiritual accounts; but good men may make use of
means for comfort, such as hearing the word, reading the Scriptures,
prayer, meditation, and conversation with good men.

\(h\) "relinquam facies meas", Montanus, Bolducius, Schmidt. (i)
"confirmabo vel roborabo cor meum", Mercerus; so R. R.

[Job 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 9:28</span></span>

I am afraid of all my sorrows,.... That they would return upon him, and
surround him, and overwhelm him, so that he should not be able to stand
up against them, or under them; that they would increase and continue
with him, and so he should never be released from them:

I know that thou wilt not hold me innocent: a sudden apostrophe to God
as near him; the meaning is not, that he was confident that God would
not justify him but condemn him in a spiritual sense; Job did not
despair of his everlasting salvation, he knew and believed in his living
Redeemer; he knew he should be acquitted and justified by his
righteousness, and not be condemned with the world; but he was certain
of this, as he thought that God would neither "cleanse" (k) him, as some
render the word, from the worms his flesh was clad with, and from the
filthy boils and ulcers he was covered with; nor clear him so as that he
should appear to be innocent in the sight and judgment of his friends;
but go on to treat him as if he was a guilty person, by continuing his
afflictions on him, even unto death; he had no hope of being freed from
them, and so of being cleared from the imputation of his friends, who
judged of him by his outward circumstances.

\(k\) "quod non mundabis me", Montanus, Bolducius, Beza.

[Job 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 9:29</span></span>

If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? If he was that wicked person,
that hypocrite, Bildad and his other friends took him to be, it was in
vain for him to make his supplications to God, as they advised him; so
Gersom gives the sense of the words; since God hears not sinners, such
as live in sin, regard iniquity in their hearts, and practise it in
their lives, at least secretly, as it was suggested Job did; if he was
such an one, it must be all lost labour to pray to God to show favour to
him, and deliver him out of his troubles, since he might reasonably
expect he would shut his eyes and stop his ears at such a man, and
regard not his cries; seeking to him must be in vain; prayer may be
fitly enough expressed by labour, it is a striving and wrestling with
God, and especially when it is constant, importunate, and fervent: but
rather the sense is, that if he was a wicked man in the account of God,
or was dealt with as one; if God would not hold him innocent, as he
asserts in the latter part of [Job
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#028); then it was a vain thing to
labour the point in the vindication of himself; since he could never
think of succeeding against God, so wise and powerful, so holy, just,
and pure. The word "if" is not in the original text, and may be left
out, and the words be rendered, "I am wicked" (l); not in any notorious
manner, as having lived a scandalous life, or been guilty of some gross
enormities, as his friends insinuated, but in common with other men; he
was born a sinner, had been a transgressor from the womb, and though he
was renewed and sanctified by the spirit of God, yet sin dwelt in him,
and through the infirmity of the flesh he was daily sinning in thought,
word, or deed; nor did he expect it would be otherwise with him while in
this world; yea, it was impossible for him to be without sin, as Bar
Tzemach observes to be the sense of the phrase; and therefore if God
would not clear him, or hold him innocent, unless he was entirely free
from sin, as it was labouring in vain to attain to such perfection, so
it must be to no purpose, and is what he chiefly intends, to attempt to
vindicate himself before God: or "I shall be wicked", or "ungodly" (m);
I shall be treated as such not only by his friends, who would reckon him
a very wicked man so long as those afflictions continued on him, let him
say what he would; but by the Lord himself, who he believed would never
release him from them as long as he lived, which in the eye of men would
be a tacit condemnation of him; so the Targum,"I shall be
condemned,''and therefore it was labour in vain, striving against the
stream, to go about to vindicate himself; nor was it possible that he
could make himself out so clear and pure and perfect, that such an holy
Being as God was could find no fault in him, in whose sight the heavens,
and the inhabitants of them, were not clean; this is further evinced in
the following words.

\(l\) "impius sum", V. L. Pagninus; so Schmidt. (m) "Ego impius ero",
Montanus, Mercerus, Bolducius; "ego reus ero", Codurcus; "equidem
improbus ero", Schultens.

[Job 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 9:30</span></span>

If I wash myself with snow water,.... As it came from heaven, or flowed
from the mountains covered with snow, as Lebanon, see [Jer
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014); or was kept in vessels for such
use, as being judged the best for such a purpose; so it was used by the
ancients (n), as being what whitens the skin, and strengthens the parts
by contracting the pores, and hindering perspiration; it signifies, in a
figurative sense, that let him take what methods he would to cleanse
himself from sin, they were all in vain, his iniquity would be seen, and
remain marked before God; and indeed there is nothing that a man can do
that will make him pure and clean in the sight of an holy God; this is
not to be done by ceremonial ablutions, such as might be in use in Job's
time, before the law of Moses was given, and to which he may have some
reference; these only sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, or only
externally, but could not purify the heart, so as to have no more
conscience of sin; nor by moral duties, not by repentance, as Sephorno;
a fountain, a flood, an ocean of tears of humiliation and repentance,
would not wash away sin; if, instead of ten thousand rivers of oil, so
many rivers of brinish tears could be produced, they would be of no
avail to cleanse the sinner; nor any works of righteousness done by man,
for these themselves need washing in the blood of the Lamb; for nothing
short of the blood of Christ, and the grace of God, can do it:

and make my hands never so clean; the hands are what men work with, [Ecc
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#010); and so may design good works,
which are sometimes called clean hands; see [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004); compared with [Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001); and may be said to be so when
they are done well, from a pare heart, and faith unfeigned, without
selfish and sordid views, with a single eye to the glory of God; which
is doing them as well, and making the hands as clean, as well can be;
yet these are of no avail with respect to justification before God, and
acceptance with him, or with regard to salvation, which is all of grace,
and not of works, be they what they will; some render the words, "and
cleanse my hands with soap" (o), which cleanses them best of anything,
see [Jer 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022).

\(n\) "Discubuimus, pueris aquam nivalem in manus infundentibus",
Petronius in Satyr. (o) Smegmate, Codurcus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Schmidt; so the Targum, and Mr. Broughton.

[Job 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 9:31</span></span>

Yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch,.... In the filthy ditch of sin,
the pit wherein is no water, the horrible pit, the mire and clay, in
which all unregenerate men are, and to which hypocrites return, as the
swine to its wallowing in the mire; and in which impurity self-righteous
persons are, and are sooner or later made to appear, notwithstanding all
their outward righteousness, holiness, purity, and perfection they boast
of; and though Job was neither of these, not an unregenerate man, nor an
hypocrite, nor a self-righteous person; yet he knew that, in comparison
of the perfect purity and holiness of God, he should appear exceedingly
impure; and that God would treat him as such, and hold him out to the
view of others as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all
things, by continuing his afflictions, from whence it would be concluded
that he was the most impure person; and indeed by the ditch may be meant
the ditch of afflictions, as Sephorno, either his present ones
continued, his filthy ulcers and scabs, with which his body was covered
all over, or new afflictions he would bring him into, where he would
sink in deep mire, there being no standing, [Psa
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002); some understand this of the
grave, the ditch or pit of corruption, into which he should be cast, and
there putrefy and rot: but the other senses seem best:

and mine own clothes shall abhor me; not his clothes in a literal sense;
either while living, his filthy ulcers being such, that were his clothes
sensible of them, they would loathe and abhor to touch him, and cover
him; or when dead, his sepulchre garments, his shroud, or winding sheet,
would disdain to cover such a filthy body, overspread with worms and
dust; or as Vatablus paraphrases it, clothes do not become a dead body;
or as Mr. Broughton,"when I go naked to the grave, as though my clothes
loathed me:''but the words are rather to be understood figuratively,
either of some of his friends that were as near and as close to him as
his clothes, or had been, but now were estranged from him, and loathed
and abhorred him, see [Job 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013); or
better, of his best works of righteousness, which he put on as a robe,
[Job 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014); and which are a covering
to the saints before men, and are ornamental to them, though not
justifying in the sight of God; and indeed in themselves, and compared
with the holy law, and holy nature of God, are imperfect and impure; and
if God was to enter into judgment with men, they would be so far from
justifying them in his sight, or rendering them acceptable to him, that
they would cause them to be abhorred by him, as all self-righteousness
and self-righteous persons are, see [Pro
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027); yea, even the best works of men
are but dung in the judgment of a good man himself, what then must they
be in the account of God? [Phi 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008);
Job here, and in [Job 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030), has most
exalted ideas of the purity, holiness, and majesty of God, so that no
creature, nor creature holiness, be they ever so perfect, can stand
before him, or be pure in his sight.

[Job 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 9:32</span></span>

For he is not a man, as I am,.... For though the parts and members of an
human body are sometimes ascribed to him, yet these are to be understood
by an anthropopathy, speaking after the manner of men, there being
something in him, which in a figurative sense answers to these;
otherwise we are not to conceive of any corporeal shape in him, or that
there is any likeness to which he is to be compared: he is a spirit
infinite, immortal, immense, invisible, pure and holy, just and true,
and without iniquity; whereas Job was but a man, a finite, feeble,
mortal creature, and a sinful one; and therefore there being such a vast
disparity between them, it was in vain to litigate a point with him, to
plead his cause before him, or attempt to vindicate his innocence; the
potsherds may strive and contend with the potsherds of the earth their
equals, but not with God their Creator, who is more than a match for
them; he sees impurity where man sees it not, and can bring a charge
against him, and support it, where he thought there was none, and
therefore it is a vain thing to enter the lists with him:

that I should answer him; not to questions put by him, but in a judicial
way to charges and accusations he should exhibit; no man in this sense
can answer him, for one of a thousand he may bring, and men are
chargeable with; wherefore Job once and again determines he would not
pretend to answer him, as he knew he could not, see [Job
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003),

and we should come together in judgment; in any court of judicature,
before any judge, to have the cause between us heard, and tried, and
determined; for in what court of judicature can he be convened into? or
what judge is there above him, before whom he can be summoned? or is
capable of judging and determining the cause between us? there is the
high court of heaven, where we must all appear, and the judgment seat of
Christ, before which we must all stand; and God is the judge of all, to
whom we must come, and by whose sentence we must be determined; but
there is no court, no judge, no judgment superior to him and his; there
is no annulling his sentence, or making an appeal from him to another;
there is no coming together at all, and much less "alike" (p), as some
render it, or upon equal terms; the difference between him and his
creatures being so vastly great.

\(p\) "pariter", Junius & Tremellius, Drusius.

[Job 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 9:33</span></span>

Neither is there any daysman betwixt us,.... Or "one that reproves" (q);
who upon hearing a cause reproves him that is found guilty, or is
blameworthy, or has done injury to another; but there is no such person
to be found, among angels or men, capable of this, supposing, as if Job
should say, I should appear to be the injured person; or there is no
"umpire" or "arbitrator" (r), to whom the case between us can be
referred; for, as Bar Tzemach observes, he that stands in such a
character between two parties must be both more wise and more mighty
than they; but there is none among all beings wiser and mightier than
God:

that might lay his hand upon us both; and restrain them from using any
violence to one another, as contending persons are apt to do; and
compromise matters, settle and adjust things in difference between them,
so as to do justice to both, and make both parties easy, and make peace
between them. Herodotus (s) makes mention of a custom among the
Arabians,"when they enter into covenants and agreements with each other,
another man stands in the midst of them both, and with a sharp stone
cuts the inside of the hands of the covenanters near the larger fingers;
and then takes a piece out of each of their garments, and anoints with
the blood seven stones that lie between them; and while he is doing this
calls upon a deity, and when finished the covenant maker goes with his
friends to an host or citizen, if the affair is transacted with a
citizen; and the friends reckon it a righteous thing to keep the
covenant.''To which, or some such custom, Job may be thought to allude.
Now, whereas Christ is the daysman, umpire and mediator between God and
men, who has interposed between them, and has undertaken to manage
affairs relating to both; in things pertaining to God, the glory of his
justice, and the honour of his law, and to made reconciliation for the
sins of men, and to make peace for them with God by the blood of his
cross; which he has completely done, being every way qualified for it,
inasmuch as he partakes of both natures, and is God and man in one
person, and so could put his hand on both, and make both one; or bring
them who were at variance to an entire agreement with each other, upon
such a bottom, as even the strict justice of God cannot object unto.
Now, I say, Job must not be understood as if he was ignorant of this,
for he had knowledge of Christ as a Redeemer and Saviour, and so as the
Mediator and Peacemaker; the Septuagint version renders it as a wish, "O
that there was a mediator between us!" and so it may be considered as a
prayer for Christ's incarnation, and that he would appear and do the
work of a mediator he was appointed to, which Job plainly saw there was
great need of; or, as others (t), "there is no daysman yet"; there will
be one, but as yet he is not come; in due time he will, which Job had
faith in and full assurance of: but there is no need of such versions
and glosses: Job is here not speaking of the affair of salvation, about
which he had no doubt, he knew his state was safe, and he had an
interest in the living Redeemer and blessed Mediator; but of the present
dispensation of Providence, and of the clearing of that up to the
satisfaction of his friends, so that he might appear to be an innocent
person; and since God did not think fit to change the scene, there was
none to interpose on his behalf, and it was in vain for him to contend
with God.

\(q\) "arguens", Montanus, Bolducius, Drusius; "redarguens", Vatablus,
Mercerus. (r) "Arbiter", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius,
Schultens. (s) Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 8. (t) So some in Caryll.

[Job 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 9:34</span></span>

Let him take his rod away from me,.... Not his government over him, of
which the rod or sceptre is an ensign, Job did not want to be freed from
that; but, his rod of affliction, or stroke, as the Targum, the stroke
of his hand, which, though a fatherly chastisement, lay heavy upon him,
and depressed his spirits; so that he could not, while it was on him,
reason so freely about things as he thought he could if it was removed,
and for which he here prays:

and let not his fear terrify me; not the fear of him as a father, which
is not terrifying, but the fear of him as a judge; the terror of his
majesty, the dread of his wrath and vengeance, the fearful apprehensions
he had of him as a God of strict justice; that would by no means clear
the guilty, yea, would not hold him innocent, though he was with respect
to the charge of his friends; being now without those views of him as a
God gracious and merciful; to these words Elihu seeks to have respect,
[Job 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006).

[Job 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 9:35</span></span>

Then would I speak, and not fear him,.... With a servile fear, though
with reverence and godly fear; meaning either at the throne of grace,
having liberty of access, boldness of spirit, and freedom of speech
through Christ the Mediator, and in the view of his blood,
righteousness, and sacrifice; for when the rod of his law and the terror
of his justice are removed, and his grace and favour in Christ shown, a
believer can speak boldly and freely to God, and not be afraid before
him: but rather Job's sense is, that were the rod of his anger taken off
and the dread of his majesty, which so awed him that he could not tell
his case as it was, and use the arguments he might to advantage; he
should speak without fear, and so as to defend himself, and make his
cause to appear to be just; to this the Lord seems to refer in [Job
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#003); being bold and daring
expressions, which Job blushed when made sensible of it, [Job
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#005),

but it is not so with me; there was no daysman between the Lord and him;
the rod was not taken off his back, nor the dread and terror of the
Almighty removed from him; and so could not speak in his own defence, as
otherwise he might: or it was not so with him as his friends thought of
him; he was not the wicked hypocritical man they took him to be, or as
the afflictive dispensations of God made him to appear to be, according
to their judgment of them: or the words may be rendered, "I am not so
with myself" (u); that is, he was not conscious to himself that he was
such a person they judged him; or such were the troubles and afflictions
that were upon him, that he was not himself, he was not "compos mentis",
and so not capable on that account, as well as others, of pleading his
own cause: or "I am not right in" or "with myself" (w); not in his right
mind, being distracted with the terrors of God, and the arrows of the
Almighty that stuck in him; or he was not righteous in himself; for
though he was clear of hypocrisy he was charged with, he did not pretend
to be without sin, or to have such a righteousness as would justify him
before God; and therefore desires things might be put upon the foot of
grace, and not of strict justice.

\(u\) "non sic ego apud me", Pagninus, Montanus, Beza, Vatablus,
Mercerus, Schmidt, Schultens. (w) "Quia non probus ego apud me",
Bolducius; "quod non sim rectus apud me", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 10](job010)

</div>
