<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job013)  [Next](job015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 14:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 14

Job, having turned himself from his friends to God, continues his
address to him in this chapter; wherein he discourses of the frailty of
man, the shortness of his life, the troubles that are in it, the
sinfulness of it, and its limited duration, beyond which it cannot
continue; all which he makes use of with God, that he would not
therefore deal rigorously with him, but have pity on him, and cease from
severely afflicting him, till he came to the end of his days, which
could not be long, [Job 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001); he
observes of a tree, when it is cut down to the root, yea, when the root
is become old, and the stock dies, it will, by means of being watered,
bud and sprout again, and produce boughs and branches; but man, like the
failing waters of the sea, and the decayed and dried up flood, when he
dies, rises not, till the heavens be no more, [Job
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007); and then he wishes to be hid in
the grave till that time, and expresses hope and belief of the
resurrection of the dead, [Job 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013);
and goes on to complain of the strict notice God took of his sins, of
his severe dealings with men, destroying their hope in life, and
removing them by death; so that they see and know not the case and
circumstances of their children they leave behind, and while they live
have continual pain and sorrow, [Job
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016).

[Job 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 14:1</span></span>

Man that is born of a woman,.... Man, Adam; not the first man, so
called, for he was made and created out of the dust of the earth, and
not born of a woman; the woman was made out of him, and not he of her;
"earthly man", as Mr. Broughton translates it, as every descendant of
Adam is; as is the earth, such are they that are earthy, everyone of
which is born of a woman; yet not as opposed unto and distinguished from
the heavenly One, or the Lord from heaven, for he also as man was made
and born of a woman: this, though a proper description of all mankind,
there being none but what are born of a woman, see [Mat
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011); yet Job chiefly designs
himself; for having spoken of his wasting circumstances in which he was,
in [Job 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028), goes on in this to
treat of his frailty and mortality, and to improve it into an argument
with God for pity and mercy, as appears from [Job
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#003); where he speaks of himself in
the first person, as here in the third, and all along: he may have
respect in this clause to Eve, the mother of all living, from whom all
descend, and of whom, in a sense, they may be said to be born; or else
to his immediate parent, he and every man being born of a woman; no man,
but the first, ever came into the world in any other way; there is one
that came into the world without an earthly father, and that is our Lord
Jesus Christ, but none without a mother; nor lie, who indeed was born of
a virgin, and so in an extraordinary and miraculous manner; and this is
observed, not so much on account of natural descent, or to denote that,
as being reckoned from the mother, she having so great a concern in the
production of man, conceiving, bearing, and bringing him forth; nor to
remark the sinfulness of nature, though one born of a sinful woman must
needs be so too, since this is expressed clearly in [Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004); but the weakness and frailty of
man; as is the creature that generates, such is that that is generated;
creatures born of strong ones are strong, and of weak ones weak; a
creature born of a lion is a strong one; and man, born of a woman, must
be weak and feeble, and no wonder he is short lived, as follows:

is of few days; or "short of days" (c); comes short of the days he might
have lived, if man had never sinned, and comes short of the days the
first man did live, and which those before the flood generally lived,
who most of them lived upwards of nine hundred years; whereas now, and
ever since the times of Moses, and about which Job lived, the days of
the years of man are but threescore and ten; and such are shorter of
days still, who live not more than half this time, who are cut off in
the bloom and prime of life, the days of whose youth are shortened, who
die in their youth, or in their childhood and infancy; and such
especially are short of days who are carried from the womb to the grave,
or die as soon as born; and those that live the longest, their days are
but few, when compared with the days of eternity, or with those men
shall live in another world, either good men in heaven, or wicked men in
hell, which will be for ever; and especially with respect to God, with
whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day,
and therefore the days and age of man are as nothing before him. Job has
here also a respect to himself, whose days in his own apprehension were
very few, and just at an end, and therefore craves pity and compassion,
see [Job 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020); and what aggravates
the shortness of man's days is, as it follows:

and full of trouble; man is born to it, being born in sin; sin and
trouble go together, where there is sin there is trouble; sin entered
into the world, and death by it, with the numerous train of afflictions
and miseries which issue in it: all men have their troubles, some of one
sort, and some of another; wicked men are not indeed in trouble as other
men, as good men are; they have not the same sort of trouble, yet are
not exempt from all; they are "full of commotion" (d) disquietude and
uneasiness, as the word signifies; they are restless, and ever in
motion; they are like the troubled sea, that cannot rest, but is
continually casting up mire and dirt; some are of such tempers and
dispositions, that they cannot sleep unless they do mischief; and though
they are many of them prosperous in their worldly circumstances, there
are others that are reduced to poverty and distress, are attended with
diseases and disorders, pains and sores, and blaspheme that God that has
power over them; and these are of all men the most miserable, having no
interest in God, in his loving kindness, nor any enjoyment of his
presence, and so nothing to support them in, and carry them through
their troubles; and though they are generally without any sense of sin
or danger, have no remorse of conscience, and their hearts are hardened;
yet at times they are "full of trembling" (e), as some render the words;
are seized with a panic through the judgments of God that are upon them,
or are coming upon them, or when death is made the king of terrors to
them: and good men they have their troubles; besides those in common
with others, they have inward troubles arising from the vanity of their
minds and thoughts, the impurity of their hearts, and the power of
indwelling sin in them, and especially from the breaking forth of it in
words and deeds; from the weakness of their graces, from the hidings of
God's face, and the temptations of Satan: in short, Job's meaning is,
that men in the ordinary course of things meet with so much trouble,
that there is no need of any extraordinary afflictions to be laid on
them, such as his were.

\(c\) "brevis dierum", Montanus, Schmidt, Michaelis, Schultens; so Beza,
Vatablus, Drusius, Mercerus. (d) "satur commotione", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis. (e) "Saturus
tremore", Montanus; "satur trepidi tumultus", Schultens.

[Job 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 14:2</span></span>

He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down,.... As the flower comes
from the earth, so does man; as it comes out of the stalk, so man out of
his mother's womb; as the flower flourishes for a while, and looks gay
and beautiful, so man while in youth, in health and prosperity. Job,
doubtless, has respect to his own case before his troubles came upon
him, when he was possessed of all that substance, which made him the
greatest man of the east; when his children were like olive plants
around his table, and his servants at his command, and he in perfect
health of body: and as a flower flourishes for a little while, and then
withers; no sooner is it come to its full blow, but presently decays;
such is the goodliness of man, it fades away whenever God blows a blast
upon it; yea, he is easily and quickly cut down by death, like a
beautiful flower cut with the knife, or cropped by the hand, or trampled
upon by the foot, see [Psa 103:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#015);

he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not; either as the shadow of
the evening, which is lost when night comes on; or the shadow on a dial
plate, which is continually moving on; or, as the Jewish Rabbins say, as
the shadow of a bird flying, which stays not, whereas the shadow of a
wall, or of a tree, continues: a shadow is an empty thing, without
substance, dark and obscure, variable and uncertain, declining,
fleeting, and passing away; and so fitly resembles the life of a man,
which is but a vapour, a bubble, yea, as nothing with God; is full of
darkness, of ignorance, and of adversity, very fickle, changeable, and
inconstant, and at most but of a short continuance.

[Job 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 14:3</span></span>

And dost thou open thine eyes on such an one,.... So frail and feeble,
so short lived and sorrowful, so soon and easily cut down and destroyed:
and by opening of his eyes is not meant his providential care of men;
whose eyes indeed are everywhere, run to and fro throughout the earth,
and are careful of and provident for all sorts of men, which is very
wonderful, [Psa 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004); nor the displays
of his special grace and favour towards his own peculiar people, on whom
his eyes of love, grace, and mercy, are opened, and are never withdrawn
from them, which is marvellous lovingkindness; but the exercise of
rigorous justice in punishing, afflicting, and chastising with so much
severity, as Job thought to be his own case; the eyes of God, as he
thought, were set on him for evil, and not for good; he looked wistly on
him, and in a very frowning manner; he sharpened his eye upon him, as
the phrase is, [Job 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009); and as some
render the word (f) here, looked narrowly into all his ways, and watched
every motion and every step he took, and pursued him with great
eagerness, and used him with great strictness in a way of justice, which
he, a poor, weak creature, was not able to bear; which sense is
confirmed by what follows:

and bringeth me into judgment with thee? by this it appears Job has a
view to himself all along, and to the procedure of God against him,
which he took to be in strict justice, and that was what he was not able
to bear; he was not a match for God, being such a frail, weak, sinful,
mortal creature; nor was God a man as he was, that they should come
together in judgment, or be fit persons to contend together upon the
foot of strict justice; sinful man can never be just with God upon this
bottom, or be able to answer to one objection or charge of a thousand
brought against him; and therefore, as every sensible man will deprecate
God's entering into judgment with him, so Job here expostulates with God
why he should bring him into judgment with him; when, as he fled to his
grace and mercy, he should rather show that to him than in a rigorous
manner deal with him.

\(f\) "super illo acuis oculos tuos", Cocceius; "super hune apertos
vibras oculos", Schultens.

[Job 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 14:4</span></span>

Who can bring a clean thing out of an clean?.... Either produce a clean
person from an unclean one: it is not to be expected that one, perfectly
free from sin, should be generated by, or brought out of, one that is
defiled with it; which is the case of all men; the first man, though
made upright, sinned, and by sinning defiled himself, and all human
nature in him: and so those that immediately descended from him were
polluted likewise, and so on in all generations, every man being
conceived and shaped in iniquity; so that it is not possible that man
that is born of a woman, sinful and unclean, should be clean himself, or
be free from sin; by which it is manifest, that the sinfulness of human
nature is unavoidable; it is natural and necessary, and cannot be
otherwise, such being the case and circumstances of immediate parents,
from whom men descend; and that this is the case of all men that come
into the world by ordinary and natural generation; there is none
righteous or pure from sin: no,

not one; and things being so, Job thought it hard that he should be
singled out, and so severely chastised, when the sinfulness of nature
was from and by his birth, and was natural and unavoidable, and when
there was not a single person on earth free from it. There never was but
one instance of one clean being brought out of an unclean person, and
that was our Lord Jesus Christ of the Virgin Mary; which was not in the
ordinary way of generation, but by a supernatural and extraordinary
production of his human nature, through the power of the Holy Ghost,
whereby it escaped the original contagion and pollution of mankind: or
else, in consequence of this, the sense is, who can bring forth or
produce a good work from an impure person? or how can it be expected
that a man that is defiled with sin should do a good work perfectly
pure? for there is not even a just and good man that doth good and
sinneth not; and much less is it to be looked for, that men in a mere
state of nature, that are as they come into the world, sinful and
impure, should ever be able to perform good works; it may as well be
thought that grapes are to be gathered of thorns, or figs of thistles;
men must be born again, created in Christ Jesus, have faith in him, and
the Spirit of God in them, before they can do that which is truly good
from right principles, and with right views; and man at most and best
must be an imperfect creature, and deficient in his duty, and cannot
bear to be strictly examined, and rigorously prosecuted: or the meaning
is, "who can make" (g) an unclean man a clean one? "no, not one"; a man
cannot make himself clean by anything he can do, by his repentance and
humiliation, by his good works, duties, and services; none can do this
but God; and to this sense some render the words, "who can--is there
one" (h)? there is, that is, God, he can do it, and he only: though men
are exhorted to cleanse themselves, this does not suppose a power in
them to do it; this is only designed to convince them of the necessity
of being cleansed, and to awaken a concern for it; and such as are made
sensible thereof will apply to God to purge them, and make them clean,
and create a clean heart within them: and this God has promised to do,
and does do; he sprinkles the clean water of his grace, and purifies the
heart by faith in the blood of Jesus, which cleanses from all sin, and
is the fountain opened to wash in for sin and uncleanness; the Targum
is,

"who can give a clean thing out of a man that is defiled with sins,
except God who is one, and can forgive him?''

none can pardon sin but God, or justify a sinner besides him; and he can
do both in a way of justice, upon the foot of the blood and
righteousness of Christ.

\(g\) "quis potest facere?" V. L. "dabit", i.e. "faciet", Vatablus;
"sistet aut efficiet", Michaelis; "quis efficiet?" Cocceius. (h) "nonne
tu qui solus est?" V. L. "annon unus?" sc. Mediator, Cocceius.

[Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 14:5</span></span>

Seeing his days are determined,.... Or "cut out" (i), exactly and
precisely, how many he shall live, and what shall befall him every day
of his life; whose life, because of the shortness of it, is rather
measured by days than vents:

the number of his months are with thee; before him, in his sight, in his
account, and fixed and settled by him:

thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; the boundaries of
his life the period of his days, beyond which he cannot go; the term of
man's life is so peremptorily fixed by God, that he cannot die sooner,
nor live longer, than he has determined he should; as the time of a
man's birth, so the time of his death is according to the purpose of
God; and all intervening moments and articles of time, and all things
that befall a man throughout the whole course of his life, all fall
under the appointment of God, and are according to his determinate will;
and when God requires of man his soul, no one has power over his spirit
to retain it one moment; yet this hinders not the use of means for the
preservation and comfort of life, since these are settled as well as the
end, and are under the divine direction: the word for bounds signifies
sometimes "statutes" (k): though not to be understood of laws appointed
by God, either of a moral or ceremonial nature; but here it signifies
set, stated, appointed times (l) Seneca (m) says the same thing;

"there is a boundary fixed for every man, which always remains where it
is set, nor can any move it forward by any means whatsoever.''

\(i\) "exacte praefiniti sunt", Tigurine version. (k) "statuta ejus", V.
L. Mercerus, Schmidt. (l) "Stata tempora", Beza. (m) Consolat. ad
Marciam, c. 20.

[Job 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 14:6</span></span>

Turn from him, that he may rest,.... From this short lived afflicted
man, whose days are limited, and will soon be at an end, meaning
himself; not that he desires he would withdraw his gracious presence,
nothing is more agreeable than this to a good man, and there is nothing
he more deprecates than the withdrawing of it; besides, this was Job's
case, and one part of his complaint, [Job
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024); nor to withhold his supporting
presence, or his providential care of him, without which he could not
subsist, but must die and drop into the dust; though some think this is
the sense, and render the words, "turn from him, that he may cease" (n);
to be, or to live, and so a wish for death, that he might have rest in
the grave from all his labours, pains, and sorrows; but rather the
meaning is, that he would turn away from afflicting him in this
extraordinary, manner; since, according to the ordinary course of
things, he would meet with many troubles and afflictions, and had but a
little time to live, and therefore entreats he would take off his hand
which pressed him sorely, and grant him a little respite; or "look off
from him" (o); not turn away his eye of love, grace, and mercy, that is
not reasonable to suppose; that was what he wanted, that God would look
upon him, and have compassion on him under his affliction, and abate it;
but that he would turn away his angry frowning countenance from him,
which he could not bear; he had opened his eyes upon him, [Job
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#003); and looked very sternly, and
with great severity in his countenance, on him, and it was very
distressing, and even intolerable to him; and therefore begs that he
would take off his eye from him, that he might have rest from his
adversity, that he might have some ease of body and mind, some intervals
of peace and pleasure: or "that he might cease" (p) from murmuring, as
Aben Ezra; or rather from affliction and trouble; not that he expected
to be wholly free from it in this life, for man is born to it, as he
full well knew; and the people of God have always their share of it, and
which abides and waits for them while in this world; but he desires he
might be rid of that very sore and heavy affliction now upon him; or
"that it might cease" (q), the affliction he laboured under, which would
be the case if God would turn himself, remove his hand, or look another
way, and not so sharply upon him:

till he shall accomplish as an hireling his day; an hireling, as if he
should say, that is hired for any certain time, for a year, or more or
less, he has some relaxation from his labours, time for eating and
sleeping to refresh nature; or he has some time allowed him as a respite
from them, commonly called holy days; or if he is hired only for a day,
he has time for his meals; and if his master's eye is off of him, he
slackens his hand, and gets some intermission from his labour; wherefore
at least Job begs that God would let him have the advantage of an
hireling. Moreover, to "accomplish his day", is either to do the work of
it, or to get to the end of it; every man has work to do while in this
world, in things natural, civil, and religious, and is the work of his
day or generation, and what must be done while it is day; and a good man
is desirous of finishing it; to which the recompence of reward, though
it is not of debt, but of grace, is a great encouragement, as it is to
the hireling: or "till as an hireling he shall will", or "desire with
delight and pleasure (r) his day"; that is, his day to be at an end,
which he wishes and longs for; and when it comes is very acceptable to
him, because he then enjoys his rest, and receives his hire; so as there
is a fixed time for the hireling, there is for man on earth; and as that
time is short and laborious, so is the life of man; and at the close of
it, the good and faithful servant of the Lord, like the hireling, in
some sense rests from his labours, and receives the reward of the
inheritance, having served the Lord Christ; which makes this day a
grateful and acceptable one to him, what he desires, and with pleasure
waits for, being better than the day of his birth; and especially when
his life is worn out with trouble, and he is weary of it through old
age, and the infirmities thereof, those days being come in which he has
no pleasure. Job therefore entreats that God would give him some
intermission from his extraordinary troubles, till his appointed time
came, which then would be as welcome to him as the close of the day is
to an hireling, see [Job 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001).

\(n\) "donec desinat, sc. esse vel vivere", Piscator, Cocceius. (o)
"respice aliorsum ab eo", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius,
Schmidt, Michaelis; so De Dieu, Schultens. (p) "Et cesset", Mercerus;
"et desinat a malo suo", Pagninus. (q) "Et cesset afflictio", Drusius;
so the Targum. (r) "grato animo excipiet", Tigurine version; "velit",
Montanus, Bolducius; "acceptum habeat", Piscator; De Dieu, Michaelis.

[Job 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 14:7</span></span>

For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout
again,.... That is, if it be cut down to the root, and only the stump of
the root is left in the ground, as the tree in Nebuchadnezzar's dream,
[Dan 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#015), yet the owner of it may
entertain a hope that it is not utterly destroyed, but will bud out
again; or "change" (s) its state and condition, and become flourishing
again: or "renew" (t) itself; and its strength, and put out new shoots
and branches; either it will rise up into a new body, as the laurel, as
Pliny (u) relates, or produce new sprouts as the willow, alder tree, and
others; for this is not true of every tree, though it may be of many;
for it is (w) reported of the cypress tree, when cut down, it never
sprouts out any more, unless in one place, in Aenaria; but since this is
the case of some, it is sufficient to Job's purpose:

and that the tender branch thereof will not cease; from shooting out; or
"its suckers will not cease" (x); which may be observed frequently to
grow out of the roots of trees, even of those that are cut down, such as
above mentioned.

\(s\) "mutabit se", Drusius; "conditionem suam", Piscator. (t) "Renovat
se", Schmidt. (u) Nat. Hist. apud Pinedam in loc. (w) Servius in Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 3. p. 681. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 16. c. 33. (x) "sugensque ejus
surculus", Schultens.

[Job 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 14:8</span></span>

Though the root thereof wax old in the earth,.... Lies long there, and
is become dry, and seems to be consumed, on which account there may be
the less hope of its flourishing:

and the stock thereof die in the ground; which may make it still more
improbable; for this is not to be understood with some interpreters (y)
of the stock or trunk of the tree cut down, and lying along on the
earth, and in the dust of it; though it may be observed, that even such
a stock or trunk, separated from the root, and as it lies along, will
sprout again, as particularly in elms: but it may rather mean, since it
is said to be "in the ground", that part of the stock or stump left in
the ground, from whence the roots part and spread in the earth; and even
though this dies, or at least so seems, yet there being still life and
vigour in the roots, they send forth suckers.

\(y\) So Piscator and Cocceius.

[Job 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 14:9</span></span>

Yet through the scent of water it will bud,.... As soon as it smells it,
or perceives it, is sensible of it, or partakes of its efficacy;
denoting both how speedily, and how easily, at once as it were, it buds
forth through the virtue either of rain water that descends upon it, or
river water by which it is planted, or by any means conveyed unto it;
particularly this is true of the willow, which delights in watery
places; and, when it is in the circumstances before described, will by
the benefit of water bud out again, even when its stock has been
seemingly dead:

and bring forth boughs like a plant; as if it was a new plant, or just
planted; so the Vulgate Latin version, as "when it was first planted";
or as a plant that sends forth many branches: the design of this simile
is to show that man's case is worse than that of trees, which when cut
down sprout out again, and are in the place where they were before; but
man, when he is cut down by death, rises up no more in the same place;
he is seen no more in it, and the place that knew him knows him no more;
where he falls he lies until the general resurrection; he rises not
before without a miracle, and such instances are very rare, and never
either before or at the resurrection, but by the omnipotence of God;
whereas a tree, in the above circumstances, sprouts out of itself,
according to its nature, and in virtue of a natural power which God has
put into it; not so man (y).

\(y\) "Mutat terra vices-----nos ubi decidimus", Horat. Carmin. l. 4.
Ode 7.

[Job 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 14:10</span></span>

But man dieth, and wasteth away,.... All men, every man, "Geber", the
mighty man, the strong man; some die in their full strength; the wise
man, notwithstanding all his wisdom and knowledge, and even skill in the
art of medicine; the rich man, with all his riches, with which he cannot
bribe death, nor keep it off; the great and the honourable, emperors,
kings, princes, nobles, all die, and their honour is laid in the dust;
yea, good men die, though Christ has died for them; even those that are
the most useful and beneficial to men, the prophets of the Lord, and the
ministers of his word; and it is no wonder that wicked men should die,
though they put the evil day far from them, make an agreement with
death, or bid it defiance, their wickedness shall not deliver from it;
all men have sinned, and death passes on them, it is appointed for them
to die; not their souls, which are immortal, but their bodies, which
return to dust, and are only the mortal part; death is a disunion or
separation of soul and body: and now when this is made, the body
"wasteth away" in the grave, and becomes rottenness, dust, and worms,
and does not by the strength of nature spring up again, as a tree does;
though some understand, by an inversion of the phrases, a wasting before
death through diseases, as if the words were to be read, "but man
wasteth away and dieth" (z); he is enervated by sickness, his strength
is weakened in the way, and when he dies there is none left in him; he
is cut off (a), as some choose to render it, or cut down as a tree is;
but then there is no force or natural strength in him to rise again, as
in a tree:

yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he? not in the same place he
was; not in his house and habitation where he lived; nor in his family,
and among his friends, with whom he conversed, nor in the world, and on
the earth where he did business; he is indeed somewhere, but where is
he? his body is in the grave; his soul, where is that? if a good man, it
is in the presence of God, where is fulness of joy; it is with Christ,
which is far better than to be here; it is with the spirits of just men
made perfect; it is in Abraham's bosom, feasting with him and other
saints; it is in heaven, in paradise, in a state of endless joy and
happiness: if a wicked man, his soul is in hell, in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels, and other damned
spirits; in a prison, from whence there is no release, and in the
uttermost misery and distress, banished from the divine Presence, and
under a continual sense of the wrath of God.

\(z\) So the Tigurine version, Vatablus, and some in Drusius; and some
Hebrews in Ramban and Bar Tzemach. (a) "exciditur", Beza, Piscator,
Mercerus; so Kimchi & Ben Gersom.

[Job 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 14:11</span></span>

As the waters fail from the sea,.... the words may be rendered either
without the as, and denote dissimilitude, and the sense be, that the
waters go from the sea and return again, as with the tide:

and the flood decays and dries up; and yet is supplied again with water:
"but man lieth down, and riseth not again", [Job
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#012); or else with the as, and
express likeness; as the waters when they fail from the sea, or get out
of lakes, and into another channel, never return more; and as a flood,
occasioned by the waters of a river overflowing its banks, never return
into it more; so man, when he dies, never returns to this world any
more. The Targum restrains this to the Red sea, and the parting of that
and the river Jordan, and the drying up of that before the ark of the
Lord, and the return of both to their places again.

[Job 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 14:12</span></span>

So man lieth down,.... Or "and", or "but man lieth down" (b); in the
grave when he dies, as on a bed, and takes his rest from all his
labours, toil and troubles, and lies asleep, and continues so till the
resurrection morn:

and riseth not; from off his bed, or comes not out of his grave into
this world, to the place where he was, and to be engaged in the affairs
of life he was before, and never by his own power; and whenever he will
rise, it will be by the power of God, and this not till the last day,
when Christ shall appear in person to judge the world; and then the dead
in Christ will rise first, at the beginning of the thousand years, and
the wicked at the end of them:

till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of
their sleep; for so the words are to be read, not in connection with
those that go before, but with the last clauses; though the sense is
much the same either way, which is, that those who are fallen asleep by
death, and lie sleeping in their graves, and on their beds, these shall
neither awake of themselves, nor be awaked by others, "till the heavens
be no more"; that is, never, so as to awake and arise of themselves, and
to this natural life, and to be concerned in the business of it; which
sometimes seems to be the sense of this phrase, see [Psa
89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029), [Mat
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018); or, as some render it, "till the
heavens are wore out", or "waxen old" (c); as they will like a garment,
and be folded up, and laid aside, as to their present use, [Psa
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026); or till they shall vanish
away, and be no more, as to their present form, quality, and use, though
they may exist as to substance; and when this will be the case, as it
will be when the Judge shall appear, when Christ shall come a second
time to judge the world; then the earth and heaven will flee away from
his face, the earth and its works shall be burnt up, and the heavens
shall pass away with great noise; and then, and not till then, will the
dead, or those that are asleep in their graves, be awaked by the voice
of the archangel, and the trump of God, and they shall be raised from
their sleepy beds, awake and arise, some to everlasting life, and some
to shame and everlasting contempt.

\(b\) "et vir", Pagninus, Montanus, Beza, Schmidt; "at vir", Cocceius.
(c) "donec atteratur eoelum", V. L. so some in Bar Tzemach, though
disapproved of by him as ungrammatical.

[Job 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 14:13</span></span>

And that thou wouldest hide me in the grave,.... The house appointed for
all living, which some understand by the "chambers" in [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020); The cemeteries or dormitories
of the saints, where they lie and sleep until the indignation of God
against a wicked world is over and past; or in Hades, the state of the
dead, where they are insensible of what is done in this world, what
calamities and judgments are on the inhabitants of it, and so are not
affected and grieved with these things; or in some cavern of the earth,
in the utmost recesses of it, in the very centre thereof, if possible;
his wish is, to be buried alive, or to live in some subterraneous place,
free from his present afflictions and misery, than to be upon earth with
them:

that thou wouldest keep me secret; so that no eye should see him, that
is, no human eye; for he did not expect to be hid from the sight of God,
be he where he would, before whom hell and destruction, or the grave,
are and have no covering; and not only be secret, but safe from all
trials and troubles, oppressions and oppressors; especially as he may
mean the grave where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are
at rest; the keys of which Christ keeps in his hands, and locks and
unlocks, and none but him; and where he has laid up his jewels, the
precious dust of his saints and where they and that will be preserved as
hidden treasure:

until thy wrath be past; either with respect to others, an ungodly
world, to punish whom God sometimes comes out of his place in great
wrath and indignation; and to prevent his dear children and people from
being involved in common and public calamities, he takes them away
beforehand, and hides them in his chambers, [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019); or with respect to himself, as
to his own apprehension of things, who imagined that the wrath of God
was upon him, being severely afflicted by him; all the effects of which
he supposed would not be removed until he was brought to the dust, from
whence he came, and until his body was changed at the resurrection; till
that time there are some appearances of the displeasure of against sin:
and then follows another petition,

that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me; either for
his going down to the grave, and being hid there, for which there is an
appointed time; for as that is the place appointed for man, it is
appointed for man to go unto it, and the time when, as appears from [Job
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005); or his coming out of the grave,
for his resurrection from thence, which also is fixed, even the last
day, the day God has appointed to judge the world in righteousness by
Christ at which time the dead will be raised; though of that day and
hour no man knows: unless he should mean a time for deliverance from his
afflictions which also is set; for God, as he settles the bounds of an
affliction, how far it should go, and no farther, so likewise the time
when it should end; and either of these Job might call a remembering of
him, who thought himself in his present case, as a dead man, out of
mind, as those that lie in the grave, remembered no more.

[Job 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 14:14</span></span>

If a man die,.... This is said not as if it was a matter of doubt, he
had before asserted it; as sure as men have sinned, so sure shall they
die; nothing is more certain than death, it is appointed by God, and is
sure; but taking it for granted, the experience of all men, and the
instances of persons of every age, rank, and condition, testifying to
it; the Targum restrains it to wicked men,

"if a wicked man die:''

shall he live again? no, he shall not live in this earth, and in the
place where he was, doing the same business he once did; that is, he
shall not live here; ordinarily speaking, the instances are very rare
and few; two or three instances there have been under the Old Testament,
and a few under the New; but this is far from being a general and usual
case, and never through the strength of nature, or of a man's self, but
by the mighty power of God: or it may be answered to affirmatively, he
shall live again at the general resurrection, at the last day, when all
shall come out of their graves, and there will be a general resurrection
of the just, and of the unjust; some will live miserably, in
inexpressible and eternal torments, and wish to die, but cannot, their
life will be a kind of death, even the second death; others will live
comfortably and happily an endless life of joy and pleasure with God;
Father, Son and Spirit, angels and glorified saints: hence, in the faith
of this is the following resolution,

all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come;
there is an appointed time for man on earth when he shall be born, how
long he shall live, and when he shall die, see [Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001); or "of my warfare" (d) for the
life of man, especially of a good man, is a state of warfare with many
enemies, sin, Satan, and the world; at the end of which there will be a
"change"; for not a change of outward circumstances in this life is
meant; for though there was such a change befell Job, yet he was,
especially at this time, in no expectation of it; and though his friends
suggested it to him, upon his repentance and reformation, he had no hope
of it, but often expresses the contrary: but either a change at death is
meant; the Targum calls it a change of life, a change of this life for
another; death makes a great change in the body of a man, in his place
here, in his relations and connections with men, in his company,
condition, and circumstances: or else the change at the resurrection,
when this vile body will be changed, and made like unto Christ's; when
it will become an incorruptible, glorious, powerful, and spiritual body,
which is now corruptible, dishonourable, weak, and natural; and, till
one or other of these should come, Job is determined to wait, to live in
the constant expectation of death, and to be in a readiness and
preparation for it; in the mean while to bear afflictions patiently, and
not show such marks of impatience as he had done, nor desire to die
before God's time, but, whenever that should come, quietly and
cheerfully resign himself into the hands of God; or this may respect the
frame and business of the soul in a separate state after death, and
before the resurrection, believing, hoping, and waiting for the
resurrection of the body, and its union to it, see [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010).

\(d\) "quibus nunc milito", V. L. "militiae maae", Montanus, Tigurine
version, Drusius, Codurcus, Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 14:15</span></span>

Thou shall call, and I will answer thee,.... Either at death, when the
soul of than is required of him, and he is summoned out of time into
eternity, and has sometimes previous notice of it; though not by a
prophet, or express messenger from the Lord, as Hezekiah had, yet by
some disease and distemper or another, which has a voice, a call in it
to expect a remove shortly; and a good man that is prepared for it, he
answers to this call readily and cheerfully; death is no king of terrors
to him, he is not reluctant to it, yea, desirous of it; entreats his
dismission in peace, and even longs for it, and rejoices and triumphs in
the views of it: or else at the resurrection, when Christ shall call to
the dead, as he did to Lazarus, and say, Come forth; and when they shall
hear his voice, even the voice of the archangel, and shall answer to it,
and come forth out of their graves, the sea, death, and the grave, being
obliged to deliver up the dead that are therein; though some think this
refers to God's call unto him in a judicial way, and his answers to it
by way of defence, as in [Job 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#022);
but the other sense seems more agreeable to the context:

thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands; meaning his body,
which is the workmanship of God, and a curious piece of workmanship it
is, wonderfully and fearfully made, [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014), and curiously wrought; and
though it may seem to be marred and spoiled by death, yet God will have
a desire to the restoration of it at the resurrection to a better
condition; even the bodies of his people, and that because they are
vessels chosen by him, given to his Son, redeemed by his blood, united
to his person, and sanctified by his Spirit, whose temples they are, and
in whom he dwells: wherefore upon these considerations it may be
reasonably supposed that Father, Son, and Spirit, have a desire to the
resurrection of the bodies of the saints, and in which they will have a
concern; and from which it may be concluded it will be certainly
effected, since God is a rock, and his work is perfect, or will be, both
upon the bodies and souls of his people; and the work of sanctification
will not be properly completed on them until their vile bodies are
changed, and made like to the glorious body of Christ; which must be
very desirable to him, who has such a special love for them, and delight
in them. Some render the words with an interrogation, "wilt thou desire
to destroy the work of thine hands" (e)? surely thou wilt not; or, as
Ben Gersom,

"is it fit that thou shouldest desire to destroy the work of thine
hands?''

surely it is not becoming, it cannot be thought that thou wilt do it;
but the former sense is best.

\(e\) "perdere desiderabis?" Pagninus, Vatablus.

[Job 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 14:16</span></span>

For now thou numberest my steps,.... Or "but now" (g), at this present
time thou seemest to have no desire to me, or affection for me, but the
reverse. Job was in a pretty good frame of mind a little before, having
in view his last change, and the glorious resurrection; but on a sudden
he returns to his former complaints of God, and here of the rigour and
strictness of his justice in marking his steps, and correcting him for
his sin; so very uncertain are the best of frames: the outward
conversation of men, whether good or bad, is often in Scripture
expressed by walking, and the actions of men, good or evil, are the
steps taken therein; here they signify evil ones, irregular steps, steps
out of the way of God's commandments, aberrations, strayings from
thence, false steps; these Job supposed God not only had knowledge of,
as he has of all the ways, paths, and goings of men, but took very exact
notice of his wrong steps; looked very narrowly to his paths, as in [Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027); and strictly marked them; yea,
told them one by one, that he might miss none, and make up a large
account, which he put down in his book, in order to produce against him;
in which Job was mistaken: he thought God dealt with him as he does with
wicked men, whose evil actions are not only known and observed, but are
counted and put down in the book of his remembrance, which will be
opened at the last day, and produced against them; but God has blotted
out of his book the sins of his people, and will remember them no more;
he has a book of remembrance for their good works, words, and thoughts,
but none for their evil ones:

dost thou not watch over my sin? of error, infirmity, and weakness;
observe it, mark it in a strict and rigorous way, which, when God does,
who can stand before him? or "watch for my sin?" [Dan
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#014) as Jeremiah's enemies watched for
his halting; so Job here represents God very wrongly, as if he watched
for an opportunity against him, to take the advantage of it, and
severely chastise him: or "thou dost not wait for my sin" (h); that is,
the punishment of it as many of the Jewish writers (i) carry the sense;
which is, that God did not defer the punishment of sin, or give him any
respite or breathing time, but as soon as ever he committed any offence,
immediately, at once, he was rough with him, and used him with great
severity. Aben Ezra inserts the word "only", as explanative of the
meaning of the words, thus, "thou watchest only over my sin", or dost
not mark and observe anything but my sins; not my good deeds, only my
evil ones; which is a wrong charge, for God takes notice of the good
works of his people, and rewards them in a way of grace, though not of
debt, as well as of their evil works, and chastises for them in a
fatherly way: others render the words to this sense, what is not, or of
no moment or consequence, thou keepest for me in mind and memory, as sin
(k); that which is not sin, or at least not known to me to be sin, or
however something very trifling, scarce to be called a sin, yet I am
dealt with for it as if a very heinous one; or I am afflicted for I know
not what, or, which is all one, for what is not known to me. Some take
the words to be a petition, "do not observe my sin" (l); or mark it
strictly, or keep it in mind, or reserve it against another time, but
hide thy face from it, and remember it no more, nor never against me.

\(g\) "at nunc", Piscator. (h) "non differes punitionem meam", Pagninus,
(i) Jarchi, Gersom, Bar Tzemach. (k) So Schultens. (l) "Nec serves, id
est, observes peccatum meum"; some in Mercerus.

[Job 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 14:17</span></span>

My transgression is sealed up in a bag,.... Denoting either the
concealment of it, as in [Hos 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#012);
not from God; nor in such sense sealed up as sin is by the sacrifice and
satisfaction of Christ, who has thereby removed it out of the sight of
divine justice; so that when it is sought for it shall not be found, nor
any more seen, which is the sense of the phrase in [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024); where the words, "to make an end
of sin", may be rendered, to "seal them up"; but this Job would not have
complained of; he means it was hid as in a bag from himself, or he knew
not what it was; the transgression was sealed up from him, he was
entirely ignorant of and unacquainted with what it was for which he was
severely afflicted: or else his sense is, that God had taken strict
notice of his transgressions, and had, as it were, put them up in a bag,
and set a seal upon it, that none might be lost, but might be ready to
be produced against him another day; in allusion, as it is thought, to
bills of indictment put up in bags sealed, to be brought into courts of
judicature at a proper time, for which they are reserved:

and thou sewest up mine iniquity; in the bag in which it is sealed; not
only did he seal up the bag, but sewed a cloth over it thus sealed, for
greater security: or "thou sewest to mine iniquity" (m), or adds
iniquity to iniquity, as in [Psa
69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027); as arithmeticians do, who add
one number to another until it becomes a great sum; thus God, according
to Job, tacked and joined one sin to another, till it became one large
heap and pile, reaching to the heavens, and calling for vengeance; or,
as Sephorno interprets it, joined sins of ignorance to sins of
presumption; or rather sewed or added the punishment of sin to sin, or
punishment to punishment; the Targum is,

"my transgression is sealed up in a book of remembrances, and thou hast
joined it to my iniquities.''

\(m\) "assuis iniquitati meae", Piscator; "et adjungis ad iniquitatem
meam", Beza.

[Job 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 14:18</span></span>

And surely the mountain falling cometh to nought,.... Job here returns
to his former subject of the irreparable state of man at death, which he
illustrates by various other similes, as before; and first by a
"mountain falling", which may be supposed, and has been fact, and when
it does, it "comes to nought"; it crumbles into dust, and where it falls
there it lies, and never rises up to a mountain, or to the height it
had, any more; or it "withers" (n), as some render it, the plants,
herbs, and trees that grow upon it, wither away, see [Nah
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#004); or "it is dissolved", or "flows"
(o), and spreads itself over the face of the green earth it covers, and
destroys with its dust and sand, which is never more gathered up to form
a mountain again; so man, like unto a mountain, as kingdoms and states,
and kings and princes, and great men are; the Targum instances in Lot;
as a man may be said to be, that is in good health of body, and in
prosperous circumstances in his family; when he falls, as he does by
death, which is expressed by falling, [Sa2
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#038); he comes to nought, he is not
any more in the land of the living, nor in the place and circumstances
in which he was before:

and the rock is removed out of his place; from the mountain, of which it
was a part; or elsewhere, by earthquakes, by force of winds, or strength
of waters; and which, when once removed, is never returned to its place
any more; so man, who in his full strength seems like a rock immovable,
when death comes, it shakes and moves him out of his place, and that
never knows him any more.

\(n\) "marceseit", Tigurine version, Mercerus; "emarcescit", Schultens.
(o) "Diffluit", Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis.

[Job 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 14:19</span></span>

The waters wear the stones,.... Either by continual running in them, or
constant dropping upon them (p); and the excavations or hollow places
they: make are never filled up again, these impressions are never
effaced, nor the stones reduced to their ancient form; so man, though he
may have the strength of stones, yet the waters of afflictions will
gradually wear him away, and bring him to the dust of death, and where
he must lie till the heavens be no more:

thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth;
herbs, plants, and trees, which a violent inundation of water tears up
by the roots, and carries away, and they are never restored to their
places any more. The word which we render "the things which grow out",
the spontaneous productions of the earth, as in [Lev
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005). Aben Ezra interprets of floods
of water; and so Schultens, from the use of the word (q) in the Arabic
language, translates it, "their effusions"; that is, the effusions of
waters before mentioned, the floods and inundations of them overflow,
"and wash away the dust of the earth"; not only that which is on the
surface of it, the soil of it; but, as the same learned man observes,
they plough and tear up the earth itself, and carry it away, and it is
never repaired; so men at death are carried away as with a flood, and
are no more, see [Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005);

and or "so" (r).

thou destroyest the hope of man, not the hope of a good man about his
eternal state, and of enjoying eternal happiness; which is the gift of
God's grace, which is without repentance, never revoked, called in, or
taken away or destroyed; it is built upon the promise of God, who cannot
lie; it is founded on the person, blood, and righteousness of Christ;
and though it may be brought low, it is never lost; the hope of carnal
men in an arm of flesh, in the creature and creature enjoyments, is
indeed destroyed; and so is the hope of external professors of religion,
that is formed on their own works of righteousness, and profession of
religion; but of this Job is not speaking, but of the hope of man of
living again in this world after death; for this is a reddition or
application of the above similes used to illustrate this point, the
irreparable state of man at death, so as that he shall never return to
this life again, and to the same state and circumstances of things as
before; and next follows a description of death, and the state of the
dead.

\(p\) "Gutta cavat lapidem", Ovid. de Ponto, l. 4. (q) "effudit",
Golius, col. 1182. Castel. col. 2590. (r) "Sic", Vatablus, Drusius,
Mercerus, Schultens; "ita", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; it answers to
Aben Ezra, Gersom.

[Job 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 14:20</span></span>

Thou prevailest for ever against him,.... God is a more than a match for
man, in anything, in everything; there is no contending with him, or
standing against him, he is stronger than he, and always prevails; there
is no withstanding any disease, and the force of it, when he sends it;
it is a messenger and servant of his, it goes at his command, and does
what he bids it do; and all the art and power of man cannot resist it,
or hinder what God would have done by it; and so death itself is
irresistible; what is stronger than death? it is a king that reigns with
a despotic power; it reigns irresistibly, victoriously, and
triumphantly; it prevails over all men, in all ages, and will do to the
end of the world; no man has power over his spirit to retain it one
moment, when death comes to separate it from the body: and this
prevalence of God by death over men will be for ever; the grave is man's
long home, to which he is brought by death, and he will never return
from it more, to come again into this world, and be about the business
of it as now;

and he passeth; out of the world, and is seen no more in it; death is a
going the way of all flesh, a departure out of this life, and to it man
never usually returns more; he goes to Hades, to the invisible place,
and makes his appearance no more here; see [Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035);

thou changest his countenance; at death; the forerunners of death will
change a man's countenance, pains, and diseases of body; by these God
makes man's beauty to consume like the moth; the fear of death will
change a man's countenance, as the handwriting on the wall did
Belshazzar's, [Dan 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#009); even such who
have out-braved death, and pretended to have made a covenant and
agreement with it, yet when the king of terrors is presented to them,
they are seized with a panic, their hearts ache, and their countenances
turn pale; but oh! what a change is made by death itself, which for this
reason is represented as riding on a pale horse; [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008); when the rosy florid looks of man
are gone, his comeliness turned into corruption, his countenance pale
and meagre, his eyes hollow and sunk, his nose sharp pointed, his ears
contracted, and jaws fallen, and his complexion altered, and still more
when laid in the grave, and he is turned to rottenness, dust, and worms:

and sendeth him away; giveth him a dismission from this world; sendeth
him out of it, from his house, his family, friends, and acquaintance:
his birth is expressed often by his coming into the world, and his death
by going out of it; for here he has no continuance, no abiding, no rest;
and yet there is no departure till God gives him dismission by death,
then he sends him away from hence; some in wrath, whom he sends to take
up their abode with devils and damned spirits; others in love, to
prevent their being involved in evils coming upon the earth, and to be
in better company, with God and Christ, with angels, and the spirits of
just men made perfect: Maimonides interprets this of Adam (r), who, when
he changed the object of his countenance, and looked on the forbidden
fruit, was sent out of paradise.

\(r\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 1. c. 2. p. 5.

[Job 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 14:21</span></span>

His sons come to honour,.... Or "are multiplied" (s), see [Nah
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015); their families increase like a
flock, become very numerous, which was reckoned a great blessing; or
"become heavy" (t); being loaded with gold and silver, with riches and
honour, raised to great grandeur and dignity, and possessed of much
wealth and large estates:

and he knoweth it not; the man whose countenance is changed and sent
away into another world; for the dead know nothing of the affairs of
this life; a good man indeed after death knows more of God and Christ,
of the doctrines of grace, and mysteries of Providence; but he knows
nothing of the affairs of his family he has left behind: some understand
this of a man on his death bed while alive, who, when he is told of the
promotion of his sons to honour, or of the increase of their worldly
substance, takes no notice of it; either being deprived of his senses by
the disease upon him; or through the greatness of his pains and agonies,
or the intenseness of his thoughts about a future state, does not notice
what is told him, nor rejoice at it; which in the time of health would
have been pleasing to him: but the first sense seems best:

and they are brought low, that is, his sons; or "are diminished" (u);
lessened in their numbers, one taken off after another, and so his
family decreases; or they come into low circumstances of life, are
reduced in the world, and brought to straits and difficulties, to want
and poverty:

but he perceiveth it not of them; he is not sensible of their troubles,
and so not grieved at them; see [Isa
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016); or when he is told of them on
his death bed, he does not take notice of them, or regard them, having
enough to grapple with himself, and his mind intent on his everlasting
state, or carried above them in the views of the love, grace, and
covenant of God; see [Sa2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005).

\(s\) , Sept. "multiplicabuntur", Vatablus, Bolducius. (t) "Multi vel
graves sunt", Drusius; "graves erunt et onusti", Mercerus. (u) , Sept.
"minuuntur, numero pauci sunt", Drusius.

[Job 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 14:22</span></span>

But his flesh upon him shall have pain,.... Either he shall be chastened
with strong pains on his sick and dying bed; which is the reason why he
neither rejoices at the happiness of his family, nor is distressed at
their misfortunes; having so much pain in his flesh and bones to endure
himself; or, as Gussetius (x) renders it, "for this" his flesh and soul
shall have pain and grief while he lives, because he cannot know how it
will be with his family when he is dead; but rather this is to be
understood of a man when dead; and so it is a continuation of the
description of death, or of the state of the dead; thus Aben Ezra
interprets it of his flesh upon him, that is, his body shall melt away,
rot and corrupt, meaning in the grave; so the word is used of marring
and destroying, in [Kg2 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019), to which
the Targum inclines,

"but his flesh, because of worms upon him, shall grieve;''

and so Jarchi, troublesome is the worm to a dead man as a needle in
quick flesh; pain and grief are by a prosopopoeia or personification
attributed to a dead body; signifying, that could it be sensible of its
case, it would be painful and grievous to it:

and his soul within him shall mourn; either while he lives, because of
his afflictions and terrors, the days being come in which he has no
pleasure, and the time of death drawing nigh; or his dead body, as the
word is used in [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010); said to
mourn by the same figure; or his soul, because of his body being dead;
or rather his breath, which at death fails and pines away (y).

\(x\) Ebr. Comment. p. 605. (y) "emarcida luget", Schultens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 15](job015)

</div>
