<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job024)  [Next](job026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 25:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 25

This chapter contains Bildad's reply to Job, such an one as it is; in
which, declining the controversy between them, he endeavours to dissuade
him from attempting to lay his cause before God, and think to justify
himself before him, from the consideration of the majesty of God,
described by the dominion he is possessed of; the fear creatures stand
in of him; the peace he makes in his high places; the number of his
armies, and the vast extent of his light, [Job
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#001); and from the impossibility of
man's being justified with him, or clean before him, argued from thence,
[Job 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#004); and which is further
illustrated by a comparison of the celestial bodies with men, and by an
argument from the greater to the less, that if they lose their lustre
and purity in his sight, much more man, a mean despicable worm, [Job
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#005).

[Job 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 25:1</span></span>

Then answered Bildad the Shuhite,.... Not to what Job had just now
delivered, in order to disprove that, that men, guilty of the grossest
crimes, often go unpunished in this life, and prosper and succeed, and
die in peace and quietness, as other men; either because he was
convinced of the truth of what he had said, or else because he thought
he was an obstinate man, and that it was best to let him alone, and say
no more to him, since there was no likelihood of working any conviction
on him; wherefore he only tries to possess his mind of the greatness and
majesty of God, in order to deter him from applying to God in a judicial
way, and expecting redress and relief from him;

and said; as follows.

[Job 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 25:2</span></span>

Dominion and fear are with him,.... Not with man, as Sephorno interprets
it, as that with him is power to rule over the imagination (the evil
figment of his heart) to choose the good, and refuse the evil; and with
him is fear of punishment, and also the fear of God to restrain him from
evil; but with God, as may easily be perceived from the whole context,
though his name is not expressed in this clause, and not till [Job
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#004); this dominion he is possessed of
is universal; his kingdom rules over all, over all the angels, good and
bad; over all men, over all the nations of the world, and the great men
in it, the kings and princes of it; and over all, of every age, sex, and
condition; and it is absolute and uncontrollable; he governs according
to his will, and is not to be controlled in his ways; nor is he
accountable to any for what he does, and his kingdom is an everlasting
one, and his dominion for ever and ever: and by the fear that is with
him is not meant actively, with which he fears; for he is afraid of
none, be they ever so great and mighty, [Job
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#004); but passively, with which he is
feared; for holy and reverend is his name, and so his nature, and all
that belong to him; he is feared by the angels in heaven, who cover
their faces before him, and cast their crowns at his feet; and by the
saints on earth, in whose assemblies he is served with reverence and
godly fear; and should be stood in awe of by all the inhabitants of the
world, because of the glory of his nature, the greatness of his works,
and the goodness of his providence:

he maketh peace in his high places; in the high places of his earth, and
among the great men of it, creating and commanding peace, and causing
war among them to cease, whenever it is his pleasure; and in the regions
of the air, where, though there are often thunder and lightning, storms
and tempests of wind, hail, and rain, yet, when he says, Peace, be
still, all is serene and quiet; and in the orbs of the heaven, the sun,
moon, and stars, which know their appointed times and seasons, and keep
their place or course, and do their work and office in the most easy and
cheerful manner; and among the angels in the highest heaven, which are
properly his high places, who, though their numbers are so great, and
they themselves thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers, and have
various offices and different work assigned them, readily do his will,
and are in the utmost harmony and concord among themselves, show no
reluctance to him, nor any discord to each other: now Bildad would have
Job consider whether he could think himself so significant, that
cognizance would be taken of him and his cause by so great, glorious,
and majestic a thing; or that he would suffer his high places, where
peace reigned, to be disturbed by his noise and brawl.

[Job 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 25:3</span></span>

Is there any number of his armies?.... His armies in heaven, the
heavenly host of angels, which are innumerable; there are more than
twelve legions of them, thousand and ten thousand times ten thousand,
employed in a military way, for the safety and preservation of the
saints; see [Gen 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001); and the sun,
moon, and stars, often called the host of heaven, the latter of which
cannot be numbered, and which fought in their courses against Sisera,
[Jdg 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020); and his armies on earth,
all the inhabitants of it; yea, every creature, even the smallest insect
in it, which are without number: thus, frogs, lice, flies, and locusts,
were the armies of God, with which he fought against Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, see [Joe 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011);

and upon whom doth not his light arise? either natural light, that grand
luminary the sun, which rises on all, the evil and the good, nor is
anything hid from the light and heat of it; or moral light, the light of
nature, with which everyone that comes into the world is enlightened by
him; or the light of providential goodness, which is unto all, and over
all his creatures; the whole earth is full of it, and all the
inhabitants have a share in it; nor is anything hid from his all
piercing, all penetrating, all seeing eye, who is light itself, and
dwells in light inaccessible, and from which light nothing can be hid.

[Job 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 25:4</span></span>

How then can man be justified with God? Since he sees all his ways and
works, his secret as well as open sins; either be more just than he, as
Eliphaz expresses it, [Job 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017); which
no man in his senses will say; or just as he is, and upon a level with
him, or in comparison of him, or before him, and in his sight: and this
is what Job himself denies, [Job 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002);
for however righteous a man may be in his own sight, or in the sight of
others, he cannot of himself be justified in the sight of God; nor can
any be justified with him by his own righteousness, because the best
righteousness of man is imperfect; and, if Bildad thought this was the
sentiment of Job, he mistook him; for, what he meant by coming to the
seat of God, and ordering his cause before him, [Job
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#002); to which Bildad seems to refer,
and being judged by him, when he doubted not but he should be acquitted,
was no other than the justification of his cause, and not of his person
before God; or that he should be cleared of the imputation of hypocrisy,
and of being the sinner and wicked man, and guilty of very bad things,
though secret and private, for which he was afflicted; for otherwise Job
knew full well that he could not be justified with God by his own
personal righteousness, for he knew himself to be a sinner, and owns it;
nor did he think himself perfect, and his righteousness a complete one;
and therefore he expected not to be justified by it; he knew his living
Redeemer, and believed in him for righteousness, and expected the
justification of his person, and his acceptance with God, only by him;
and in this way there are many that are justified with God secretly, "in
foro Dei", in the court of God, and in his sight, who always beholds his
people as righteous in Christ, and openly, "in foro conscientiae", in
the court of conscience, when they believe in him; and who will be
publicly justified, and declared righteous, at the day of judgment:

or how can he be clean that is born of a woman? which suggests a
doctrine that Job as firmly believed as Bildad did, that all men are
unclean by natural generation, or as they are born into the world; their
ancestors being such, the more immediate, and the more remote, which may
be traced back to the first man and woman, [Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004); so that as no man is clean and
pure as God is, or in comparison of him, or in his sight; they can
neither be naturally clean, nor so of themselves, by any means or
methods they can make use of; but then they may be, as many are, clean
by the blood of Christ, and grace of God, through which his people are
cleansed from all their sins, and all their iniquities, and are without
spot before the throne and in the sight of God.

[Job 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 25:5</span></span>

Behold, even to the moon,.... If all things that are glorious and
illustrious in the lower world, and which are between that and the
region of the moon, are beheld; or all from the seat of the Divine
Majesty, down to that glorious luminary, are viewed, they lose all their
lustre and brightness, when compared with the Divine Being;

and it, even that itself

shineth not; it is darkened, confounded, and ashamed; it hides its
beautiful face, and draws in its borrowed and useful light, at the
approach of him, who is light itself, and in whom is no darkness at all:
or it tabernacles not (n); has no tabernacle to abide in, as is said of
the sun, [Psa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004); or does not expand
and spread its light, as a tent (o) or tabernacle is spread; it does not
diffuse, but contracts it. No mention is made of the sun, not because
that shines in its own light, which the moon does not; but perhaps
because the controversy between Job and his friends was held in the
night, when the moon and the stars were only seen, and therefore only
mentioned; otherwise, what is here observed equally holds good of the
sun as of the moon; see [Isa 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023);

yea, the stars are not pure in his sight; as there are spots in the sun
and in the moon, seen by the eye of man, aided and assisted, so such may
be seen by God in the stars also, and in these, both in a natural and in
a mystical sense; as by them may be meant the angels of heaven, even
those are not pure in the sight of God, and in comparison of him, the
most perfectly pure and holy Being; see [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018).

\(n\) "et non ponet tabernaculum", Montanus, Bolducius; so Schmidt,
Schultens. (o) "Non expandet lumen suum in modum tentorii", Complutenses
apud Bolduc.

[Job 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 25:6</span></span>

How much less man, that is a worm?.... Whose original is of the earth,
dwells in it, and is supported by it, and creeps into it again; who is
impure by nature and by practice, weak and impotent to do anything that
is spiritually good, or to defend himself from his spiritual enemies;
and is mean and despicable, as even the best of men are, in their own
eyes, and in the eyes of the world: and, if the best of men are
comparable to such creatures, and our Lord himself, in human nature, was
content to be called a worm, and no man; what must the worst of men be,
or man be in and of himself, without the grace of God and righteousness
of Christ, by which he can be only clean and righteous? see [Isa
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014); and, if the celestial bodies
above mentioned are eclipsed of all their brightness and glory, in the
presence of God; what a contemptible figure must man make in the court
of heaven, who, in comparison of them, is but a worm, and much more so,
as appearing before God?

and the son of man, which is a worm; which is repeated with a little
variation for the confirmation of it; or it may signify, that even the
first man was no other than of the earth, earthy, and so are all his
sons. The Targum is,

"how much more man, who in his life is a reptile, and the son of man,
who in his death is a worm?''

to which may be added, that he is in his grave a companion for the
worms; and indeed it appears by the observations made through
microscopes, that man, in his first state of generation, is really a
worm (p); so that, as Pliny says (q), one that is a judge of things may
pity and be ashamed of the sorry original of the proudest of animals. By
this short reply of Bildad, and which contains little more than what had
been before said, it is plain that he was tired of the controversy, and
glad to give out.

\(p\) Lewenhoeck apud Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 721. Vid.
Philosoph. Transact. abridged, vol. 2. p. 912, 913. (q) Nat. Hist. l. 7.
c. 7.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 26](job026)

</div>
