<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job023)  [Next](job025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 24

This chapter contains the second part of Job's answer to the last
discourse of Eliphaz, in which he shows that wicked men, those of the
worst characters, prosper in the world, and go through it with impunity;
he lays down this as a certain truth, that though no time is hid from
God, yet they that are most familiar with him, and know most of him, do
not see, and cannot observe, any days of his for judging and punishing
wicked men in, this life, [Job 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001);
and instances in men guilty of injustice, violence, oppression, cruelty,
and inhumanity, to their neighbours, and yet God lays not folly to them,
or charges them with sin, and punishes them for it, [Job
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#002); and in persons that commit the
most atrocious crimes in secret, such as murderers, adulterers, and
thieves, [Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013); he allows that
there is a curse upon their portion, and that the grave shall consume
them, and they shall be remembered no more, [Job
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018); and because of their ill
treatment of others, though they may be in safety and prosperity, and be
exalted for a while, they shall be brought low and cut off by death, but
generally speaking are not punished in this life, [Job
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021); and concludes with the greatest
assurance of being in the right, and having truth on his side, [Job
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025).

[Job 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 24:1</span></span>

Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty,.... Which seems to
be an inference deduced from what he had said in [Job
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#014); that since all things are
appointed by God, and his appointments are punctually performed by him,
the times of his carrying his purposes and decrees into execution cannot
be hidden from him; for, as he has determined what shall be done, he has
determined the time before appointed for the doing of them; as there is
a purpose for everything under the heavens, there is a time set for the
execution of that purpose, which must be known unto God that has fixed
it; for as all his works are known to him from the beginning, or from
eternity, the times when those works should be wrought must also be
known to him. The Vulgate Latin, version reduces the words to a
categorical proposition, "times are not hidden from the Almighty";
either temporal things, as Sephorno interprets it, things done in time,
or the times of doing those things; no sort of time is hid from God;
time respecting the world in general, its beginning, duration, and end;
all seasons in it, day and night, summer and winter, seedtime and
harvest, which are all fixed and settled by him; the several distinct
ages and periods of time, into which it has been divided; the old and
new world, the legal and Gospel dispensation, the various generations in
it; the four great monarchies of the world, their rise, and duration,
and end, with all other lesser kingdoms and states; time respecting the
inhabitants of the world, their coming into and passing out of it in
successive generations, the time of their birth, and of their death, and
of adversity and prosperity, which interchangeably take place during
their abode in it; and particularly the people of God, the time of their
redemption by Christ, of their conversion by the grace of God, and all
their times of darkness, desertion, temptation, and afflictions, and of
peace, joy, and comfort; time, past and future, respecting the church of
God, and the state of it, and all things relative thereunto; and the
times of Israel's affliction in a land not theirs, four hundred years,
and of their seventy years' captivity in Babylon, were not hidden from
the Almighty, but foretold by him; the suffering times of the church
under the New Testament; the ten persecutions of it by the Roman
emperors; the flight and nourishment of it in the wilderness for a time,
and times, and half a time; the treading down of the holy city forty two
months; the witnesses prophesying: in sackcloth 1260 days; the killing
of them, and their bodies lying unburied three days and a half, and then
rising; the reign of antichrist forty two months, at the end of which
antichristian time will be no more; the time of Christ's coming to
judgment, which is a day appointed, though unknown to men and angels,
and the reign of Christ on earth for a thousand years; all these times
are not hidden from, but known to the Almighty, even all time, past,
present, and to come, and all things that have been, are, or shall be
done therein. Several Jewish commentators (c) interpret these words as
an expostulation or wish, "why are not times hidden?" &c. if they were,
I should not wonder at it that those that knew him do not know what
shall be; but he knows the times and days in which wicked men will do
wickedness, why is he silent? Mr. Broughton, and others (d), render
them, "why are not", or "why should not times be hidden by the
Almighty?" that is, be hidden in his own breast from men, as they are;
for the times and seasons it is not for man to know, which God has put
in his own power, [Act 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006); as the
times of future troubles, of a man's death, and the day of judgment; it
is but right and fit, on many accounts, that they should be hid by him
from them; but others of later date translate the words perhaps much
better, "why are not certain stated times laid up", or "reserved by the
Almighty" (e)? that is, for punishing wicked men in this, life, as would
be the case, Job suggests, if it was true what his friends had asserted,
that wicked men are always punished here: and then upon this another
question follows, why

do they that know him not see his days? that know him not merely by the
light of nature, but as revealed in Christ; and that have not a mere
knowledge of him, but a spiritual and experimental one; who know him so
as to love him, believe in him, fear, serve, and worship him; and who
have a greater knowledge of him than others may have, and have an
intimate acquaintance and familiarity with him, are his bosom friends;
and if there are fixed times for punishing the wicked in this life, how
comes it to pass that these friends of God, to whom he reveals his
secrets, cannot see and observe any such days and times of his as these?
but, on the contrary, observe, even to the stumbling of the greatest
saints, that the wicked prosper and increase in riches. Job seems to
refer to what Eliphaz had said, [Job
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019); which he here tacitly denies,
and proves the contrary by various instances, as follows.

\(c\) Aben Ezra, Nachmanides, & Simeon Bar Tzemach. (d) "quinam ab
omnipotente", Beza; so Junius & Tremellius. (e) "Quare ab omnipotente
non sunt recondita in poenam stata tempora", Schultens.

[Job 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 24:2</span></span>

Some remove the landmarks,.... Anciently set to distinguish one man's
land from another, to secure property, and preserve from encroachments;
but some were so wicked as either secretly in the night to remove them,
or openly to do it, having power on their side, pretending they were
wrongly located; this was not only prohibited by the law of God, and
pronounced an accursed thing, [Deu
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014); but was reckoned so before the
law was given, being known to be such by the light of nature, as what
was now, and here condemned, was before that law was in being; and so we
find that this was accounted an execrable thing among the Heathens, who
had a deity they called Jupiter Terminalis, who was appointed over
bounds and landmarks; so Numa Pompilius appointed stones to be set as
bounds to everyone's lands, and dedicated them to Jupiter Terminalis,
and ordered that those that removed them should be slain as sacrilegious
persons, and they and their oxen devoted to destruction (f): some render
it, "they touch the landmarks" (g), as if to touch them was unlawful,
and therefore much more to remove them:

they violently take away flocks, and feed thereof; not content with a
sheep or a lamb, they took away whole flocks, and that by force and
violence, openly and publicly, and slew them, and fed on them; or else
took them and put them into their own grounds, or such as they had got
by encroachments from others, where they fed them without any fear of
men; which shows the effrontery and impudence of them.

\(f\) Dion. Halicarnass. & Festus apud Sanctium in loc. Vid. Rycquium de
Capitol. Roman. c. 14. Ovid. Fasti, l. 2. (g) "attigerunt", Pagninus,
Bolducius; "attingunt", Vatablus.

[Job 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 24:3</span></span>

They drive away the ass of the fatherless,.... Who are left destitute of
friends, and have none to take care of them, and provide for them; and
who having one ass to carry their goods for them from place to place, or
to ride upon, which though a creature of no great worth, yet of some
usefulness, this they drove away from its pasture, or however from its
right owner; and who having but one, it was the more cruel and inhuman
to take it from him, see, [Sa2 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#003);

they take the widow's ox for a pledge; or oxen, the singular for the
plural, with which her lands were ploughed, for a single ox could be but
of little service: some render it "a cow" (h), by the milk of which she
and her family were chiefly supported, as many poor country families are
by the means of a good milch cow; and to take this, on which her
livelihood depended, and retain for a pledge, was very barbarous; when
the law concerning pledges took place among the Jews, in the times of
Moses, which it seems was in being before with others, whatsoever was
useful to persons, either to keep them warm, or by which they got their
bread, were not to be taken, at least not detained for a pledge, see
[Exo 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026).

\(h\) "pro bove foemina, vacca", Bolducius.

[Job 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 24:4</span></span>

They turn the needy out of the way,.... Either, in a moral sense, out of
the right way, the way of righteousness and truth, by their bad
examples, or by their threatenings or flatteries; or, in a civil sense,
out of the way of their livelihood, by taking that from them by which
they got it; or, in a literal sense, obliging them to turn out of the
way from them, in a supercilious and haughty manner, or causing them,
through fear of them, to get out of the way, that they might not meet
them, lest they should insult them, beat and abuse them, or take that
little from them they had, as follows:

the poor of the earth hide themselves together; who are not only poor in
purse, but poor in spirit, meek, humble, and lowly, and have not spirit
and courage to stand against such oppressors, but are easily crushed by
them; these through fear of them hide themselves in holes and corners in
a body, in a large company together, lest they should fall into their
cruel hands, and be used by them in a barbarous manner, see [Pro
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#028).

[Job 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 24:5</span></span>

Behold, as wild asses in the desert,.... The word "as" is a supplement,
and may be omitted, and the words be interpreted literally of wild
asses, as they are by Sephorno, whose proper place is in the wilderness,
to which they are used, and where their food is provided for them, and
which they diligently seek for, for them and their young; and so the
words may be descriptive of the place where the poor hide themselves,
and of the company they are obliged to keep; but the Targum supplies the
note of similitude as we do; and others (i) observe it to be wanting,
and so it may respect wicked men before described, who may be compared
to the wild asses of the wilderness for their folly and stupidity, man
being born like a wild ass's colt, [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012); and for their lust and
wantonness, and for their rebellion against God and his laws, and their
unteachableness. Perhaps some regard may be had to the wild Arabs that
were in Job's neighbourhood, the descendants of Ishmael, called the wild
man, as he is in [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012); who lived
by plunder and robbery, as these here:

they go forth to their work: of thieving and stealing, robbing and
plundering, as their trade, and business, and occupation of life, and as
naturally and constantly as men go to their lawful employment, and as if
it was one:

rising betimes for a prey; getting up early in a morning to meet the
industrious traveller on the road, and make a prey of him, rob him of
what he has about him; for they cannot sleep unless they do mischief:

the wilderness yieldeth food for them, and for their children; though
they are lurking in a wilderness where no sustenance is to be had, yet,
by robbing everyone that passes by, they get enough for them and their
families: though some understand all this of the poor, who are obliged
to hide themselves from their oppressors, and go into the wilderness in
droves like wild asses, and as timorous and as swift as they in fleeing;
and are forced to hard service, and to rise early to earn their bread,
and get sustenance for their families; and who in the main are obliged
to live on berries and roots, and what a wild desert will afford; but
the, word "prey" is not applicable to the pains and labours of such
industrious people, wherefore the former sense is best; and besides,
there seems to be one continued account of wicked men.

\(i\) Aben Ezra, Ben Gersom, Bar Tzemach.

[Job 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 24:6</span></span>

They reap everyone his corn in the field,.... Not the poor, who are
obliged to reap the corn of the wicked for them without any wages, as
some; but rather the wicked reap the corn of the poor; they are so
insolent and impudent, that they do not take the corn out of their barns
by stealth, but while it is standing in the field; they come openly and
reap it down, as if it was their own, without any fear of God or men: it
is observed, that the word (k) signifies a mixture of the poorer sorts
of corn, which is scarce anything better than food for cattle; yet this
they cut down and carry off, as forage for their horses and asses at
least. Some of the ancient versions, taking it to be two words, render
them, "which is not their own" (l); they go into a field that is not
theirs, and reap corn that do not belong to them, that they have no
right unto, and so are guilty of great injustice, and of doing injury to
others:

and they gather the vintage of the wicked; gather the grapes off of the
vines of wicked men, which are gathered, as the word signifies, at the
latter end of the year, in autumn; and though they belong to wicked men
like themselves, yet they spare them not, but seize on all that come to
hand, whether the property of good men or bad men; and thus sometimes
one wicked man is an instrument of punishing another: or "the wicked
gather the vintage" (m); that is, of the poor; as they reap where they
have not sown, they gather of that they have not planted.

\(k\) "migma suum", Bolducius; "farraginem ejus vel suam", Tigurine
version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis. (l) Sept.
"non suum", V. L. so the Targum, and Aben Ezra, Grotius, Codurcus. (m)
"et in vinea (aliena) vindemiant impii", Tigurine version; "vineasque
vindemiant impii", Castalio.

[Job 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 24:7</span></span>

They cause the naked to lodge without clothing,.... That is, such as are
poorly clothed, thinly arrayed, have scarce anything but rags, and yet
so cruel the wicked men above described, that they take these away from
the poor, and even their bed clothes, which seem chiefly designed; so
that they are obliged to lodge or lie all night without anything upon
them:

that they have no covering in the cold; neither in the daytime, nor in
the night, and especially the latter; and having no house to go to, and
obliged to lay themselves down upon the bare ground, had nothing to
cover them from the inclemency of the weather; for even in hot countries
nights are sometimes cold, and large dews fall, yea, sometimes it is a
frost, see [Gen 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040).

[Job 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 24:8</span></span>

They are wet with the showers of the mountains,.... They that are
without any clothes to cover them, lying down at the bottom of a hill or
mountain, where the clouds often gather, and there break, or the snow at
the top of them melts through the heat of the day; and whether by the
one or by the other, large streams of water run down the mountains, and
the naked poor, or such who are thinly clothed, are all over wet
therewith, as Nebuchadnezzar's body was with the dew of heaven, when he
was driven from men, and lived among beasts, [Dan
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#033),

and embrace the rock for want of a shelter; or habitation, as the
Targum; having no house to dwell in, nor any raiment to cover them, they
were glad to get into the hole of a rock, in a cave or den there, and
where some good men in former times were obliged to wander, [Heb
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038); and whither mean persons, in
the time and country in which Job lived, were driven to dwell in, see
[Job 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006).

[Job 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 24:9</span></span>

They pluck the fatherless from the breast,.... Either on purpose to
starve it, which must be extremely barbarous; or to sell it to be
brought up a slave; or by obliging the mother to wean it before the due
time, that she might be the better able to do work for them they obliged
her to. Mr. Broughton renders the words, "of mischievousness they rob
the fatherless"; that is, through the greatness of the mischief they do,
as Ben Gersom interprets it; or through the exceeding mischievous
disposition they are of; of which this is a flagrant instance; or

"they rob the fatherless of what remains for him after spoiling (n),''

or devastation, through the plunder of his father's substance now dead,
which was exceeding cruel:

and take a pledge of the poor; either the poor himself, or his poor
fatherless children, see [Kg2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001); or
what is "upon the poor" (o), as it may be rendered; that is, his
raiment, which was commonly taken for a pledge; and, by a law afterwards
established in Israel, was obliged to be restored before sunset, that he
might have a covering to sleep in, [Exo
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026); See Gill on [Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006).

\(n\) "per devastationem", some in Munster; "post vastationem", Tigurine
version; so Nachmanides & Bar Tzemach. (o) "super inopem", Cocceius,
Schultens; so Ben Gersom.

[Job 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 24:10</span></span>

They cause him to go naked without clothing,.... Having taken his
raiment from him for a pledge, or refusing to give him his wages for his
work, whereby he might procure clothes to cover him, but that being
withheld, is obliged to go naked, or next to it:

and they take away the sheaf from the hungry; the Vulgate Latin version
renders it, "ears of corn", such as the poor man plucked as he walked
through a corn field, in order to rub them in his hand, and eat of, as
the disciples of Christ, with which the Pharisees were offended, [Luk
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001); and which, according to a law in
Israel, was allowed to be done, [Deu
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#025); but now so severe were these
wicked men to these poor persons, that they took away from them such
ears of corn: but it is more likely that this sheaf was what the poor
had gleaned, and what they had been picking up ear by ear, and had bound
up into a sheaf, in order to carry home and beat it out, and then grind
the corn of it, and make a loaf of it to satisfy their hunger; but so
cruel and hardhearted were these men, that they took it away from them,
which they had been all, or the greatest part of the day, picking up;
unless it can be thought there was a custom in Job's country, which was
afterwards a law among the Jews, that if a sheaf was forgotten by the
owner, and left in the field when he gathered in his corn, he was not to
go back for it, and fetch it, but leave it to the poor, [Deu
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019); but these men would not suffer
them to have it, but took it away from them; or the words may be
rendered, as they are by some, "the hungry carry the sheaf" (p) that is,
of their rich oppressive masters, who having reaped their fields for
them, and bound up the corn in sheaves, carry it home for them; and yet
they do not so much as give them food for their labour, or wages to
purchase food to satisfy their; hunger, and so dealt with them worse
than the oxen were, according to the Jewish law, which were not to be
muzzled when they trod out the corn, but might eat of it, [Deu
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004).

\(p\) "et famelici gestant manipulum", Tigurine version, Mercerus; so
Schultens, Michaelis.

[Job 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 24:11</span></span>

Which make oil within their walls,.... Not the poor within their own
walls; as if the sense was, that they made their oil in a private manner
within the walls of their houses, or in their cellars, lest it should be
known and taken away from them; for such cannot be thought to have had
oliveyards to make oil of; rather within the walls of their rich
masters, where they were kept closely confined to their work, as if in a
prison; or within the walls and fences of their oliveyards, where their
olive presses stood; or best of all "within the rows (q) of their olive
trees", as the word signifies, where having gathered the olives, they
pressed out the oil in the presses and this they did at noon, in the
heat of the day, as the word (r) for making oil is observed by some to
signify, and yet had nothing given them to quench their thirst, as
follows:

and tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst; after having gathered
their grapes from their vines for them, they trod them in the
winepresses, and made their wine, and yet would not allow them to drink
of it to allay their thirst.

\(q\) "inter ordines", Mercerus, Piscator, Cocceius; so Sephorno, and
some in Eliae Tishbi, p. 241. (r) "meridiati sunt", V. L. so Bolducius,
Schultens.

[Job 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 24:12</span></span>

Men groan from out of the city,.... Because of the oppressions and
injuries done to them, so that not only the poor in the country that
were employed in the fields, and oliveyards, and vineyards, were used
exceeding ill; but even in cities, where not only are an abundance of
people, and so the outrages committed upon them, which made them groan,
were done openly and publicly, with great insolence and impudence, but
where also courts of judicature were held, and yet in defiance of law
and justice were those evils done, see [Ecc
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016);

and the soul of the wounded crieth out; that is, the persons wounded
with the sword, or any other instrument of vengeance, stabbed as they
went along the public streets of the city, where they fell, these cried
out vehemently as such persons do; so audacious, as well as barbarous,
were these wicked men, that insulted and abused them:

yet God layeth not folly to them; it is for the sake of this observation
that the whole above account is given of wicked men, as well as what
follows; that though they are guilty of such atrocious crimes, such
inhumanity, cruelty, and oppression in town and country, unheard of,
unparalleled, iniquities, sins to be punished by a judge, yet are
suffered of God to pass with impunity. By "folly" is meant sin, not
lesser sins only, little, foolish, trifling things, but greater and
grosser ones, such as before expressed; all sin is folly, being the
breach of a law which is holy, just, and good, and exposes to its
penalty and curse; and against God the lawgiver, who is able to save and
to destroy; and as it is harmful and prejudicial, either to the
characters, bodies, or estates of men, and especially to their immortal
souls; and yet God that charges his angels with folly did not charge
these men with it; that is, he seemed, in the outward dealings of his
providence towards them, as if he took no notice of their sins, but
connived at them, or took no account of them, and did not take any
methods in his providence to show their folly, and convince them of it,
nor discover it to others, and make them public examples, did not punish
them, but let them go on in them without control; and this Job observes,
in order to prove his point, that wicked men are not always punished in
this life.

[Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 24:13</span></span>

They are of those that rebel against the light,.... The light of nature,
acting contrary to the dictates of their own consciences, in being
guilty of the inhumanity, barbarity, and cruelty they were chargeable
with in the above instances; or the light of the law, as the Targum;
though as yet the law of the ten commandments was not in being; or
however was not known to these persons; or against God himself, who is
light, and in him no darkness at all, is clothed with it, and is the
Father of lights unto his creatures, the Light of lights, and the Light
of the world, from whom all light, natural, spiritual, and eternal,
springs, [Jo1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005); which is the sense
of most of the Jewish commentators (s); and every sin is a rebellion
against God, and betrays the enmity of the carnal mind to him, is an act
of hostility against him, and shows men to be enemies in their minds to
him:

they know not the ways thereof; the ways of light, but prefer the ways
of darkness to them; or the ways of God, the ways of his commandments,
which he has prescribed for men, and directed them to walk in; these
they know not, are wilfully ignorant of, desire not the knowledge of
them, and will be at no pains to get any acquaintance with them; or they
approve not of them, they are not pleasing to them, and they choose not
to walk in them:

nor abide in the paths thereof; if at any time they are got into the
paths of light, truth, and righteousness, or in the ways of God's
commandments, and do a few good actions, they do not continue therein,
but quickly go out of the way again, leave the paths of righteousness to
walk in the ways of darkness, [Pro
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#013). Some interpreters understand
these words entirely of natural light, and of men who are like owls and
bats that flee from the light, who are authors of the works of darkness,
and do what they do in the dark secretly, and hate the light, and do not
choose to come unto it, that their deeds may not be reproved; and so now
Job enters upon the account of another set of men different from the
former, who did what they did openly, in the face of the sun, and before
all men; but these he is now about to describe are such who commit
iniquity secretly and privately, and instances in the murderer
adulterer, and thief, in [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014).

\(s\) Aben Ezra, Ben Gersom, Sephorno, Bar Tzemach.

[Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 24:14</span></span>

The murderer rising with the light,.... The light of the morning, before
the sun is risen, about the time the early traveller is set out on his
journey, and men go to distant markets to buy and sell goods, and the
poor labourer goes forth to his work; then is the time for one that is
used to commit robbery and murder to rise from his bed, or from his
lurking place, in a cave or a thicket, where he has lain all night, in
order to meet with the above persons: and so

killeth the poor and needy; takes away from them the little they have,
whether money or provisions, and kills them because they have no more,
and that they may not be evidence against him; it may be meant of the
poor saints and people of God, whom the wicked slay out of hatred to
them:

and in the night is as a thief; kills privately, secretly, at an
unawares, as the thief does his work; or the "as" here is not a note of
similitude or likeness, but of reality and truth; and so Mr. Broughton
renders the words, "and in the night he will be as a thief"; in the
morning he is a robber on the highway, and a murderer; all the day he is
in his lurking place, in some haunt or another, sleeping or carousing;
and when the night comes on, then he acts the part of a thief; in the
morning he not only robs, but murders, that he may not be detected; at
night he only steals, and not kills, because men are asleep, and see him
not.

[Job 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 24:15</span></span>

The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight,.... Not of the
morning, which would not give him time enough to satiate his lust, but
of the evening, that he may have the whole night before him to gratify
his impure desires, and that these may be indulged in the most private
and secret manner; and having fixed the time in the evening with his
adulteress, he waits with impatience, and earnestly wishes and longs for
its coming, and diligently looks out for the close of day, and takes the
first opportunity of the darkness of the evening to set out on his
adventure, see [Pro 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#007); and the "eye"
is particularly observed, not only because that is the instrument by
which the twilight is discerned, and is industriously employed in
looking out for it, but is full of adultery, as the Apostle Peter
expresses it, [Pe2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014); it is what is
the inlet to this sin, the leader on to it, the caterer for it, and the
nourisher, and cherisher of it, see [Job
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001);

saying, no eye shall see me; no eye of man, which such an one is careful
to guard against; and especially the eye of the husband of the
adulteress, whose raging jealousy will not spare the adulterer, but take
revenge on him by an immediate dispatch of him. And few care to have it
known by any that they are guilty of this sin, because it brings
dishonour and reproach upon them, which cannot be wiped off: the fact of
Absalom going in to his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel,
[Sa2 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021), and lying with them in the
face of the sun, is the most notorious instance of this kind to be read;
usually both sexes choose the utmost secrecy. Potiphar's wife took the
opportunity to tempt Joseph when none of the men of the house were
within, [Gen 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#010); and when Amnon
intended to force his sister, he ordered all the men to be had out of
the room, [Sa2 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#009), and moreover, the
adulterer foolishly fancies that God sees him not, or at least is not
concerned about that; though there is no darkness where such workers of
iniquity can hide themselves from his all seeing eye, the darkness and
the light are both alike to him. These men are like the ostrich, which
thrusting its head into a thicket, as Tertullian (t) observes, fancies
it is not seen; so children cover their faces, and, because they see
none, think that nobody sees them; and as weak and childish a part do
such act, who imagine that their evil deeds, done in the dark, are not
seen by him, before whom every creature is made manifest, and all things
are naked and open:

and disguiseth his face; puts a mask upon it, that he may not be known
by any he meets, when upon his amorous adventure, as harlots used to
cover themselves with a vail, [Gen
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014).

\(t\) De Virgin, Veland. c. 17.

[Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 24:16</span></span>

In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for
themselves in the daytime,.... Which some understand of adulterers last
mentioned, who, having observed where beautiful women dwell, mark their
houses, and the way to them, and the best way into them, and in the dark
get in at windows, or by breaking open doors get to the persons they
lust after; but as such steps would be neither safe nor prudent, so they
are not necessary; such sort of persons get admittance in an easier way,
either by bribing servants, or by a previous agreement with the
adulteress herself: rather this is to be understood of the thief and his
companions, before spoken of; or designs another sort of thieves, such
as are guilty of burglary, housebreakers, who in the daytime go about
and observe such houses as are full of money, plate, and rich goods, see
[Job 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#015); and take diligent notice of
the way to them, and which is the best and easiest part to get into
them, and, perhaps, set on them a private mark that they may know them;
these they break up, the walls, or doors, or windows, and get in at
them, and rob, and plunder, and carry off all they can; the same sins
were committed, and the same methods of committing them were used,
formerly as now; there was a law in Israel concerning housebreaking,
[Exo 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002); and our Lord alludes to it,
[Mat 24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043). Some render the words,
"they seal up" or "shut up themselves in the day" (u); in their caves,
and dens, and lurking places, and do not appear, and scarce ever see the
light, and therefore it follows:

they know not the light; it is seldom or ever seen by them, or they do
not approve it, like it, and love it, being not for their purpose; while
it is light they can do nothing, that manifestly discovers and betrays
them, and therefore they hate it; and in a figurative sense they know
not, or do not approve of the light of nature, which checks and controls
such evil actions, and accuses them of them; nor the light of God's
word, or holy law, which forbids them, and therefore they despise it,
and cast it away from them, and will not be subject to it; nor God
himself, who is light, and against whom their carnal minds are enmity;
and whatever knowledge they have of him, or profess to have, in works
they deny him, and live without him, as atheists in the world.

\(u\) , Sept. "includunt sese", some in Mercerus; so Drusius; "semet
sigillant", Schultens.

[Job 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 24:17</span></span>

For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death,.... It is as
disagreeable, and as hateful, and as terrible to them as the grossest
and thickest darkness can be to others. The word is to be rendered
either "alike" or "altogether", and not "even", as in our version: "the
morning is to them equally" or "together" (w); that is, to the murderer,
robber, thief, adulterer, and housebreaker, "as the shadow of death";
alike disagreeable to them all; or "the shadow of death is to them
together" or "alike as the morning"; what the morning is to others,
exceeding pleasant and delightful, that to them is the shadow of death,
or the darkest night; they love darkness rather than light:

if one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death; they
are frightened unto death, they are in as great terror as a man is to
whom death is the king of terrors; and who is sensible of the near
approach of it, the plain and manifest symptoms of it being upon him:
this is the case of the murderer, adulterer, and thief, when they are
caught in the fact; or are known by such who are capable of giving
notice of them, detecting them, and bearing witness against them: or
"he", each and everyone of these, "knows the terrors of the shadow of
death" (x); the darkest night, which strikes terrors into others, is
known by them, is delighted in by them, is familiar with them, and
friendly to them, and is as pleasing as the brightest day to others.

\(w\) Pariter, Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (x) "agnoscit terrores umbrae
mortis", Mercerus, Cocceius; so Codurcus, Schmidt.

[Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 24:18</span></span>

He is swift as the waters,.... Or "upon the face of the waters" (y);
which some interpret of another set and sort of wicked men, guilty of
like crimes, not on land, but upon the mighty waters; pirates, such that
commit robberies upon the high seas; who generally choose the swiftest
vessels to run from place to place for their prey, and to carry off
their booty when pursued; whose manner of life is detestable to other
persons; and especially they are cursed by those on land, who suffer by
robbing the ships of their goods they send abroad; but these men best
like such a manner of life, and prefer it to any thing by land, to
agriculture or cultivation of vineyards, which they have no regard unto,
as is supposed to be intimated by the following clauses; but it is
greatly to be questioned whether there were any such persons, or that
such practices obtained so early as the time of Job. Schultens thinks
Sodomites are meant, who are most profuse to lust, and flow in it like
water, plough the accursed field, by going after strange flesh, and have
no regard to lawful marriage, or honest wives, comparable to vines and
vineyards; but I should rather think those guilty of the sin of Onan are
meant, who have no regard to the propagation of posterity. Others, as
Ben Gersom are of opinion that this refers to the above persons,
murderers, adulterers, and thieves, [Job
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014); who, being conscious of their
crimes and due deserts, and in danger of being taken up, and brought to
just punishment, flee to the sea with all the haste they can, take
shipping, and go abroad into foreign parts; where they dwell in desolate
and uncultivated places of the earth, which are cursed, or nigh unto
cursing, and never more see pleasant fields, gardens, orchards, and
vineyards: though others suppose that these words describe the temper
and disposition of such wicked persons, who are unstable as water,
carried about as any light thing upon the water with every wind of
temptation, run swiftly into evil, and make haste to commit sin; though
it seems best of all to interpret the words as respecting the state of
wicked men at death, who then pass away swiftly and suddenly as gliding
waters, and are "lighter" or swifter "than the waters", as Mr. Broughton
renders the words:

their portion is cursed in the earth; that part and portion of the good
things of this world they have is with a curse; their very blessings are
cursed, and what they leave behind has a curse entailed on it, and in
process of time is blasted, and comes to nothing; for, the curse of the
Lord is in the house of the wicked, [Pro
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033);

he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards; as in their lifetime they had
no regard to the way of good and righteous men, of whom Jarchi in a
mystical sense, interprets the vineyards; so at death they are taken
away from all their worldly enjoyments they set their hearts upon; their
places know them no more, and they no more see their fields, and
vineyards, and oliveyards, and take no more walks unto them nor in them.

\(y\) "super faciem aquarum", Mercerus, Bolducius, Beza, Drusius,
Schultens.

[Job 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 24:19</span></span>

Drought and heat consume the snow waters,.... Melt the snow into water,
and dry up that, which is done easily, quickly, and suddenly:

so doth the grave those which have sinned; all have sinned, but some are
more notorious sinners than others, as those here meant; and all die and
are laid in the grave, and are consumed; hence the grave is called the
pit of corruption and destruction, because bodies are corrupted and
destroyed in it, and which is the case of all, both good and bad men;
but the metaphor here used to express it by, of the consumption of snow
water by drought and heat, denotes either that the death of these
persons is sudden and violent, and in such a manner are brought to the
grave, consumed there; that they die a sudden death, and before their
time, and do not live out half the days, which, according to the course
of nature, they might have lived, or it was expected by them and others
they would; whereas they are "snatched away", as the word signifies, as
suddenly and violently as snow waters are by the drought and heat; or
else that their death is quick, quiet, and easy, as snow is quickly
dissolved, and the water as soon and as easily dried up by the drought
and heat; they do not lie long under torturing diseases, but are at once
taken away, and scarce feel any pain; they die in their full strength,
wholly at ease and quiet; which sense well answers Job's scope and
design, see [Job 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#023). Some render
the words, "in the drought and heat they rob, and in the snow waters"
(z); that is, they rob at all times and seasons of the year, summer and
winter; and this is their constant trade and employ; they are always at
it, let the weather be what it will: and "they sin unto the grave", or
"hell" (a); they continue in their wicked course of life as long as they
live, until they are brought to the grave; they live and die in sin.

\(z\) "deficit"; so some in Simeon, Bar Tzemach. (a) "ad infernum usque
peccarunt", Schmidt; "usque ad sepulchrum", Mercerus; some in Drusius.

[Job 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 24:20</span></span>

The womb shall forget him,.... His mother that bore him; or his wife, by
whom he had many children; or his friend, as Gersom, who had a tender
and affectionate respect for him; these all, and each of them, either
because of his wicked life and infamous death, care not to speak of him,
but bury him in oblivion; or because of his quiet and easy death, are
not distressed with it, but soon forget him; unless this is to be
understood of the womb of the earth, in which being buried, he lies
forgotten, to which the next clause agrees; though some interpret it of
God himself the word having the signification of mercy (b); who, though
mercy itself, is rich and abundant in it, yet has no mercy for, nor
shows any favour to, such men; but they lie in the grave among those
whom he remembers no more in a way of grace and favour, [Psa
85:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#005);

the worm shall feed sweetly on him; for being brought to the grave at
once, without any wasting distemper, is a fine repast for worms, his
breasts being full of milk, and his bones moistened with marrow, and
full of flesh; or "the worm is sweet unto him" (c); he feels no pain by
its feeding on him, and so the sense is just the same with that
expression, "the clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him", [Job
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033);

he shall be no more remembered; with any mark of honour and respect; his
memory shall rot with him, while the righteous are had in everlasting
remembrance; or rather dying a common death, and not made a public
example of:

and wickedness shall be broken as a tree; that is, wicked men, who are
wickedness itself, extremely wicked, and are like to a tree, sometimes
flourishing in external prosperity, having an affluence of the things of
this world, and always like barren and unfruitful trees, with respect to
grace and good works; these, when the axe of death is laid to the root
of them, they are cut down, and their substance comes to nothing, and
their families are destroyed, and so they become like trees struck with
thunder and lightning, and broken into ten thousand shivers; or as the
trees in Egypt were broken to pieces by the plague of hail, [Exo
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025).

\(b\) "misericordia", V. L. "miseratio", Montanus, Bolducius; so
Tigurine version, Grotius. (c) "dulcescit ei", Beza, Piscator; "suavis",
Cocceius; so Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 24:21</span></span>

He evil entreateth the barren, that beareth not,.... Here Job returns,
to give some further account of the sins of some wicked men, who prosper
in this world, and go through it with impunity; and speaks of such that
use their wives ill because they are barren, upbraid them with it, and
are churlish to them on account of it; or use them ill that they may be
barren, and bear no children, having no pleasure in them, as not in
vineyards, before, [Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018); and
some interpret this of deflowering virgins, who never bore children, and
of using methods to make them abortive, when with child; the word we
translate "evil entreateth" sometimes signifies joining to, or being a
companion of others, as in [Pro 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020);
hence various senses are given; some, he joins himself to a barren
woman, that he may have no children, being not desirous of any; others,
he, joins himself to, and is a companion of harlots, who are commonly
barren: and like the prodigal, spends his substance among them. Some
interpreters take this verse and [Job
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022); as expressive of the punishment
of wicked men: so Mr. Broughton renders the words, "he adjoineth the
barren" (d), and gives the sense of them thus; God sends after him a
barren wife, that he shall have no help by children; but, though a
numerous offspring has been reckoned an outward happiness, and not to
have any an infelicity, yet it has been the case of many good men and
women to be childless; wherefore love and hatred are not known hereby:
besides, such a sense is contrary to the scope and design of Job, which
is to prove that wicked men often go unpunished in this life; wherefore,
rather the meaning is, that a wicked man uses ill such, who having not
only lost their husbands, but having been barren, and so childless, have
none to take their part, and to protect and defend them from the abuses
of such men; the Targum renders the word, "he breaketh", and so some
understand it (e); he breaketh the barren, tears them to pieces, ruins
and destroys them, as to their outward substance, because they have no
children to help them; with which agrees what follows,

and doth not good to the widow; does not make her glad and cheerful, as
Job did, who made the widow's heart to sing for joy, [Job
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#013); does not relieve and assist her
when in distress, either by counsel and advice, or by administering to
her necessities; but, on the contrary, afflicts and oppresses her; takes
her ox, or her raiment, for a pledge, and plunders her house, and
devours the substance of it; for more is intended than is expressed.

\(d\) "consociat ei sterilem", Junius & Tremellius. (e) Pagninus,
Montanus, Bolducius, Piscator, Mercerus, Drusius.

[Job 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 24:22</span></span>

He draweth also the mighty with his power,.... Such a wicked man not
only maltreats the weak, the helpless, and the defenceless, but even
attacks the mighty and powerful; such as are in great power and
authority, and abound in wealth and riches, only somewhat inferior in
both to himself: wherefore, by his superior force, he draws them to be
of his party, to join with him in acts of rapine and violence,
oppression and cruelty; or he draws them by power or policy, or by both,
as the wicked man does the poor with his net, [Psa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009); and so makes a prey of him and
his substance. Some understand this of the punishment of wicked men, and
interpret it, as Jarchi does, of God's drawing him to punishment; God
sometimes does indeed draw and hurl the mighty from their seats; though
they are set in high, yet in slippery places, and are brought down to
destruction in a moment; and he will draw them all to his judgment seat
hereafter, whether they will or not, and send them into everlasting
punishment; but the former sense is best:

he riseth up, and no man is sure of life; he rises up in the morning:,
either from his bed, or from his lurking place, where he was all night
with a murdering intention, and no man he meets with is safe, but in the
utmost danger of his life, [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014);
or, he rises in the world to great power and dignity, and increases in
wealth and riches, which he abuses to the hurt of others; so that they
flee from him and hide themselves, not caring to trust their life with
him, [Pro 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#028); or he riseth up
against a man in an hostile way, and against whomsoever he does, they
are in the utmost jeopardy, and cannot be secure of their lives; though
this also is by some interpreted as the punishment of a wicked man, who,
when he rises in the morning, "trusteth not his own life" (f), as the
words may be rendered, and as they are in the margin of our Bibles; but
his life is in suspense, being surrounded with a thousand dangers, and
has no assurance of it, and is in continual fear, and often fears where
no fear is; see [Deu 28:66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066); or, if a
man rises up against him, the wicked tyrant and cruel oppressor, he the
tyrant is not sure of his life but may be slain by him that rises up
against him; but the former sense is best.

\(f\) "non fidit suae vitae", Tigurine version, Piscator; so V. L.

[Job 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 24:23</span></span>

Though it be given him to be in safety,.... Or "he gives him" (g), that
is, it is God gives the wicked man to be in safety, notwithstanding all
his wickedness; for Job, having described the wicked man, now represents
him as in the greatest prosperity: safety is of God in every respect,
not only the safety of good men, both in a way of providence and in a
way of grace, but even of bad men; those are often preserved from the
incursions and depredations of others, and their goods are kept, and
they possess them in peace, and they dwell secure and confidently
without care. The Vulgate Latin version is widely different,

"God gives him place of repentance, and he abuses it to pride;''

though the Targum somewhat agrees with it,

"he gives to him repentance, that he may trust, or be confident and be
supported:''

so God gave space to repent to the old world; to whose case some Jewish
writers apply the context, see [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003);

whereon he resteth; being in prosperity and safety, he trusts to it, and
depends upon it it will ever be the case; he has much goods laid up for
many years, and therefore sings "requiem" to his soul, saying, "take
thine ease"; tomorrow will be as this day, and much more abundant;
things will always be as they are, or better:

yet his eyes are upon their ways; or, "and his eyes" (h), that is, the
eyes of God, which are upon all men, good and bad, and upon all their
ways and works; these are upon the wicked man and all his courses; not
to punish him now for his sins; for, though he sees all his wicked
actions, not one escapes his notice, yet he lays not folly to him, nor
charges him with it, nor inflicts punishment on him for it; nay, his
eyes are upon him to prosper and succeed him in all he does; which is
the usual sense of the phrase, unless where there is an explanation, or
anything said to show the contrary; see [Deu
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012). Some give a different sense of
the words, as that such that fear the wicked man give him gifts, that
they may be in safety, in which they trust; or he gives them his hand,
or his word, or both, that they shall be, on which they rely; but his
eyes are upon them, watching their ways and works, to take every
opportunity and advantage against them; but the former is best.

\(g\) "dat ei", Piscator, Mercerus, i.e., Deus, Beza, Drusius,
Michaelis. (h) "et ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, Bolducius, Beza, Cocceius,
Schultens.

[Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 24:24</span></span>

They are exalted for a little while,.... To seats of honour, to places
of profit and trust, to great wealth and riches, to be highly esteemed
among men, and to have a large affluence of the good things of life; see
[Mal 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015); though this exaltation,
dignity, and glory, wealth and riches, last but for a little time, this
life at longest being but short, like a vapour that appears, and soon
vanishes away; and then all a man's honours and glory, riches and
substance, are at an end, who is soon cut down as the grass, and withers
as the green herb, [Psa 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002); but as
this pretty much falls in with the sentiment of Zophar, or seems to do
so, [Job 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005); rather this phrase,
"for a little while", may be joined with what follows, "a little while,
and they are gone";

but are gone; out of the world, to their own place, and death puts an
end to all their prosperity, to all their outward enjoyments, which yet
they retain till death: or "they are not" (i); in the land of the
living, in their houses and shops, and places of trade and commerce;
they are no more about their business, and in their callings of life,
nor in the possession of their worldly estates; the places which knew
them know them no more; and this comes to pass in a very little time;
their honour is short lived, and their earthly portion is not forever:

and brought low; not diminished in their substance in life, nor lessened
in their honour and grandeur, nor are brought into poverty and disgrace;
but are brought at last to death, and laid low in the grave, and are fed
upon by worms, and reduced to rottenness and dust:

they are taken out of the way, as all others; out of the world, by
death, and out of the way of others; who come in their room, and were
hoping for their death, and waiting for their posts of honour, and
places of profit, or for their worldly estates; and out of the way of
doing more mischief, and especially to good men; or they are "closed" or
"shut up" (k); that is, in the grave, where they lie imprisoned until
the resurrection morn, and out of which prison none can release
themselves; nor will they be released, until Christ, who has the keys of
the grave, unlocks it, and sets the prisoners free; but then all this is
no other than what befalls the rest of mankind; all die, and must die,
and all are brought to the grave, and laid in that, and shut up in it,
which is the house appointed for all living:

and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn; when they are fully ripe at
harvest time; it being usual in some places, as I have somewhere read,
when they gather their corn, only to cut off the ears of corn at the
top, which is very easily and quickly done; and so this may denote the
quiet and easy death of wicked men, and when they are come to a full
age, and are like a shock of corn in its season, [Job
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026).

\(i\) "et non ipse", Montanus, Bolducius; "et non sunt", Schultens. (k)
"claudentur", Pagninus, Montanus; "clauduntur", Piscator.

[Job 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 24:25</span></span>

And if it be not so now,.... If this is not the case of men of such
wicked lives as above described, do not prosper in the world, and
increase in riches, and do not pass through the world with impunity, and
die quietly, in the full possession of their honour and wealth:

who will make me a liar? where is the man? let him stand forth and
appear, and disprove what has been said, and make out the doctrine
delivered to be false doctrine, and a lie; for no lie is of the truth:

and make my speech nothing worth; vain, useless, and unprofitable; truth
is valuable, like gold, silver and precious stones; but error is as
wood, hay, and stubble, and nothing worth, yea, to be detested and
rejected: or let him make what I have said to stand "for nothing" (l);
let him show, if he can, that it is impertinent, and not to the purpose,
that it does not prove the point for which it is brought: thus Job was
willing to have what he had said tried by every method that could be
made use of, that it might appear whether what he had said was true or
false, worthy to be regarded, or worthless; and he here bids defiance to
his friends, or to any other, and triumphs over them, as having gained
his point; and, as it appears by the sequel, he had, at least in a great
measure, and however with respect to this matter, that good men are
afflicted in this life, and wicked men prosper; of which there are many
instances,

\(l\) "ad nihilum", Pagninus, Montanus; so Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Mercerus, Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 25](job025)

</div>
