<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job028)  [Next](job030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 29:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 29

In this chapter Job gives an account of his former and wishes it was
with him now as then; and which he describes with respect to his own
person, and the favours he personally enjoyed, whether temporal or
spiritual, [Job 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001); with respect to
his family and domestic affairs, [Job
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#005); with regard to the esteem he had
from men of every age and station, [Job
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007); the reasons of which were the
mercy and compassion he showed to the poor, the fatherless, and the
widow, and the justice he administered in the execution of his office as
a magistrate, [Job 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012); in which
honour and prosperity he expected to have lived and died, [Job
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018); and which he further describes
by the respect he had among men, and the power and authority he
exercised over them, [Job 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#021).

[Job 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 29:1</span></span>

Moreover, Job continued his parable,.... Or "added to take it up" (q),
that is, he took it up again, and went on with his discourse; he made a
pause for awhile, waiting to observe whether any of his three friends
would return an answer to what he had said; but perceiving they were not
inclined to make any reply, he began again, and gave an account of his
former life, in order to show that he was far from being the wicked man,
or being so accounted by others, as his friends had represented him:

and said; as follows.

\(q\) "addidit assumere", Montanus, Bolducius, Mercerus; "addidit
tollere", Drusius.

[Job 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 29:2</span></span>

Oh that I were as in months past,.... Which is either an earnest wish
for restoration to his former state of outward prosperity; which he
might desire, not through impatience and discontent under his present
circumstances, or from a carnal and worldly spirit; but either that the
present reproach he lay under from his friends might be taken off, he
observing that they accounted him a wicked man and an hypocrite, because
of his afflictions; wherefore he judged, if these were removed, and he
was in as prosperous a condition and in as good circumstances as before,
they would entertain a different opinion of him; or, that his words
might be better attended to, as they were by men, both young and old,
and even princes and nobles before, it being a common case, that what a
poor and distressed man says is not regarded; or that he might be in a
capacity of doing good to the poor and fatherless, the widow and the
oppressed, as he had formerly; or, this wish is only made to introduce
the account of his former life, by which it would appear, that he was
not the man his friends had represented him to be, from the favour he
was in with God, and from the respect shown him by men, and the many
good things done by him: but since, by various expressions, which before
had dropped from his lips, it appears, that he had no hope nor
expectation of ever being restored to his former outward happiness; this
may be considered as a wish for the return of spiritual prosperity,
wishing he was in as good frames of soul, and as much in the exercise of
grace, and was as holy, as humble, as spiritual, and heavenly minded, as
he was when he had so much of the world about him; and that he had but
the like communion with God, and his gracious presence with him, as he
had then. The state of the Lord's people, God-ward, is always the same;
his election of them stands sure; the covenant of grace with them is
unalterable; their interest in a living Redeemer always continues; grace
in them is a principle, permanent and perpetual; but there may be, and
often is, an alteration in their frames, and in the exercise of their
graces, and in the open regard of God unto them; their graces may be low
in exercise; there may be a decay of the life and power of godliness;
their frames may change, and the presence of God may be withdrawn from
them, and they may have no view of interest in salvation, at least not
have the joys of it; wherefore, when sensible of all this, may be
desirous it might be with them as it was before; that God would turn
them again, and cause his face to shine upon them, that they might be
comfortable; the particulars of Job's former case follow, which he
desires a renewal of:

as in the days when God preserved me; either in a temporal sense; God
having set an hedge of special providence about him, whereby he and his,
his family and substance, were remarkably preserved; but now this was
plucked up, and all were exposed to ravage and ruin; or in a spiritual
sense, as he was both secretly and openly preserved, and as all the
Lord's people are, in Christ, and in his hands, and by his power,
spirit, and grace: the Lord preserves their souls from the evil of their
own hearts, sin that dwells in them, that it shall not have the dominion
over them; from the evil that is in the world, that they shall not be
overcome by it, and carried away with if; and from the temptations of
Satan, so as not to be devoured and destroyed by him, and from a final
and total falling away; he preserves them in his own ways, safe to his
kingdom and glory; but sometimes all this does not appear so evident
unto them, as it might not to Job at this time; who observed the
workings of his corruption, and the breaking out of them, in passionate
words, wishes, and curses, and the temptations of Satan, who was busy
with him to go further lengths, even to blaspheme and curse God; so that
he might fear that God his defence was departed from him, the return of
which he was desirous of; see [Isa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014).

[Job 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 29:3</span></span>

When his candle shined upon my head,.... Which may be understood either
of outward prosperity, sometimes signified by a candle, [Job
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005); and may be called the candle of
the Lord, because it is from him, it is of his lighting and setting up;
and its shining on his head may denote the large measure and degree of
it possessed by him, in allusion to torches carried on high to light
with; or lamps, or candles, set up in the higher part of the house to
give the more light; or to the sun in the firmament, and especially when
in its meridian, and shines clearest right over our heads, and casts no
shadow: or else it may be understood of light in a figurative sense, not
of the light of nature in men, which, though called the candle of the
Lord, [Pro 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#027); yet, in man's fallen
state, shines not clearly; and with respect to this there was no
difference in Job than heretofore; but rather it is the light of grace,
the true light, which had shone upon him and in him, but now not so
clearly as formerly, and as he could wish for; or else the word of God,
which is a light unto the feet, and a lamp to the path; or it may be,
best of all, the favour of God, the light of his countenance he had
before enjoyed, having had a comfortable display of his love, a clear
view of interest in it, and had the blessings of it bestowed upon him,
and enjoyed by him; and nothing was more desirable by him, as is by
every good man, than the return of the light of God's countenance; and
that he might be remembered with his special favour, as his people are,
and as he had been in times past:

and when by his light I walked through darkness; that is, either by the
light of outward prosperity he had escaped those calamities, distresses,
and dangers, and got over those difficulties which attended others,
though now surrounded with them; or by the light of divine grace, or of
the word of God, and especially by and in the light of God's
countenance, he walked cheerfully and comfortably, without any fear of
the darkness of affliction and calamities, or of the dark valley of the
shadow of death, or of the prince of darkness, or of the darkness of
hell and damnation; but now clouds of darkness being about him, and he
without the light of God's countenance, could not see the way in which
he walked and therefore wished that that again might be lifted up upon
him.

[Job 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 29:4</span></span>

As I was in the days of my youth,.... Either taken literally, he being
one like Obadiah, that feared God from his youth upward, [Kg1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003); or figuratively, for his former
state of prosperity, when he was like a tree in autumn laden with ripe
and rich fruit, and in great abundance; and so some render the words "in
the days of my autumn", or "autumnity" (r); though it may respect the
time of his first conversion, the infancy and youth of his spiritual
state, who, when first regenerated, was as a newborn babe, and then
became a young man, and now a father in Christ, his living Redeemer: and
Job wishes it was with him as in his youth, or in the early days of his
conversion, at which season, generally speaking, there are great zeal
and fervency of spirit, a flow of love and affection to God and the best
things; large discoveries of his love, much sensible communion with him,
and enjoyment of his presence; wherefore such returning seasons are
desirable; see [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002);

when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle; either the secret power
and providence of God, which was upon his house and family, and all that
belonged to him; or the secret of his love, which was manifested to him,
and is from everlasting to everlasting on them that fear the Lord, as
Job did; who had secret communion with God, his fellowship was with him;
he dwelt in the secret place of the Almighty, and was taken into his
secret chambers, where he had the greatest familiarity with him, see
[Psa 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014). Some observe the word for
"secret" is used for an "assembly" (s), and take the sense to be, that
the assembly of the saints and people of God was in his tabernacle or
house; there they met together for religious worship, and where Job had
often a comfortable opportunity, and wishes for the same again, see [Psa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001).

\(r\) "in autumno dierum mearum", Hottinger. Thesaur. Phiolog. p. 507.
"in diebus autumnitatis meae", Schultens; so the word signifies in
Arabic, vid. Golium, col. 1415. Lud. Capell. in loc. (s) "in societate
Dei", Pagninus, Beza; "societas Dei", i.e. "con gregatio", Bolducius; so
Jarchi.

[Job 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 29:5</span></span>

When the Almighty was yet with me,.... Not merely by his powerful and
providential presence, as he is with all men; but in a special manner by
his gracious presence, which is a wonderful and distinguishing favour;
but sometimes the people of God are without it, at least they think so,
and which was now Job's case, see [Job
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#002); and therefore he desires he
would return to him, and show him his face and favour:

when my children were about me; as olive plants about his table, in
their youth; when he looked at them with great delight and pleasure, as
his growing hopes; and, when grown up, and were not far from him, but
were round about him, and lay near his heart, and whose welfare,
temporal and spiritual, he was solicitous for; but now they were all
taken away from him, and were no more: the word for "children" signifies
also "servants" (t), and may take in them, of whom he had many to do his
work and business; to attend upon him, to wait his orders, and execute
them, and guard his person; but now many of them were slain by the
Sabeans and Chaldeans, and by fire from heaven; and those he had were
very disrespectful to him, see [Job
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015).

\(t\) "juvenes mei", Tigurine version; "vel famuli vel filii", Mercerus,
Drusius; so Jarchi.

[Job 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 29:6</span></span>

When I washed my steps with butter,.... Not the steps of his house or
palace; for to have done this, or his servants by his orders, as it
would have been a very great impropriety, so a piece of great
prodigality, which Job could never have been guilty of; but either his
footsteps, the prints of his feet; and the sense be, that his cattle
produced such a vast quantity of milk, that when his servants brought it
from the fields to the dairy, their milk pails ran over in such
abundance, that Job could not step out of his house, and take a walk in
his fields, but he stepped into puddles of milk, of which butter was
made: this is an exaggerated phrase, like that by which the land of
Canaan is described as "flowing with milk and honey"; or rather this is
to be understood of the washing of his feet, which are the instruments
of stepping or walking. It was usual in those times, in the eastern
countries, to wash their feet upon travelling, or at festivals; but then
this was commonly done with water, not with butter, see [Gen
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004); and the meaning can only be,
that Job had such abundance of milk, or butter made of it, that he
could, if he would, have washed his feet in it; indeed, they had used to
anoint the feet with ointment; but whether cream or butter was any
ingredient in it, and so the part is put for the whole, is not certain,
see [Luk 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038), [Job
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003); besides, that would have been
more properly expressed by anointing than washing; it seems to be an
hyperbole, an expression like that of Zophar, in [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017); signifying the vast abundance
of the increase and produce of Job's kine; who is said to wash his feet
in milk or butter, as Asher is said to dip his feet in oil, because of
the great plenty of it, [Deu 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024);
the spiritual meditation upon the words may be this; the feet of the
best of saints need washing, there being many failings and infirmities
in their walk and conversation; in which they gather much pollution and
faith daily; the proper wash for this is the blood of Christ, of which
the layer in the tabernacle and temple was a type, at which the priests
washed their hands and feet; but the word of God, called the sincere
milk of the word, is the instrument or means of washing, or of directing
souls to the fountain opened to wash in; so that with respect to that,
the feet of saints, as the eyes of Christ, may be said to be washed with
milk:

and the rock poured me out rivers of oil; another hyperbolical
expression, like that in [Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013),
where honey is said to be sucked out of the rock, and oil out of the
flinty rock; as honey may be got out of a rock, because bees may make
their nests and hives there, where it is laid up by them; so oil, in
like manner, may be had from the flinty rock, olive trees growing on
hills, mountains, and rocks, which yield oil in great abundance; near
Jerusalem was a mount called Olivet, from thence: the land of Edom, or
Idumea, where Job lived, abounded with cragged mountains and rocks; and
there might be in Job's estate such on which olive trees grew in great
plenty, as to produce vast quantities of oil: it is a very fanciful
thought of Bolducius, that this rock was no other than a stone vessel,
in which was oil, somewhat like the alabaster box in [Mat
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007); and which was plentifully poured
on Job, when he was anointed high priest; and another learned man (u),
though he rejects the notion of its being a vessel for sacred use, yet
is willing to allow it was an oil vessel for common use: as to the
spiritual sense, it may be observed, that a rock in Scripture often
signifies a divine Person, [Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004);
it is an emblem of Christ, as oil also is of the Spirit of God and his
grace, [Mat 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#003); and which flows from
Christ, who is full thereof, and that in such great abundance, as to be
expressed by rivers; see [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).

\(u\) Fortunat. Schacch. Elaeochrysm. Myroth. l. 2. c. 79. p. 715.

[Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 29:7</span></span>

When I went out to the, gate through the city,.... Job having described
his former state of happiness by the personal favours he enjoyed, and by
the prosperity of his family, and his abundance of plenty at home,
proceeds to give an account of the honour and respect he had from men of
every age and rank abroad: though he had an affluence of the things of
this world, he did not indulge himself at home in ease and sloth; but
went abroad to take care of the public welfare, maintain public peace,
and administer public justice among his neighbours; performing the
office of a civil magistrate, which is often expressed in Scripture by
going in and out before the people: Job went out from his own house to
the gate of the city, where a court of judicature was kept, as it was
usual in those times and countries to hold them in the gates of the
city; see [Zac 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016); and to which he
passed through the city, very probably, in great pomp and splendour,
suitable to his office and character, which drew the eyes and attention
of the people to him; by which it should seem that his house was on one
side of the city, and the gate where justice was administered was on the
other; though it may be rendered, "over the city" (o), and the sense be,
that he passed along as he that was over the city, the chief man in it,
and president of the court of justice, see [Kg2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#005);

when I prepared my seat in the street; where he sat, not as a teacher,
though he was an instructor, not only of his family, but of his
neighbours, as Eliphaz himself testifies, [Job
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003); and it was usual for such to have
seats to sit upon, as those had who succeeded Moses, and are said to sit
in his chair; and it was usual to call to men and instruct them in open
public places; hence Wisdom is said to utter her voice in the streets,
in the opening of the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in
at the doors, [Pro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); but Job here
speaks of himself as a civil magistrate, as a judge upon the bench, who
had a seat or throne erected for him to sit upon, while he was hearing
and trying causes; and this was set up in the street under the open air,
before the gate of the city, where the whole city might be convened
together, and hear and see justice done to their neighbours; in such a
street, before the gate of the city, Ezra read the law to Israel; and in
such an one Hezekiah got the people of Israel together, and spoke
comfortably to them when invaded by Sennacherib; see [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002); and the Arabs, to this day, hold
their courts of justice in an open place under the heavens, as in a
field, or in a market place (p); and it is right that courts of justice
should be open and accessible to all.

\(o\) "super civitatem", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt; "super urbe",
Schultens. (p) Norden's Travels in Egypt and Nubia, vol. 2. p. 140, 141,
158. See Joseph. Antiqu. l. 18. c. 5. sect. 6.

[Job 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 29:8</span></span>

The young men saw me, and hid themselves,.... Through a veneration of
him; which was much, since young men, through a vain conceit and opinion
of themselves, are apt to treat their superiors in age with slight,
neglect, and contempt; or through fear, lest he should spy them, and
call them to him, and examine them closely concerning their conduct and
behaviour, and reprove them for their youthful follies he might have
knowledge of:

and the aged arose and stood up; as he passed by them, to show their
respect unto him; or when he came into court, they rose up, and
continued standing until he had took his seat; and even then kept the
same posture, attending to his counsel and instruction, to his
definitive sentence and decision of matters in debate; though they were
venerable persons themselves, and such as before whom young men were to
arise, [Lev 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032); and were also men
of wisdom and prudence, [Job 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#012);
yet these men rose and stood up, paying a deference to Job's superior
sense and judgment.

[Job 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 29:9</span></span>

The princes refrained talking,.... Who were in court before Job came in,
and were either talking with one another about indifferent matters, or
were giving their opinion in a case before them; but no sooner did Job
make his appearance, but they left off talking, and would not proceed
any further; they laid a restraint upon their words, and curbed
themselves from speaking any more till they had heard his opinion:

and laid their hand on their mouth; as a token of silence, [Jdg
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#019).

[Job 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 29:10</span></span>

The nobles held their peace,.... These may be in some respects inferior
to the others; not princes of the blood, or sons of kings, who were
properly princes, and yet great personages, of a noble extraction, and
of considerable families: some think the leaders and generals of armies
are meant, commanders and captains, and such like military officers,
those sons of Mars, who are generally bold and daring, boisterous and
blustering, and full of talk; and yet even these held their peace in the
presence of Job:, or their "voice was hid" (r); it could not be heard:

and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth; so that they had no
use of it, and it was as if they had none, see [Eze
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026). Here are various expressions
made use of, signifying the profound silence of great personages while
Job was present; and this silence was owing either to a consciousness of
their own weakness, and lest they should, by speaking before him, betray
it, and he should expose them; or to the desire they had of hearing
Job's opinion first, which was as an oracle to them, and usually
determined matters in debate before them; such high sentiments did they
entertain of Job's good sense and abilities.

\(r\) "occultabatur", Drusius; "occultabat se", Piscator.

[Job 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 29:11</span></span>

When the ear heard me, then it blessed me,.... The ear of the common
people assembled together to hear causes tried, and how they would go;
when they heard Job give his opinion in court, or the definitive
sentence passed by him as a judge, they all applauded his wisdom and
justice; they highly praised and commended him; in which sense the word
"blessed" is used, [Pro 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#028); or they
wished a blessing on him; they prayed for his welfare, as it becomes
people to do for those that are in authority, especially wise and
faithful magistrates; or they accounted him a blessed man, and called
him so, [Luk 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048); as he was, both in
a temporal sense, being blessed with a great plenty of earthly things,
and also blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ, with an
abundance of grace, and with a title to eternal glory; as well as he was
blessed as a magistrate, with great wisdom, and with great integrity and
uprightness in the discharge of his office:

and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me: of his gracefulness and
gravity, of his honesty and faithfulness, of his good behaviour among
his neighbours, and of his wise conduct in the courts of judicature.

[Job 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 29:12</span></span>

Because I delivered the poor that cried,.... This honour and esteem he
had not because of his grandeur and riches, because of his worldly
wealth and substance, but because of the goodness of his disposition,
and because of the good he did to men, his acts of pity and compassion
to the poor, and of the justice he did to all men; the poor and the
afflicted, when they cried to him for help, he delivered them out of the
hands of their oppressors:

and the fatherless; the care and defence of which belongs to judges and
civil magistrates, see [Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001);

and him that had none to help him; as the poor and fatherless seldom
have; there is power on the side of the oppressors of them, but they
have few or none to take their parts, and to be their comforters, [Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001); in these instances Job imitated
God, and was a follower of him, as a dear child of his; who, when this
and the other poor man cries unto him, he hears, saves, and delivers out
of all their troubles; he is the helper, yea, the father of the
fatherless, and the judge of the widow; and, when there is no help from
men, he is a present help in times of need.

[Job 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 29:13</span></span>

The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me,.... That were
ready to perish through the oppression of others, or through want of the
necessaries of life, or through false charges brought, and through false
witness bore against them, and so liable to a sentence of condemnation
to death, or having it passed upon them; but Job taking their part, and
searching thoroughly into their cause, not only respited them from
destruction, but cleared them from the charges laid against them, and
which brought the blessing of those persons on him; who blessed God for
him, and blessed him, wished a blessing on him in their prayers to God,
who had been such a happy instrument of their deliverance from ruin and
destruction; see [Pro 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011);

and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy; by relieving her wants,
defending her cause, and punishing those that oppressed her; which is
the reverse of the character Eliphaz gives of Job, [Job
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#009).

[Job 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 29:14</span></span>

I put on righteousness, and it clothed me,.... Not the righteousness of
his living Redeemer, the robe of righteousness and garment of salvation
he had from him; though he had put on that by faith, and it was his
clothing in the sight of God, which covered his person, and covered all
his sins from the avenging eye of divine justice; and in which he was
presented before God unblamable and irreprovable in his sight, and with
which he was adorned and beautified, being made perfectly comely through
it, and completely justified by it; but legal righteousness in the
administration of his office as a magistrate; he put it on, that is, he
exercised it, and he exercised it constantly from morning tonight, and
day after day; as a man puts on his clothes in a morning, and keeps them
on all the day, and which he is always repeating; and it was as visible
in him, and to be seen and observed by all, as the clothes on his back;
and it covered him all over as a garment does; no blemish was to be seen
in him, or blame to be cast upon him, throughout the whole course of his
administration; and this was a fence unto him against all calumny and
reproach, as garments are against the inclemency of the weather; see
[Sa1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003); so a godly conversation in
the exercise of graces and virtues, and in the performance of duties
both to God and man, is sometimes expressed by a putting them on, as
garments are put on; see [Eph 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024);
and these are an outward clothing to appear in before men, and should be
shown forth with meekness and wisdom, so as to be beheld by men; and
should be continually exercised and constantly performed; and then they
are a covering with respect to men, and they appear harmless, blameless,
and without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation;
and thus, by well doing, put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
and such to the blush, those who falsely accuse their good conversation:
and this in every sense was Job's case:

my judgment was as a robe and diadem; such as the high priest among the
Jews wore in the execution of his office, which made him look grand and
majestic; and it was usual in Job's time, as it is in ours, and has been
the custom in all ages and countries, for judges and civil magistrates
to be clothed in a different manner from others, as it is proper they
should, to command an awe and reverence of them among the common people,
and make them respectable to them: but Job did not so much regard his
purple robe he was clad in, or the distinguishing turban he wore on his
head, or whatever it was, and which might bear some resemblance to a
mitre or a diadem; as it was his great concern to administer justice,
which he reckoned his greatest honour, and was more ornamental to him
than all the showy ensigns of his office; and it was this which gave him
honour and esteem among all sorts of men, high and low: and his regard
to the poor, before observed, did not arise from a foolish commiseration
of them as poor men, and in order to get himself a name for his pity to
them, but proceeded upon a principle of justice and equity, which he
made the rule of his administration; he did not countenance the poor in
his cause right or wrong; not the quality of the person, but the
righteousness of his cause, was what he attended to; and he took his
part not merely because he was a poor man, but seeing his cause was
just.

[Job 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 29:15</span></span>

I was eyes to the blind,.... Either in a literal sense: there was a law
in Israel against putting a stumbling block before the blind, and a
curse pronounced on those that caused them to wander out of the way;
which implied that they ought to remove all impediments out of their
way, and should lead, guide, and direct them in the right way; and this
Job might do, if not in his own person, yet by his servants, and so was
as eyes unto them, and especially by taking care of and providing for
persons in such circumstances: or rather in a civil sense; such who were
in perplexity and distress, oppressed by their neighbours, but did not
know how to get justice done them, what steps to take, or methods to
pursue, to obtain their right or secure it; these Job instructed with
his good advice and counsel, and put them into a way of proceeding
whereby they could be extricated out of their difficulties, and
peaceably enjoy their own, see [Num
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#031), and it might be true of him in
a spiritual sense; that he was eyes to his blind Heathen neighbours
among whom he dwelt; who were ignorant of God, and of the living
Redeemer, and of the way of life and salvation by him, and of their
miserable and lost estate, and of their need of a Saviour; not being
acquainted with the nature of sin, and the sad consequences of it, and
with the way of atonement for it, nor with the mind and will of God, and
the worship of him; all which he might be a means of enlightening their
minds with: Eliphaz owns he instructed many, [Job
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003); thus ministers of the Gospel are
eyes to the blind; for though they cannot give eyes, or spiritual sight
to men, which is only from the Lord, yet they may be instruments of
opening blind eyes, and of turning men from darkness to light, as the
word preached by them is a means of "enlightening the eyes", [Act
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#018); whereby men come to see their
lost estate, and the way of salvation by Christ:

and feet was I to the lame; either in a literal sense, as David was to
Mephibosheth, when he sent for and maintained him at his own table, so
that he had no occasion to seek for his bread elsewhere, [Sa2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#013); and Job might make a provision
in some way or another for such sort of persons: or rather in a civil
sense, such who were engaged in law suits, and had justice on their
side, but for want of friends or money, or both, could not carry them
on; these Job supported and supplied, and carried them through their
suits, and got their cause for them.

[Job 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 29:16</span></span>

I was a father to the poor,.... Not in a literal sense; for his children
were rich as well as himself, while he had them; but in a civil sense,
he was the patron of the poor; he was an advocate for them, he took
their part, he pleaded their cause, defended their persons, and secured
the little property they had; he had the pity and compassion of a father
for them, and supplied their wants; he fed them and clothed them; he did
not eat his morsel alone, but gave them part of it, and warmed them with
the fleece of his flock:

and the cause which I knew not I searched out; any cause that was
brought before him, he knew thing of before, and which, upon the opening
of it, did not appear plain and easy, but had its difficulties; this he
closely examined, and searched thoroughly into the merits of, till it
appeared plain to him on which side the truth and justice of it lay; he
did not hurry it over, and pass sentence, having only in a superficial
manner considered it, as is too often the case; but after a long
examination of the contending parties, and of the witnesses on both
sides, to whom he gave an impartial hearing, he pronounced the decisive
sentence; see [Pro 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#002). Some think
this refers to his diligent search and inquiry after causes that were
not brought before him; he did, not wait for application to be made to
him, but hearing of, or upon inquiry finding, that there were persons
oppressed and distressed by cruel men, he of himself voluntarily offered
his assistance, searched into their cause, made himself master of it,
and freed them from their distresses; so different were his behaviour
and character from that of the unjust judge, [Luk
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001); though others, choose to render
the words, "the cause of him that I knew not", &c. (t); of a stranger,
of one that he had never seen before, of one that was most unknown to
him in the world; the cause of such an one he took as, much pains with
to get the true knowledge of, and do justice to, as of the dearest
relation, the nearest neighbour, and the most intimate friend and
acquaintance that he had.

\(t\) "quem non cognoveram", Junius & Tremellius, Michaelis;
"ignotissimi", Schultens.

[Job 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 29:17</span></span>

And I brake the jaws of the wicked,.... Their jaw teeth, or grinders,
alluding to beasts of prey, who have such teeth, very large; the meaning
may be, that Job confuted the arguments which wicked men made use of in
their own defence, and against the poor, exposed the weakness of them,
and made them ineffectual to answer their purposes; disabled tyrants and
cruel oppressors from doing any further hurt and damage to the
fatherless and helpless; was an instrument in the hand of God of
breaking the power, and weakening the hands of such persons, and
hindering them from doing the mischief they otherwise would; see [Pro
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#014);

and plucked the spoil out of his teeth; as David took the lamb out of
the mouth of the bear and lion that came into his father's flock, and
carried it off: thus Job delivered the poor out of the hands of such
monsters in nature, comparable to beasts of prey, and saved them from
being utterly ruined by them, and obliged them to restore unto them what
they had in an unrighteous manner taken from them.

[Job 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 29:18</span></span>

Then I said, I shall die in my nest,.... Job, amidst all his prosperity,
knew he should die, death and the grave being appointed for all men; and
he often thought of it, and of the manner of it; but he concluded that
death was as yet some distance from him, as appears from the following
clause; and that, when the time was come, he should not die on the
ground, but in the city in which he lived (m), in his house, and on his
bed; that he should die with all his children about him, like a bird in
its nest full of young; whereas now he was stripped of them all, and
likely to die childless; that he should die amidst all his outward
enjoyments, in an affluence of good things, in honour, credit, and
esteem among men; whereas now he was deprived of all his substance, and
had in contempt by friends and foes; and that he should die in great
tranquillity of mind and peace of soul, in the enjoyment of the divine
Presence, and under rich discoveries of his love and grace; whereas now
God had hid himself from him, and the arrows of the Almighty stuck fast
in him. Job now had dropped his former confidence, and yet after all he
did die in all the circumstances he believed he should; see [Job
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010); and this confidence might rise
not from any mercenary spirit in him, as if this would be the fruit and
reward of his integrity and uprightness, justice and faithfulness, and
as due to him on that account; but from the promises of God, which to
the patriarchs were usually of temporal blessings, as types of spiritual
ones; though it may be there was in this somewhat of the infirmity of
the flesh, as in David, [Psa 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007); and
an inattention to the uncertainty of all temporal enjoyments; nor might
he then be so well acquainted with the doctrine of the cross he now had
an experience of:

and I shall multiply my days as the sand; which is not to be numbered;
an hyperbolical expression, to denote the long life he expected to
enjoy, and which was promised to good men; and which Job,
notwithstanding his present despair of it, was favoured and satisfied
with, [Psa 91:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#016). Some versions render
it, "as the phoenix" (n), a bird of that name, spoken of by many writers
as a very long lived one; some say it lived five hundred years (o),
others five hundred forty (p), others six hundred sixty (q); yea, some,
and so the Jewish writers, as Jarchi and others (r), make it to live a
thousand years, and some say (s) more; and it is reported of it, though
not with sufficient evidence, that there is never but one of the kind at
a time; which, perceiving its end drawing near, it makes a nest of
cassia, frankincense, and other spices, and sets fire to it, and burns
itself in it, and that out of its ashes comes forth an egg, which
produces another; and some of the ancient writers, as Tertullian (t)
particularly, have made use of this as an emblem of the resurrection;
and to which some think Job has here respect; that he should live long
like this bird, and then die and rise again; but inasmuch as this seems
to be a fabulous bird, and that there is not, nor ever was, any such in
being, it cannot well be thought that Job should allude unto it; though
his making mention of his nest, in the former clause, may seem to favour
it, and which has induced some to give into it (u): others render it,
"as the palm tree" (w); between which and the phoenix there is thought
to be some likeness on account of duration (x), and both in the Greek
tongue have the same name; the palm tree is an evergreen, and endures a
long time; Pliny (y) speaks of a palm tree in his time at Delos, said to
have been there from the days of Apollo, which is supposed to be 1400
years; and it is observed (z) that this tree does continue two or three
hundred years; and this version may seem to be countenanced and
confirmed by what follows: but since the Hebrew word here used is never
used but of sand, it is best so to understand it here, seeing it as
fully answers Job's purpose; which was to express his confidence of a
very long life. Sand is frequently used in Scripture for what is
innumerable; so in Aristophanes (a), for what cannot be numbered, and
are equal to a mountain of sand.

\(m\) So Rufus Virginius used to call the villa where he dwelt,
"Senectutio suae Nidulum", Plin. l. 6. Ep. 10. (n) "sicut phoenix",
Pagninus; so Mercerus, Piscator. (o) Herodot Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 73.
Pompon. Mela de situ Orbis, l. 6. c. 58. Tacit. Annal. l. 6. c. 28. (p)
Solin. Polyhistor. c. 46. (q) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 2. (r) Bereshit
Rabba, sect. 19. fol. 15. 2. Yalkut in loc. par. 1. fol. 152. 2. (s)
Vid. Texelii Phoenix. l. 2. c. 1. p. 140. (t) De Resurrectione, c. 13.
Vid. Clement. Rom. Ep. 1. ad Corinth. p. 60. & Felli Not. in ib. (u)
Vid. Tentzelii Dissert. de Phoenice, &c. sect. 5. (w) , Sept. "sicut
palma", V. L. (x) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 4. (y) Ib. l. 16. c. 44.
(z) Vid. Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. l. vol. 4. p. 757. (a) Acharnes Act.
1. Sc. 1. & Scholia in ib.

[Job 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 29:19</span></span>

My root was spread out by the waters,.... According to our version and
others, Job here, and in the following verses, gives the reasons of his
hope and confidence of his long life, and quiet and comfortable death
amidst all his prosperity and happiness; which were founded upon his
flourishing circumstances, and the great respect that was shown him
among men; and this is the sense, if we read the words in the past
tense, as we and many others do; or in the present tense, "my root is
spread", &c. as others; but there are some interpreters, both Jewish and
Christian (b), that render them in the future tense, here and to the end
of the chapter; and so they are a continuation of Job's hope and trust,
in the times of his prosperity, that things would always continue as
they were with him, and much more abundantly; and indeed all is true of
Job, in every sense, and all may be taken into the account; and that
these words, and the following, as they describe what had been, and at
the then present time, when he concluded the above in his mind, was his
case, so they may also declare what he believed would be always his case
to the end of his days. Here he compares himself to a tree well rooted
and happily situated by plenty of water, and which may be expressive
both of his temporal and spiritual prosperity: his outward prosperity
seemed to him to have been well settled and established, being like a
tree that had taken root, and was like to continue, being watered with
the favour and blessing of God, which maketh rich; and as to his
spiritual estate, he was like a tree planted by a river of water, to
which good men are often compared in Scripture, [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003); they are in general called trees
of righteousness, and are sometimes likened to particular trees, as to
olives, cedars, and palm trees; and some think, as Pineda, that it is to
the latter Job here has respect; the last clause of [Job
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018) being in the Latin Vulgate
version so rendered as to countenance this sense; and it may be observed
that this tree having thick long leaves, and fruit full of juice, and
its wood spongy, requires much water; and, as Pliny (c) says, delights
in watery places; nor is it content with rain, but is better satisfied
with waters flowing about it; hence it is often found necessary to dig
about it, and lay its roots open, that the waters may more easily come
at them, and flow about them (d) and so the words here in the original
text are, "my root" was, is, or shall be "open to the waters" (e): good
men, as they are rooted in the love of God, and in the person of Christ,
so they have, as Job had, the root of the matter in them, the truth of
grace, or a principle of grace; which is watered, and kept alive and
flourishing, by the love and favour of God shed abroad in the heart; by
fresh supplies of grace out of the fulness of Christ, who is the
fountain of gardens, and well of living waters; and by the means of
grace, the word and ordinances, the still waters to which saints are
led, and by which they are made to lie down, and where they are watered,
refreshed, and comforted:

and the dew lay all night upon my branch; so that the water being at his
root below, and the dew on his branch above, he must be in a fruitful
and flourishing condition: the dew is a great blessing to the earth, to
trees, herbs, and plants, and the cause of great fertility; and this may
respect Job's temporal happiness, in the health and prosperity of his
children, who were to him what branches are to a tree; and in the
affluence of worldly good things, with which through the blessing of
God, as dew upon him, he abounded; and may also have regard to his
spiritual affairs: believers in Christ are branches in him, as Job was
one; and the dew of divine grace and favour lies upon them continually,
even in the darkest seasons; which revives and refreshes their souls,
and makes them fruitful in the exercise of grace, and performance of
good works; see [Pro 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012); the dew
falls in the night, and the sooner it fails the longer it lies, and is
most useful: some render the words "upon my harvest", or "mowing" (f);
the dew is of great use in harvest time; mowers and reapers choose the
morning to work in, when the stalks are moistened by the dew; and which
is of use to keep the ears of corn from shedding by swelling the fibres,
and so retaining the grains in their proper places (g); see [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004).

\(b\) Jarchi, Ben Gerson, Bar Tzemach, Schmidt, Schultens. (c) Nat.
Hist. l. 13. 4. (d) Palladius apud Scheuchzer, ut supra (Physic. Sacr.
l. vol. 4.), p. 759. (e) "aperta ad aquas", Montanus, Bolducius,
Mercerus, Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis, Schultens. (f) "in messe mea",
Montanus, Tigurine version; "in segete mea", Cocceius; so the Targum.
(g) Vid. Scheuchzer, ut supra. (Physic. Sacr. l. vol. 4. p. 759.)

[Job 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 29:20</span></span>

My glory was,.... "Is" or "shall be";

fresh in me; or "new" (g); renewed day by day, having fresh additions
made unto it; which was true of Job's temporal honour from among men; as
a prince and civil magistrate, he had the honour given him that was due
unto him, and this was continually increasing; and also of his spiritual
glory, which lay, as every good man's glory does, in the grace of God
wrought in him, and in the righteousness of Christ put upon him, [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009); which grace is renewed and
increased in them by the Holy Spirit, and is therefore called the
renewing of the Holy Ghost; and which righteousness is revealed "from
faith to faith", [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), from a
lesser degree of it to a greater:

and my bow was renewed in my hand; "is" or "shall be"; meaning either
his authority as a civil magistrate, increasing daily to the terror of
evildoers, and to the praise, profit, and defence of them that did well;
or his strength, as Gersom interprets it, his spiritual strength, as in
[Isa 40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031); where the same word is
used as here; so that he grew stronger and stronger in faith and other
graces, and went from strength to strength; the bow was a warlike
instrument, and required strength to draw it, and is put for it; see
[Gen 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022).

\(g\) "nova", Mercerus, Piscator, Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 29:21</span></span>

Unto me men gave ear,.... Or give ear, or shall give ear, being all ear;
all attention to him, listening to what he said with the utmost
diligence and earnestness; even all sorts of men, high and low, rich and
poor, princes, nobles, and common people; this they had done, and Job
concluded they still would do the same; see [Job
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009);

and waited; patiently, without any weariness, with pleasure and delight,
without giving any interruption, or wishing his discourse was ended; and
though continuing ever so long, were not impatient until it was
finished:

and kept silence at my counsel; which was the thing waited for, and
which when given, it was to the highest satisfaction; they acquiesced in
it, and showed their approbation of it by their silence, not having
anything to object to it, any alteration to be made in it, or any thing
to be added to it; but being so complete and full, they were ready to
take it at once, and act according to it; Job's counsel being like that
of Ahithophel, which was as the oracle of God, [Sa2
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023).

[Job 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 29:22</span></span>

After my words they spake not again,.... Did not or would not make any
reply to them; they did not attempt to change and alter them, to add
unto them, or take from them, or in any wise to correct them, and much
less to contradict them, and treat them with contempt; or "differed
not", as Mr. Broughton renders it; differed not from them, but agreed to
them; and differed not among themselves, but united in what Job said, as
being full to the purpose, after which nothing more could be said; see
[Ecc 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#012);

and my speech dropped upon them; his prophecy, as Jarchi, prophesying
being expressed by dropping, [Amo
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016); his doctrine dropped from his
lips like the honeycomb, and was sweet, grateful, and delightful to his
hearers, as the church's lips, [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011); or rather like the rain, as in
[Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002), when it falls and drops
gently and easily, and so penetrates and soaks into the earth, and
abides and does good: in like manner, when good and sound doctrine drops
upon the hearers, so as to enter into their hearts, and work effectually
in them, it does them good, and they rejoice at it, and are far from
having anything to say against it.

[Job 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 29:23</span></span>

And they waited for me as for the rain,.... The former rain, as appears
by the following clause, which fell in autumn, about October, after
seedtime, in order to nourish and cherish it, and bring it up; now as
the husbandman waited for this, was in daily expectation of it, and
greatly desired it, and longed for it; see [Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007); so the people waited for Job, for
his coming into their public assemblies, whether civil or religious, and
longed to hear him speak, for their counsel and instruction, for their
comfort and direction in all things they stood in need of:

and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain; which fell in
the spring about March, in the time of harvest, which was of use to
fatten the kernals of grain, and make them fuller, and the flour finer;
now Job's hearers opened their mouths, as the dry and parched earth
gapes for rain; or the husbandman, or the gardener, as the Targum, opens
his mouth, and asks and prays for rain; or as a hungry and thirsty man
opens his mouth to take in refreshment, or expresses thereby his desire
of it; or as persons somewhat deaf open their mouths to hear the better,
there being a way through the mouth to the internal ear, as anatomists
(h) observe; which lies through the Eustachian tube, out of the palate,
to the internal cavity of the ear, called the "concha"; wherefore such
persons naturally open their mouths when they would hear attentively;
all which expresses the eager desire of Job's hearers after his
doctrine, which, like the rain, would be useful, profitable, and
edifying to them; their view was not to indulge their curiosity, to
please their ears, but to affect their hearts, and instruct their minds.

\(h\) Scheuchzer, ut supra. (Physic. Sacr. l. vol. 4. p. 759.)

[Job 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 29:24</span></span>

If I laughed on them, they believed it not,.... Not that he at any time
laughed at them, by way of derision; but when in a cheerful frame of
mind, or in a merry mood, he used freedom and familiarity, and jested
with them; but they could not believe that he did jest, or was in jest,
he being a man always of such gravity and seriousness, that they
concluded the smile on his countenance, and the pleasant turn of his
expression, had a serious meaning in them; or such familiarity with them
was so pleasing to them, that they could scarcely for joy believe that
he did condescend to indulge such an air of pleasantry: or as Mr.
Broughton renders it, and so some others to the same sense, "they would
not be bold" (i); familiarity with them did not breed contempt, as it
sometimes does; they did not presume upon it, and grow bold and
insolent, and make him their equal, and jest with him again; but still
there was an awe upon them, and they behaved with reverence to him; and
to show how great it was is the design of the expression:

and the light of my countenance they cast not down; they did not ruffle
his mind, or disturb the serenity of it; or cause him to change his
countenance, through any bold and indecent behaviour towards him,
encouraged by the freedom and pleasantry he used with them; they did not
put him to shame, or provoke him to anger and displeasure by any
unbecoming deportment; they kept their distance, they did not detract
from his authority and majesty, or in the least lessen that, but behaved
with the same reverence and regard to him they ever did; see [Gen
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#006).

\(i\) "non tamen sibi sumebant audaciam", Michaelis; "neque tam audaces
fiunt", Reimar apud Schultens.

[Job 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 29:25</span></span>

I chose out their way,.... When his friends and neighbours came to him
for advice in things civil, he marked out their way for them, directed
what steps to take, what methods to pursue for their good; they desired
him to choose for them, preferring his judgment to theirs, and were
determined to abide by his choice of ways and means, and to follow his
counsel; and in religious matters, he instructed them in their duty,
both towards God and men, and proposed unto them what was most eligible,
both with respect to doctrine and practice;

and sat chief; in all their public assemblies; he presided in their
councils and courts of judicature; and when met together for religious
worship, he sat in the chair of the teacher, and instructed them; he was
chief speaker, as the Heathens said of the Apostle Paul, [Act
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012);

and dwelt as a king in the army, or "troop" (k). Mr. Broughton renders
it with a garrison; Job was surrounded with multitudes of persons, that
waited upon him on one account or another, who were ready to receive his
words, and be obedient to them, as a king or general in the midst of an
army, surrounded by his general officers, and the whole army encamped
about him, doing him honour, and ready to obey whatever commands or
instructions he should give them; some conclude from hence that Job was
really a king, as being not a note of similitude, but of truth and
reality, as in [Mat 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002); and so he
might be; for in those times and countries every city almost had its
king; though this is not necessarily supposed here; for the phrase seems
only to denote the authority and influence Job had over men by his
advice and instruction, which were as much regarded as from a king; and
the majesty he appeared in, and the reverence in which he was had:

as one that comforteth the mourners: which some restrain to the king in
his army, and connect them therewith thus, "when he comforteth the
mourners" (l); the soldiers mourning for some loss sustained, and
slaughter made among them; whose minds the king or general by a set
speech endeavours to cheer, and comfort, and allay their fears, and
animate them to intrepidity and fortitude, when all eyes are upon him
and attentive to him; and so attentive were Job's hearers to him. Bar
Tzemach observes, that the copulative or "and", is wanting, and so is a
clause by itself, and expresses something distinct from the forager, and
may be supplied, "and I was as one that comforteth the mourners"; as a
wise man that comforteth them, as Aben Ezra explains it; like one that
made it his business to visit mourners in affliction, on account of the
death of a relation, and the like: see [Job
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#019); and speaks comfortable words to
them, to support them under their sorrow; when such an one used to speak
alone, and all stood silent before him, and attentive to him; and in a
like position was Job, when he gave his instructions to those about him;
and he was, no doubt, a comforter of mourners himself, being either in
temporal afflictions, or in spiritual troubles; comforted those that
were cast down in either sense, and was a type of Christ, who was
appointed to comfort all that mourn in Zion.

\(k\) "in agmine", Montanus, Bolducius; "in turma", Mercerus, Drusius,
Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens. (l) "quando", Junius & Tremellius,
Drusius; "quum vel quando", Schmidt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 30](job030)

</div>
