<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job004)  [Next](job006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 5

In this chapter Eliphaz goes on to prove, and further confirm and
establish, what he had before asserted, that not good men, but wicked
men only, are afflicted of God, at least greatly, so as to have their
substance wholly destroyed and perish, which was Job's case; and this
partly from the case, state, and sentiments of all the saints, [Job
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001); and from his own observation and
experience, [Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003); and then he
proceeds to give some advice; and seeing afflictions do not come by
chance, but are of God, it is right in such circumstances for a man to
seek to the Lord for pardon and salvation, and commit his cause unto
him, [Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006); who does many great
things in a providential way to the good of man in general, and to the
disappointment of wicked crafty men, and to the serving of the poor in
particular, [Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009); so that it is
best patiently to bear the afflicting hand of God, and it is an
happiness to be corrected by him, since he delivers such out of all
their troubles, and preserves them from many evils, and bestows many
good things on them; which would be Job's case particularly, if he
behaved according to the advice given, and which is left with him to
consider of, [Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017).

[Job 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 5:1</span></span>

Call now, if there be any that will answer thee,.... That is, call upon
God, which, if seriously, and not ironically spoken, was good advice;
God is to be called upon, and especially in times of trouble; and
invocation is to be made in faith, in sincerity, and with fervency, and
to be accompanied with confession of sin, and repentance for it; and
sooner or later God hears and answers those that call upon him; but
Eliphaz suggests, that if Job did call upon him, it would be in vain, he
would not hear him, he going upon the same maxim that the Jews did in
Christ's time, "God heareth not sinners": [Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031); or call upon him to give him an
oracle from heaven, to favour him with a vision and revelation, and see
if he could get anything that would confront and confute what he had
delivered as coming that way; which, if it could be done by him, would
appear to be a falsehood and an imposture, since one revelation from God
is not contradicted by another: or else the sense is, "call" over the
catalogue and list of good men that have been from the beginning of the
world, and see if there be any that "answers to thee" (n), whose case,
character, and behaviour, correspond with thee; if ever any of them was
afflicted as thou art, or ever behaved with so much indecency,
impatience, murmuring, and blasphemy against God, as thou hast done;
that ever opened his mouth, and cursed the day of his birth, and
reflected upon the providence and justice of God as thou hast, as if
thou wert unrighteously dealt with: or rather, "call now", and summon
all creatures together, angels and men, and get anyone of them to be thy
patron, to defend thy cause, and plead for thee, to give a reply to what
has been said, from reason, experience, and revelation: and shouldest
thou obtain this, which is not likely, "lo, there is one that can answer
thee" (o), as some render the words, meaning either God or himself; thus
Eliphaz insults Job, and triumphs over him, as being entirely baffled
and conquered by him, by what he had related as an oracle and revelation
from heaven:

and to which of the saints wilt thou turn? or "look", or "have respect"
(p), that will be of any service to thee? meaning either the Divine
Persons in the Godhead, sometimes called Holy Ones, as in [Jos
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019); [Pro
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010); the Holy Father, the Holy Son,
and the Holy Spirit, who may and should be turned and looked unto; God
the Father, as the God of providence and grace for all good things;
Jesus Christ his Son, as the Redeemer and Saviour for righteousness and
eternal life; the blessed Spirit, as a sanctifier to carry on and finish
the work of grace; but it is suggested, it would be in vain for Job to
turn and look to any of these, since he would be rejected by them as a
wicked man, nor would any of them plead his cause: or else the holy
angels, as the Septuagint express it, and who are called saints and Holy
Ones, [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); and it is asked,
which of those he could turn or look to, and could expect relief and
protection from? signifying, that none of these would vouchsafe to
converse with him, nor take him under their care, nor undertake to plead
his cause: or rather holy men, such as are sanctified or set apart by
God the Father, to whom Christ is made sanctification, and in whose
hearts the Holy Spirit has wrought principles of grace and holiness, and
who live holy lives and conversations; and it is insinuated, that should
he turn and took to these, he would find none of them like him, nor in
the same circumstances, nor of the same sentiments, or that would take
his part and plead for him; but that all to a man would appear of the
same mind with Eliphaz, that none but wicked men were afflicted by God
as he was, and that he was such an one, and that for the reason
following: the Papists very absurdly produce this passage in favour of
praying to departed saints, when not dead but living ones are meant, and
even turning to them is discouraged; and besides, this would contradict
another tenet of the Papists, that the Old Testament saints, until the
coming of Christ, were in a sort of purgatory, called Limbus Patrum, and
therefore incapable of helping saints on earth that should apply unto
them.

\(n\) "si est correspondens tibi", Bolducius. (o) "Ecce est qui
respondeat tibi", Schultens. (p) Sept. "obtueberis", Montanus;
"respicies", Vatablus, Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis.

[Job 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 5:2</span></span>

For wrath killeth the foolish man,.... Not one that is an idiot, and
destitute of common sense, and has no understanding in things natural
and civil; but a wicked man, who has no knowledge of things divine and
spiritual, and so foolish; which is the character of every natural man,
and of God's people before conversion; and even of some professors, who
are foolish virgins, and carry the lamp of a religious profession
without the oil of grace; and such an one Eliphaz took Job to be, whom
sooner or later the wrath of the Lord, as the Targum interprets it,
which is revealed from heaven, and comes down upon the children of
disobedience, would consume like devouring fire: or this may be
understood of the wrath and passion of such men themselves, which
sometimes rises in them to such an height, as that they die in a fit of
it; or do those things which bring them to death, either by the hand of
God, or by the civil magistrate:

and envy slayeth the silly one; one that is simple and void of
understanding, and is easily persuaded and drawn into sin, either by his
own heart, or by evil men, or by the temptations of Satan; and in whose
heart envy at the prosperity of others dwells, and which insensibly
preys upon him, eats up his own spirits, and is rottenness to his bones,
and crumbles them into dust, [Pro
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030); or the word may be rendered
"jealousy", or "zeal" (q), as it sometimes is, and may signify the
jealousy of the Lord, zeal for his own glory, which he sometimes stirs
up as a man of war, and which smokes against wicked men, and consumes
them as fire, see [Isa 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013); Eliphaz
by all this would represent and insinuate that Job was such a man, hot,
passionate, and angry with God and his providence, and envious at the
prosperity of others, particularly his friends; and so was a foolish and
silly man, in whose breast wrath and envy rested, and would be his ruin
and destruction, as he was already under slaying and killing
providences.

\(q\) "zelus", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt,
Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 5:3</span></span>

I have seen the foolish taking root,.... Such foolish wicked men as
before described; those Eliphaz had observed to prosper in the world,
and increase in riches, and even to have attained to a seeming stability
and firmness, as if they would ever continue in such happy
circumstances, see [Jer 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002); by this
he would obviate an objection that here might be raised and made against
the assertion he was proving, that wicked men are afflicted and punished
of God for their sins; whereas it is notorious that they are not in
trouble as other men, but in very prosperous and flourishing
circumstances; this he grants is their case for a while, as he had
observed, but in a short time they pass away, they and their substance
disappear, and are no more seen, as follows:

but suddenly I cursed his habitation; not that he wished ill to him, or
imprecated evils upon him; for cursing and bitterness only fit the
mouths of wicked men, and not good men, among whom Eliphaz must be
allowed to be; but he immediately thought within himself, as soon as he
saw the flourishing state of the wicked, that the curse of the Lord was
in their houses, as in [Pro 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033); that
they and all they had were under a curse, and that God find given them
what they had with a curse, and had cursed all their blessings; which
makes the difference between a good man and a wicked man; the one has
what he has, his cottage and his small substance, with a blessing; the
other his pleasant habitation, as the word (r) here used signifies, his
stately palace, rich furniture, and large estates, with a curse; or he
prognosticated, he foresaw, and could foretell, and that without
pretending to an extraordinary spirit of prophecy, that in a short time
the curse of God would light upon him, and upon his house, see [Zac
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003).

\(r\) "pulchritudini ejus", V. L. "commodam ejus", Cocceius; "amoenam",
Schultens.

[Job 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 5:4</span></span>

His children are far from safety,.... From outward safety, from evils
and dangers, to which they are liable and exposed, not only from men,
who hate them for their father's sake, who have been oppressors of them,
or from God, who visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children;
and from spiritual and eternal safety or "salvation", or from salvation
in the world to come, as the Targum, they treading in their fathers
steps, and imitating their actions:

and they are crushed in the gate; or openly, publicly, as Aben Ezra and
others; or in the courts of judicature whither they are brought by those
their parents had oppressed, and where they are cast, and have no favour
shown them; or literally by the falling of the gate upon them; and
perhaps some reference is had to Job's children being crushed in the
gate or door of the house, through which they endeavoured to get when it
fell upon them and destroyed them; the Targum is,"and are crushed in the
gates of hell, in the day of the great judgment:"

neither is there any to deliver them; neither God nor man, they having
no interest in either, or favour with, partly on account of their
father's ill behaviour, and partly on account of their own; and sad is
the case of men when it is such, see [Psa
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021).

[Job 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 5:5</span></span>

Whose harvest the hungry eateth up,.... This is to be understood of the
foolish rich man before described, as taking root and flourishing;
though he sows, and reaps and gathers in his harvest, and fancies he has
goods laid up for many years, to be enjoyed by him, yet he is taken away
by death, and another eats what he has gathered; either his hungry
heirs, that he has kept bare, and without the proper necessaries of
life; or the poor whom he has oppressed, who, driven by hunger, seize
upon his harvest, and eat it up, whether he be alive or dead: Sephorno
interprets this of the wicked man himself, who should eat up his own
harvest, and not have enough to satisfy him, the curse of God being upon
his land; and another learned interpreter (s) thinks the sense is, that
such should be the curse of God on the fields of wicked men, that they
should produce no more than what was usually left to the poor, and
therefore should have no need to gather it:

and taketh it even out of the thorns; that is, either the hungry man
takes the harvest out of the thorns, among which it grows, see [Mat
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007); or which he had gotten "through
the thorns", as Mr. Broughton renders it; that is, the owner, through
many difficulties; and hunger will break through many to get at it; or
though his harvest being got in, is enclosed with a thorn hedge, the
hungry man gets through it, and takes it out from it, surrounded by it;
the above mentioned Jewish writer understands this also of the wicked
man, who takes his own harvest out from among the thorns, so that there
is nothing left for the poor and his friends, as it is meet there
should: the word (t) for "thorns" has also the signification of armour,
particularly of shields; hence the Targum is,"and armed men with warlike
arms shall take it away;''to which agrees the Vulgate Latin version,"and
the armed men shall take it away;''that is, soldiers should forage,
spoil, and destroy it:

and the robber swalloweth up their substance; the house robber, who
breaks in and devours all at once, and makes a clear riddance of it;
some render it "the hairy man" (u) either that neglects his hair, as
beggars, or such that live in desert places, as robbers, that they may
appear the more terrible; or that take care of it, and nourish it, and
tie it up in locks, and behind their heads, as Bar Tzemach and Ben
Melech observe they do in Turkey; others translate it "the thirsty" (w),
and so it answers to the hungry in the preceding clause, and designs
such who thirst, and gape after, and covet the substance of others, and
greedily catch at it, and swallow it up at once, at one draught, as a
thirsty man does a large quantity of liquor, see [Pro
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012); this may have some respect to
the Sabeans and Chaldeans, that swallowed up Job's substance, and took
away his cattle from him at once, and were no other than bands of
robbers; and the use of the word for a thief or a robber, as we take it,
is confirmed by a learned man (x), who derives it from the Arabic word
which signifies to smite with a club or stone.

\(s\) Schmidt. (t) "de lanceis", Bolducius. "est et elypeus, umbo",
Codurcus. (u) "comatus", Cocceius, Schmidt; "horridus", Junius &
Tremellius. (w) Sitientes, V. L. "sitibundi", Montanus, Bolducius; so
Simeon Bar Tzemach. (x) Hinckelman. Praefat. ad Alcoran. p. 28, 29.

[Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 5:6</span></span>

Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust,.... Or rather, "for"
or "indeed" (y), this being a reason showing that wicked men are justly
afflicted and punished; seeing their afflictions come not from the
creatures, though they may be instruments, but from God for the sins of
men: the word for affliction also signifies iniquity or sin, the cause
of affliction, as well as affliction the fruit of sin; and so does the
word in the following clause; and Aben Ezra understands both, not of
natural but moral evil, and so do others (z); both senses may be taken
in: sin does not come from God, the Maker of the dust of the earth, he
is not the author of sin, nor does this spring out of the dust which he
has made; good things, as Schmidt observes, come out of the earth for
the use of man as well as beasts, bread, and wine, and oil, and all the
necessaries of life; the precious things produced by the influence of
the sun and moon, the precious things of the everlasting hills, and of
the earth, and the fulness of it; indeed, the earth was cursed for the
sin of men, but this is taken off; and, however, it is not owing to the
soil, or to the air and climate in which a man lives, that he is sinful;
for though there may be national vices or some sins peculiar to or more
predominant in one nation than in another, yet this is not to be
attributed to such causes; for all sin is from a man's self, and
proceeds out of his own evil heart, which is desperately wicked and evil
continually, and from whence all the impure streams of sin flow, see
[Mat 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019); and so afflictions are not
to be ascribed to second causes, such as the things before mentioned, or
Job's losses by the Sabeans and Chaldeans; nor did he place them to that
account, but to the hand of God; nor to chance and fortune, or to be
reckoned fortuitous events, as if they were chance productions,
spontaneous things that spring up of themselves, and not under the
direction of an all wise Providence; but they are to be considered as of
God, and as of his appointment, and directed by his sovereign will and
pleasure, and overruled for his glory; who has fixed what they shall be,
of what kind and sort, what the measure of them, to what pitch they
shall rise, and how long they shall last:

neither doth trouble spring out of the ground; the same thing as before
in different words, neither sin, the cause of trouble, the effect of
sin; sin may very fitly be expressed by a word (a) which signifies
trouble, because it is both troublesome, wearisome, and offensive to
God, and brings trouble to the bodies and souls of men here and
hereafter. Here Eliphaz begins to lower the tone of his voice, and to
speak to Job in a seemingly more kind and friendly manner, observing to
him the spring of afflictions, and giving him advice how to behave under
them.

\(y\) "quia", Pagninus, Montanus; "etenim", Beza, Mercerus; "nam",
Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis, Schultens; so Broughton; "sane",
Bolducius. (z) "iniquitas", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Bolducius,
Schmidt, Michaelis; "improbitas", Codurcus. (a) "perversitas", Pagninus;
"improbitas", Schultens.

[Job 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 5:7</span></span>

Yet man is born unto trouble,.... Or but (b), after the negative follows
the positive part of the assertion; before we have what is denied as the
cause of affliction, here what it is affirmed to be, or what it is to be
ascribed unto, even to the appointment of God for sin: to be born to it
is to be appointed to it, as all men are appointed to death, and to
everything previous and that leads on to it; and it signifies that
affliction or trouble springs from the birth sin of man, from original
sin, the sin of the first parent, and of his nature; as all sins arise
from hence, and are streams from this fountain of pollution, so all
disorders and diseases of body, all distresses and anguish of mind, and
death in every sense, corporeal, spiritual, and eternal; and these are
the lot and portion, the estate and inheritance, of the sons of men by
nature, what they are born unto, and are full of, see [Job
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001); the same word is here used as in
[Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006), and signifies labour,
mischief, the mischief of sin, improbity, wickedness, moral evil; and
man may be said to be born to sin, inasmuch as he is conceived, shapen,
and born in it; and as he is born at once into a sinful state, and sins
as soon as born, goes astray from the womb, is a transgressor from
thence, and the imagination of his heart evil from his infancy and youth
upwards, he becomes a slave to sin, and is a homeborn one; not that he
is laid under a necessity of force to sin, or his will compelled to it;
for he sins most freely, is a voluntary slave to it; he serves various
lusts as pleasures, and gives himself up to work all iniquity with
greediness; but there is such a connection between his birth, the
circumstances of it, and sin, that sin is the certain consequence of it,
and immediately, naturally, and necessarily follows upon it; that is, by
a necessity of consequence, though not of coaction or force; it is as
natural for man to sin as it is for a thirsty man to covet and drink
water; or as for an Ethiopian to be born black, and a leopard with
spots; or, as it follows:

as the sparks fly upward; which they do naturally and necessarily when
coals are blown, and which are here called "the sons of coals" (c); and
to these, troubles and afflictions, the fruits and effects of sin, may
be aptly compared; not only for the necessity of them, it is if needs be
they are, but for the nature of them, being fiery and troublesome, hence
called fiery trials, and signified by fires and flames of fire, [Pe1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012); and also for the number of them,
being many, and very grievous: some interpret this of flying fowls, of
young vultures, as the Septuagint; of young eagles, as others; Aben Ezra
makes mention of this sense, as if it was, as a fowl is born to fly, so
man is born to labour; to labour in the law, according to the Targum; or
to labour for his bread; or rather, to labour and sorrow; that is, to
affliction and trouble: a learned man (d) thinks the phrase, according
to the use of it in the Arabic language, designs the more rapid cast of
a dart, of the vibration of it, which is very quick.

\(b\) "sed", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius Schmidt, so
Broughton. (c) , "tilii prunae", Montanus, Vatablus, Piscator, Cocceius,
Bolducius, Schmidt. (d) Hinckelman. Praefat. ad Alcoran. p. 29. So
Schultens renders it, "tela corusea".

[Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 5:8</span></span>

I would seek unto God,.... Or "truly" (e), "certainly, doubtless, I do
seek unto God", verily I do so; for so the words are introduced in the
original text, and express what Eliphaz had done when under afflictions
himself; for he was not without them, though he had not them to such a
degree as Job had; and when he was under them, this was the course he
took; he sought unto God by prayer to support him under them, to
sanctify them to him, and to deliver him out of them; and this he
proposes for Job's imitation, and suggests, that if he was in his case,
this would be the first step he should take; and good advice this is,
nothing more proper for a man, especially a saint, than, when afflicted
of God, to seek unto him, to seek his face and his favour, to entreat
his gracious presence, and the discoveries of his love, that he may see
that it is not in wrath, but in love, he afflicts him; to submit unto
him, humble himself before him, acknowledge his sins, and implore his
pardoning grace and mercy; to entreat him to help him, in this time of
need, to exercise the graces of faith and patience, and every other; to
desire counsel and advice how to behave under the present trial, and to
be made acquainted with the reasons, ends, and uses of the dispensation,
as well as to beg for strength to bear up under it, and in his own time
to grant deliverance from it:

and unto God would I commit my cause; or "direct my word or speech" (f)
to him; that is, in prayer, as Sephorno adds; I would, as if he should
say, make known my case to him, tell him the whole of it, and pour out
my soul before him; and then I would leave it with him, and not wrangle,
quarrel, and contend with him, but say, "here am I, let him do what
seemeth good unto him": some render the words, "truly", or "indeed I
shall discourse concerning God, and order my speech about Deity" (g); I
shall no longer insist on this subject, but drop it, and hereafter treat
of God, his nature, being, and perfections, and particularly his works;
though these are rather observed in the following verses, as so many
arguments to engage Job to seek the Lord, and leave his case and cause
to him.

\(e\) "profecto", Junius & Tremellius; "enimvero", Piscator, Cocceius,
Schultens; "certe", Mercerus, Vatablus, Beza; "verum, enimvero",
Schmidt, Michaelis; so Broughton. (f) "ponam eloquium meum", V. L.
Pagninus, Montanus; "deponerem verba mea, i.e. dirigerem", Vatablus;
"dirigerem sermonem meum", Beza, Michaelis; "dispose my talk unto God",
Broughton. (g) "Enucleatius disseram de Deo, et de Numine instruam
sermocinationem meam", Schultens.

[Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 5:9</span></span>

Which doeth great things,.... The things of creation are great things,
the making of the heavens and the earth, and all therein, by the word of
the Almighty, out of nothing, and which is a display of great power,
wisdom, and goodness; the things of Providence are great things, which
God is always doing; as the upholding all things in being by the word of
his power, governing the whole universe, ordering all things in it,
supplying and feeding all creatures, men and beasts; and especially the
things of grace are great things, the covenant of grace, and its
blessings, redemption by Jesus Christ, the work of grace upon the heart,
the quickening and enlightening dead and dark sinners, taking away their
hearts of stone and giving them hearts of flesh, and constantly
supplying them with his grace for the finishing of it; the consideration
of all which is a great encouragement to seek the Lord in time of need,
as well as of what follows concerning them:

and unsearchable; the things of nature; many of them are such as puzzle
the greatest philosophers, who are not able, with all their sagacity and
penetration, to find out the causes and reasons of them; and in
providence the way of God is often in the deep, and is not to be tracked
and followed; and the dispensations of his grace to the sons of men are
so sovereign and distinguishing, that it made the apostle say, speaking
of them, "O the depth", &c. [Rom
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033); and there are some things not
to be inquired into, nor can they be searched out; secret things belong
to God, as his purposes relating to the eternal state of particular
persons, and the times and seasons of various future events, as the day
of judgment, &c.

marvellous things; in nature, as the formation of man and all creatures;
in providence, and it may be respect may be had to the wonders done in
Egypt, and the marvellous things in the field of Zoan, the plagues of
Egypt, and the deliverance of Israel, and their passage through the Red
sea; which were things done much about this time, or before it, as some
think, and of which Eliphaz might have heard, and were fresh in his
memory; and wonderful things are done in grace, as the effects of
marvellous loving kindness: and those

without number; the works of God are manifold, and not to be counted;
the stars of heaven, the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field, and
cattle on a thousand hills, the fishes of the sea, small and great, see
[Psa 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025); to which may be added,
those animalcules, of which a billion do not exceed the size of a small
grain of sand, as they may be seen through a microscope (h); the various
things done every day in providence, the special blessings of goodness,
and the kind thoughts of the heart of God, which, if one attempt to
reckon up, they are more than can be numbered, [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005).

\(h\) Leuwenhoeck apud Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 667.

[Job 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 5:10</span></span>

Who giveth rain upon the earth,.... Not upon the land of Israel only, as
the Targum and Jarchi, see [Deu 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011);
but upon the whole earth; this is particularly mentioned as being of
God, and which none of the vanities of the Gentiles can give; and it is
a free gift of his, which tarries not for the desert of men, and is
bestowed on the godly and ungodly; and is a great blessing of goodness,
which enriches the earth, makes it fruitful, and through it, it produces
plenty of good things for man and beast:

and sendeth water upon the fields; or "out places" (i); places outside
of cities and towns, such as gardens, fields, and deserts, where showers
of rain are sent of God to water them, many of which are not under the
care of man, but are under the providence of God; the Targum and Jarchi
interpret this of Gentile lands, as distinct from the land of Israel, to
whom God "gives" rain, and to the other "sends" it; some render it,
"upon the streets" (k), that is, upon persons that lie in the streets,
and have no houses to dwell in, and to whom rain in hot and dry
countries was welcome.

\(i\) "in geuere significat loca quae sunt foris", Piscator;
"exteriora", Mercerus; "open fields", Broughton; "faciem viarum", Beza.
(k) "Super faciem platearum", Pagninus, Mercerus, Boldueius, Cocceius,
Schultens; "super facies platearum", Montanus, Schmidt; "super plateas",
Vatablus, Michaelis.

[Job 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 5:11</span></span>

To set up on high those that be low,.... Not the low plants, which,
through rain, are made to run up on high, though there is a truth in
that; but husbandmen and gardeners, and such like persons, in low
circumstances, who, by means of showers of rain, which make their
gardens, fields, and lands fruitful, are raised to enjoy good estates,
and large possessions:

that those which mourn may be exalted to safety; or "are black" (l),
that are clothed in black, as a token of mourning; or whose faces are
black with famine, see [Lam 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008); or
are in very distressed circumstances, and black through poverty, as the
Targum, and mourn over and grieve at their sad and deplorable case;
those, through rain and fruitful seasons, are brought out of such an
uncomfortable situation, and put into a better condition of life, where
they are as in a fortress, out of the reach of such sad calamities: some
connect the words with the following, that in order to do this, to raise
up the humble and exalt mourners, "he disappoints the devices of the
crafty", &c. [Job 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012).

\(l\) "denigrati", Montanus, Bolducius; "atrati", Cocceius, Schmidt,
Michaelis; "pullati", Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus,
Beza; "sordidati", Schultens.

[Job 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 5:12</span></span>

He disappointeth the devices of the crafty,.... Or, "it disappointeth";
that is, the rain, as some Jewish commentators (m) interpret it, and the
whole paragraph to this sense; the rain coming upon the earth makes it
fruitful, and causes it to produce a plentiful crop, whereby the schemes
of crafty men are disappointed, who in a time of drought withhold the
corn, and enhance the price of it, and distress the poor; and this in
order to make a penny of them, according to [Amo
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004); but through the rain falling are
not able to gain their end, but are obliged to bring out their corn, and
sell it at a low price, and so are taken in their own craftiness; their
counsel becomes brutish, and they are brought into bad circumstances
themselves, and the poor saved from being ground and oppressed by them,
and have hope for the future of plenty of provisions, to the confusion
and astonishment of their oppressors: but the Targum interprets this of
the Egyptians cunningly devising mischief against the Israelites,
without success; and not amiss, since that affair might be well known to
Eliphaz, and he might have it in view: the fact was this, a new king of
Egypt, after the death of Joseph, observing the great increase of the
people of Israel in his dominions, and fearing, in case of a war, they
should join the enemy, and get out of the land by such an opportunity,
calls his nobles, courtiers, and counsellors together, to form some wise
schemes how to diminish them, [Exo
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008); and the first was to set
taskmasters over them, and afflict them with hard bondage, but this
succeeded not, [Exo 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011); for the more
they were afflicted the more they multiplied and grew; another decree
was, to order the midwives to kill the male children of the Israelites,
and save alive the females, [Exo 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015);
but the midwives, fearing God, obeyed not the order, and the people
still multiplied, [Exo 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#017); and then
a third project was formed, to cast every son born to the Israelites
into the river, and drown them, [Exo
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022); but notwithstanding this they
were preserved, as Moses, [Exo 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010),
and doubtless many others; the people increased so, that they went out
of Egypt six hundred thousand men, [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037); this was a recent thing, it may
be in the times of Eliphaz, and which he might easily call to mind: and
he might also have respect to a more remote case, that of the builders
of Babel, who devised a scheme to build a tower, whose top should reach
to heaven, and secure them from a dispersion of them throughout the
earth, [Gen 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001); when God descended
in the display of his power and providence, confounded their language,
so that they were obliged to desist from their enterprise, and were
scattered throughout the earth, which by their scheme they thought to
have prevented: this may be applied to wicked crafty men in common, who
devise schemes to commit sin, and gratify their lusts, to get for
themselves riches and honour, and to do mischief to others, which God in
his providence breaks, frustrates, and makes of none effect; and to
false teachers, that walk in craftiness, lie in wait to deceive, and
make use of cunningly devised fables, coin new doctrines, invent new
forms of worship, and appoint new ordinances, and contrive different
ways and methods of salvation; all which is foolishness with God, and to
such persons [Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013) is applied by
the Apostle Paul, [Co1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019), and this
may likewise respect wicked princes and potentates, with their
counsellors and wise politicians, who in former, as well as in later
times, have formed designs against their neighbours, and to the hurt of
the interest of true religion particularly; but have been baffled and
confounded by Divine Providence, of which, as there were many instances
in Israel of old, so in our British Isles of late:

so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise; what their heads
have contrived, what they have resolved and determined upon, and what
they have began to effect, but could not go on with; or, "bring it
soundly to pass", as Mr. Broughton renders it; that is, could not
complete it, or bring it to perfection; and indeed not able to do "any
thing" (n), as some translate the word, not anything of what they
devised and contrived: it signifies "that which is", which has a being
and substance, and solidity in it (o), but nothing of this kind could be
done; it is sometimes rendered "wisdom", and "sound wisdom", [Pro
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007); and so it is here by some (p),
and may signify, that though their counsels were deeply laid, and wisely
formed, according to the best rules of wisdom and prudence, they yet are
not able to bring them to pass; which shows the infinitely superior
wisdom of God, and his overruling providence, and which therefore must
be a great encouragement to seek unto him, and leave every cause and
case with him.

\(m\) Aben Ezra, Jarchi, & R. Simeon Bar Tzemach. (n) "quicquam",
Pagninus, Vatablus, Drusius, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "quicquam
rei", Cocceius, Michaelis; so Kimchi in Sepher Shorash, rad. (o)
"Consistentiam", Montanus; "nihil solidi", Tigurine version. (p)
"Sapientiam", Schmidt; so Aben Ezra & Syr. ver. "astu", Codurcus.

[Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 5:13</span></span>

He taketh the wise in their own craftiness,.... As beasts are taken in a
pit, or birds in a snare or net, or with birdlime; so these crafty men,
who are wise in their own opinion, and really so in things natural,
civil, and worldly, or however, to do evil are entangled and taken in
their own schemes; they fall into the pit they have digged for others,
and are snared in the works of their own hands, as Haman and his sons
were hanged on the gallows he prepared for Mordecai, [Est
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#010); or, "by their own craftiness"
(q), by the crafty schemes they themselves have formed: so sometimes
those very things crafty men design to prevent, are brought about by the
very means they make use of; thus Joseph's brethren designed to prevent
the accomplishment of his dreams, which portended their subjection to
him, [Gen 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009), by selling him to the
Ishmaelites, who carried him to Egypt, where, in process of time, he was
made governor of the land, and where his brethren became obedient to
him, [Gen 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006); with which fact
Eliphaz might be acquainted, it being not long before his time: so the
Jews, to prevent the Romans taking away their city and nation, contrived
to put Christ to death, and did, whereby they brought the wrath of God
upon them, executed by those very persons; the same they did also, to
prevent the spread of his fame and glory in the world, and that he might
not be believed on as the Saviour of men, whereas, hereby he became the
Saviour of them; and he a crucified Christ, being preached to the world
by his ministers, the savour of his knowledge has been diffused in every
place, his glory great in all the earth, and will be more so: the Targum
applies this to the wise men of Pharaoh, and the Apostle Paul to the
Jewish doctors and wise philosophers of the Gentiles, [Co1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019); which quotation proves the
authority of this book:

and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong: that is, the counsel
or well contrived schemes of the crafty and wise before mentioned, who
twist and wind about, as the word (r) here used signifies, that there is
no tracing their measures, and finding out the spring of them, nor the
ends they have in view; yet these are sometimes carried on to execution
in a rash and precipitate manner, and so miscarry; and like a man that
is had to a precipice, and is thrown down from thence, and is destroyed
at once, so are their counsels and schemes dashed to pieces by the
providence of God: or, "is hastened" (s); too much haste is made to
accomplish it, and so it comes to nought, through an over eagerness to
have it done at once; not waiting a fit opportunity for the
accomplishment of it.

\(q\) "per suam ipsorum astutiam", Schultens. (r) "intorquentium",
Schmidt; "tortuosorum", Schultens. (s) "festinata, ab origine
festinandi", Schultens.

[Job 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 5:14</span></span>

They meet with darkness in the daytime,.... Which may denote their
infatuation in things the most plain and clear, and which are obvious to
everyone's view, even to such as are of much meaner capacities the
themselves; and so it sometimes is, that the greatest politicians, men
of the greatest sagacity and penetration, capable of forming and
conducting the wisest counsels, yet blunder in things plain and easy to
everyone; which must be imputed to their being given up to a judicial
blindness of mind by the Lord, who destroys the wisdom of the wise, and
brings to nothing the understanding of the prudent; or this may signify
the defeat of their counsels, when they are in the highest pitch of
esteem among men, as Ahithophel's counsel was as the oracle of God; or
the destruction of such persons and their schemes when they are in the
meridian of their glory, who being in high and slippery places, come to
desolation in a moment:

and grope in the noon day as in the night; which intends the same as
before; this was threatened to the Jews in case of disobedience, and was
fulfilled in them, [Deu 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029); a
learned man renders it, "as the night they grope", or "feel, at noon
day" (t); as the Egyptians felt darkness when it was noon, and when
light was in all the dwellings of the Israelites, [Exo
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#022); this may be applied to the case
of many in a land of Gospel light, who are in darkness, walk in
darkness, and are darkness itself; though the light of the glorious
Gospel shines all around them on others, and know no more of divine and
spiritual things than the Gentiles, but grope or feel about like persons
blind, and in the dark as much as they, [Act
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027); nay, they not only have the
great things of the Gospel hid from them, and Satan blinds their minds
lest this light should shine into them, but "they run into darkness"
(u), as the words of the first clause may be rendered; those
"lucifugae", such as the Jews were, and the Deists now are run from the
light of divine revelation, and love darkness, and which is the
aggravation of their condemnation, [Joh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019).

\(t\) "tanquam noctum palpant", Schultens. (u) "incurrent", V. L.
"incurrunt", Vatablus, Mercerus.

[Job 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 5:15</span></span>

But he saveth the poor,.... Who are so in a literal sense, and whom the
Lord saves with a temporal salvation; these being the butt of the
crafty, wise, and cunning, on whom their eyes are, for whom they lay
snares, and lie in wait to draw them in; and these being helpless and
without friends, God takes notice of them, appears for them, and arises
for their help, and saves them:

from the sword; of their enemies, drawn against them and ready to be
sheathed in them:

from their mouth; from their reproaches, calumnies, detraction, and evil
speaking; or "from the sword, their mouth" (w), as some; or "from the
sword of their mouth" (x), as others; or which comes out of it; whose
mouths and tongues are as sharp swords, which destroy their credit and
reputation, and threaten them with ruin; the Targum is,"from the
slaughter of their mouth:"

and from the hand of the mighty; their mighty enemies, that, are
mightier than they; the Targum is,"from the hand of a mighty king;''such
an one as Pharaoh, which the same paraphrase makes mention of in [Job
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#014), and from whom the poor
Israelites were delivered: this may be applied to the poor in a
spiritual sense, who are poor in spirit, and are sensible of their
spiritual poverty, whom the Lord looks unto, has a regard for, and saves
them from "the sword" of avenging justice; that being awaked against the
man, his fellow, and so warded off from them, and from the mouth of a
cursing and condemning law, and from Satan the accuser of the brethren;
and of wicked men, whose tongue rising up in judgment against them, he
condemns; and from the "hand" of Satan the strong man armed, and who is
stronger than they; and of all their spiritual enemies.

\(w\) So some in Michaelis. (x) "A gladio oris eorum", V. L. "a gladio
qui ex ore eorum", De Dieu, Schultens.

[Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 5:16</span></span>

So the poor hath hope,.... Who observing this and that and the other
poor man crying to the Lord and saved, hopes that he may be saved by him
also; and having had experience of salvation out of one trouble or more,
even out of six troubles, as in [Job
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019), entertains a comfortable hope he
shall be saved out of the seventh, or whatsoever he is in: the word (y)
used signifies one that is weak and feeble, attenuated, and exhausted of
his strength, wealth, and substance; and may be applied to one
spiritually poor, and in a very destitute and forlorn condition in
himself; and yet, through the revelation of the grace and mercy of God
to him, has hope of safety in Christ, the strong hold and hope set
before him to flee unto; and of salvation by him, it being in him, and
for the chief of sinners, and altogether free; and of eternal life
through him, as being promised of God, that cannot lie: the free gift of
God through Christ, and in his hands to dispose of:

and iniquity stoppeth her mouth: that is, iniquitous men: very wicked
men, who are iniquity and wickedness itself; these shall stop their
mouths, through shame at what they have said concerning the poor that
God saves, see [Mic 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009); and through
admiration at the goodness of God in saving them, [Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015); having nothing to say against
the ways and dispensations of Divine Providence, they are apt to quarrel
with, [Psa 107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040); and especially at
the last day such shall have their mouths stopped, and shall not be able
to open them against the Lord or his people, being convinced of their
hard speeches which they have spoken against them, [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015); and will be like the man at the
feast without a wedding garment, speechless, or muzzled, and his mouth
stopped, [Mat 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#012).

\(y\) "tenai", Montanus, Vatablus, Junius, Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius.

[Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 5:17</span></span>

Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth,.... Reproves, rebukes,
convinces by his word, which is profitable for correction of men's minds
and manners; and by his messengers, the prophets and ministers, who are
sent as reprovers of the people, and to rebuke them sharply, that they
may be sound in their principles, and sober in their conversation; and
by his Spirit, which makes the correction of the word and ministers
effectual, and who reproves and convinces of sin, righteousness, and
judgment; and sometimes this is done by afflictive providences, by blows
as well as words, which are the rod of correction God makes use of with
his children; for this is not the correction of a judge reproving,
condemning, and chastising malefactors and criminals, but of a father
correcting his children, in love, in judgment, and in measure, for
faults committed; [Pro 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012); so God's
corrections are for sin, to bring his people to a sense of it, to
humiliation and repentance for it, and to an acknowledgment of it; and
often for remissness in duty, private or public, and when they set too
high a value on the creature, and creature enjoyments, trust in them,
and glory of them, to the neglect of the best things: now such persons
are happy who are corrected by God in this manner; for these corrections
are fruits and evidences of the love of God to them, and of their
relation to God as children; he grants them his presence in them, he
sympathizes with them, supplies and supports them under them, and
delivers out of them; he makes them work for their good, spiritual and
eternal; by these he prevents and purges sin, tries and brightens their
graces; makes them more partakers of his holiness; weans them from this
world, and fits them for another: and this account is introduced with a
"behold", as a note of attention, exciting it in Job and others; thereby
suggesting that it was worthy of notice and regard, and a matter of
moment and importance; and as a note of admiration, it being a wonderful
thing, a mere paradox with natural men especially, and contrary to all
their notions and things, that an afflicted man should be a happy man,
who generally reckon good men to be unhappy men, because of their
afflictions, reproaches, and persecutions; and as a note of
asseveration, affirming the truth and certainty of the assertion, and
which is confirmed by after testimonies, and by the experience of the
saints, [Psa 94:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019); the Targum
restrains this to Abraham; but it is true of every good man whom God
afflicts in a fatherly way:

therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty; who is able
to save and to destroy to take off his hand, or lay it heavier it not
regarded, to bear up his people under all their afflictions, or to
deliver them out of them; or of Shaddai (z), God all sufficient, who has
a sufficiency in himself, and needs not anything from his creatures;
whose grace is sufficient for his people, to supply them in all their
straits and difficulties; or of him who is all nourishing, who has
breasts of consolation to draw out to his people in distress, the word
(a) used coming from one that signifies a pap, or breast, as some think;
hence mention is made of the blessings of the breast, when he is spoken
of under this character, [Gen 49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025);
now this chastising of his is not to be understood of chastisement in a
way of vindictive wrath and justice, and as a proper punishment for sin,
for this is laid on Christ, the surety of his people, [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005); and to inflict this on them
would be a depreciating the satisfaction of Christ, be contrary to the
justice of God, and to his everlasting and unchangeable love; but this
is the chastening of a father, and in love, and for the good of his
people, in when he deals with them as with children: the word signifies
"instruction" (b); affliction is a school of instruction, in which the
saints learn much of the mind and will of God, and more of his love,
grace, and kindness to them; and are enriched with a larger experience
of divine and spiritual things: and therefore such chastening should not
be "despised" or rejected as nauseous and loathsome, as the word
signifies: indeed no affliction is joyous; the bread of affliction, and
water of adversity, are not palatable or grateful to flesh and blood;
yea, are even a bitter and disagreeable potion, as the cup of sorrow was
to the human nature of Christ; but yet should not be rejected, but
drank, for the same reason he gives, it being the cup given by his
heavenly Father, ; nor should it be despised as useless and
unprofitable, as the word is used in [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022); seeing afflictions are of
great use for humiliation for sin, for the increase of grace and
holiness; the chastening of the Father of spirits is for profit now, and
works a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, [Heb
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#010); this passage seems to be
referred to by Solomon, [Pro 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011); and
is quoted by the apostle, in [Heb
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005); where he uses a word (c) by
which he translates this, which signifies to "make little of"; and as on
the one hand afflictions should not be magnified too much, as if there
were none, nor ever had been any but them; so, on the other hand, they
should not be slighted and overlooked, and no notice taken of them, as
if they were trifling and insignificant, and answered no end or purpose;
the hand of God should be observed in them, and acknowledged; and men
should humble themselves under his mighty hand, and quietly and
patiently bear it; and, instead of despising, should bless him for it,
it being for their good, and many salutary ends being answered by it.

\(z\) Symmachus; Saddai, Montanus, Drusius; "omnisufficientis",
Cocceius. (a) "Alii a mamma deducunt quae" Ebraeis, "q. mammosum dieas,
quod omnia alat", Drusius. (b) Sept. "eruditionem", Cocceius. (c)

[Job 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 5:18</span></span>

For he maketh sore, and bindeth up,.... Or, "though he maketh sore, yet
he bindeth up" (d); as a surgeon, who makes a wound the sorer by probing
and opening it, to let out the matter and make way for his medicine, and
then lays on the plaster, and binds it up: so God causes grief and puts
his people to pain, by diseases of body, or by making breaches in, their
families and estates, and such like cutting providences; and then he
binds up their breach, and heals the stroke of their wound, and in the
issue makes all whole again: so in spiritual things; he cuts and wounds,
and gives pain and uneasiness, by the sharp twoedged sword of the word,
and by his Spirit making use of it; and lays open all the corruption of
nature, and brings to repentance and humiliation for all transgressions;
and then pours in the oil and wine of pardoning grace and mercy, and
binds up the wounds that are made:

he woundeth, and his hands make whole; or "heal" (e); the same thing is
meant, expressed by different words; and the whole suggests, that every
afflicted man, and particularly Job, should he behave well, and as he
ought, under the afflicting hand of God, would be healed, and become
sound and whole again, in body, mind, family, and estate; for, though
God for the present caused grief, yet he would have compassion, since he
did not willingly grieve the children of men; did not do it for his own
pleasure, but for their good; as a skilful surgeon cuts and wounds in
order to heal; see [Deu 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039).

\(d\) Assembly's Annotations. (e) "sanabunt", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus,
&c.

[Job 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 5:19</span></span>

He shall deliver thee in six troubles,.... Behaving as before directed;
seeking unto God, committing his cause and case to him, and leaving it
with him; and not despising the chastening of the Lord, but receiving
and bearing it with reverence, patience, and submission: and then the
sense is, that God would deliver out of whatsoever troubles he was or
should be in, though they were ever so many; a certain number being put
for an uncertain one, [Psa 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019),

yea, seven there shall no evil touch thee; which is a number expressive
of multitude and of perfection, and so may denote the multitude and
fulness of afflictions: the tribulations of God's people are many,
through which they pass to heaven, and there is a measure of them to be
filled up; and when they are come to the height, and the measure is
fully up, then the Lord puts a stop to them, and delivers out of all
their troubles; and in the midst of them all, so preserves them, that
"no evil" shall so much as "touch" them; not the evil of punishment;
for, though those troubles and afflictions that attend them are evil
things, in a natural or civil sense, they are disagreeable and
distressing, yet they are not the effect of vindictive justice; there is
not a drop wrath and vengeance in them; and though they do come upon
them and unto them, upon their persons and families; yet not so as to do
any real hurt, or as to destroy them; see [Psa
91:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#010); some think that seven
particular troubles are meant, hereafter mentioned, as Jarchi; as
famine, war, an evil tongue, destruction, dearness of provision, the
beasts of the earth, and the stones of the field.

[Job 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 5:20</span></span>

In famine he shall redeem thee from death,.... In a time of extreme want
of provisions, God so cares for his own dear people, that they shall not
be starved to death by the famine; so in the famine in Egypt, which the
Targum takes notice of, in the times of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob, and the patriarchs, there was food provided for them, so that
they and their families were sustained, and perished not for lack of the
necessaries of life: God sometimes goes out of his ordinary way, and
works wonders for his poor and needy in distress, when they cry unto
him; see [Isa 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#017),

and in war from the power of the sword; or, "from the hands of the
sword" (f): from swords in hand, when drawn, and men are ready to push
with them with all their force; as he delivered and preserved Abraham
from the sword of the four kings, when he waged war with them, [Gen
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#020); and the Israelites, in the war
of Amalek, in the times of Moses, [Exo
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008), which the Targum here refers to;
and David from the harmful sword of Goliath, [Sa1
17:46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#046), and others with whom he was
concerned in war: and so the Lord covers the heads of his people in the
day of battle oftentimes, when multitudes fall on their right hand and
on their left.

\(f\) "de manu gladii", V. L. "e manibus gladii", Pagninus & Montanus,
&c.

[Job 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 5:21</span></span>

Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue,.... Of Satan, as
Jarchi, the accuser of the brethren; or rather from the evil tongue of
wicked men, their slanders, calumnies, and reproaches; the tongue is a
small weapon, but it is a cutting one; it is like a scourge or whip,
with which wicked men strike hard: the enemies of Jeremiah encouraged
one another to smite him with their tongue, [Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018); and a sad thing it is to be
under the lash of some men's tongues, and a great mercy it is to be
delivered from them: God does sometimes hide his people, and keeps them
secretly, as in a pavilion, from the strife of tongues; [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020); he either restrains the tongues
of men, lays an embargo on them, and will not suffer them to say that
evil of his people which Satan and their wicked hearts prompt them to;
or, if they are suffered to defame and speak evil of good men, yet they
do it in such a romantic way, and so overcharge and load it, that it is
not credited by any what they say, even by those of their own party; so
that the characters of God's people suffer not by their lies and
calumnies: some render it, "when the tongue wanders about" (g); walks
through the earth, and spares none, all ranks and degrees of men; God
hides his people from being hurt by it, see [Psa
73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009); Aben Ezra interprets the word
rendered "tongue" of a nation or people; and so it may be understood of
one nation entering into another, passing through it, and making
desolations in it; as the Scythians, Gauls, Goths, Huns, and Vandals,
have done in different ages; and that, in such a time of calamity, God
has his hiding places in Providence for the protection and safety of his
people: but the Targum interprets it of an evil tongue, and particularly
of the tongue of Balaam:

neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh: meaning
either of pestilence, which is the destruction that wastes at noonday,
[Psa 91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006); which, when it comes into a
nation or neighbourhood, shall not come nigh the good man, and infect
him; or if it does, shall not carry him off; and if it does that, it
carries him home to heaven and happiness, and therefore he has no reason
to be afraid of it: or of a general calamity; as when there is a
complication of judgments in a nation, or in the world in general, as
war, famine, pestilence, earthquakes, &c. as if all were just falling to
pieces and into ruin; and yet even then the saints have no cause to
fear; see [Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001); or the
destruction of the whole world at the last day, when the heavens and
earth, and all therein, shall be burnt up: for then good and righteous
men will be safe with Christ, and dwell with him in the new heavens and
the new earth, which shall be prepared for them; see [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); the Targum refers this to the
destruction of the Midianites.

\(g\) "dum pervagabitur", Vatablus; "quum grassatur", Cocceius,
Godurcus; "grassabitur", Grotius; so Aben Ezra and Ben Gersom, and R.
Jonah, in Ben Melech.

[Job 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 5:22</span></span>

At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh,.... Not deride and despise
them, and make a jest of them; for good men have a reverence and awe of
the righteous judgments of God upon them, when they are in the world,
[Psa 119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120); but the sense is, that
such shall reckon themselves safe and secure amidst such calamities,
provision being made for their protection and sustenance; and be
cheerful and comfortable, putting their trust and confidence in the
Lord, as Habakkuk was, in a time of great distress, when all the
necessaries of life were cut off from the stall, the herds, the flocks,
and the fields; [Hab 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017); just as a
man that is in a good harbour, or has a good house over his head, laughs
at blustering storms and winds (h), or thinks himself secure, and so is
cheerful and pleasant amidst all the noise that is about him, see [Hab
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#010),

neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth; either,
literally taken, beasts of prey, that wander about in the earth, noisome
and pernicious ones; which are one of God's sore judgments which he
threatens the disobedient with, and promises the obedient he will rid
them of; and therefore they have no reason to be afraid of them, see
[Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021); some think serpents are
particularly designed, which creep upon the earth, and whose, food is
the dust of the earth, with all other poisonous animals, between which
and men there is an antipathy; and yet good men need not be afraid of
these; see [Mar 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018); or
figuratively, cruel and barbarous men, thieves and robbers, as Jarchi;
or rather fierce and furious persecutors, and particularly the beasts of
Rome, Pagan and Papal; though the literal sense is to be preferred; the
Targum interprets this of the camp of Og, comparable to the beasts of
the earth.

\(h\) "Ridebis ventos hoc munere teetus et imbres", Martial.

[Job 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 5:23</span></span>

For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field,.... So as to
receive no hurt from them, by walking among them, and even barefoot,
which was usual in the eastern countries, see [Psa
91:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#012); or by their being in the field,
so as to hinder the increase of them; but on the contrary, even from
such fields as were stony ground, a large crop has been produced, and so
rather receive benefit by them, as men do from those with whom they are
in league; and may therefore likewise signify, that these stones should
be useful in being boundaries or fences about their fields, and
landmarks in them, which should not be removed: many interpreters take
notice of a sense that Pineda gives of these words, and which Cocceius
calls an ingenious one, that it refers to a custom in Arabia, which may
be called Scopelism, and was this; a man's enemies would lay stones in
his field, and these signified, that if any attempted to till and manure
those grounds where they were laid, some evil would befall him by the
means of those persons who laid the stones there; and which stones were
thought to be ominous and formidable; something like it is in [Kg2
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019); and so the sense is, that a good
man had nothing to fear from such stones, he being in league with them;
and this malicious practice is thought to have had its origin in Arabia
Petraea (i); but the first sense seems best:

and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee; a covenant
being made with them, as in [Hos 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018);
meaning either literally, the beasts of the field; and these either the
same as before, wild beasts, or beasts of prey; or rather, in
distinction from them, tame beasts, as cows and horses, which should be
so far from doing any harm, as sometimes is done by these tame
creatures, that they should be very serviceable in tilling fields and
drawing carriages, and the like: or else figuratively, men comparable to
such creatures; and so the sense may be, that when a man's ways please
the Lord, and he behaves according to his mind and will, particularly
under afflictions, even his enemies are made to be at peace with him;
[Pro 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007); the Targum interprets this
of the Canaanites, comparable to the beasts of the field.

\(i\) See Egmont and Heyman's Travels, vol. 2. p. 156.

[Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 5:24</span></span>

And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace,.... Not a
place of religious worship, though the Targum renders it an house of
doctrine or instruction; for we read not of any such but the tabernacle
of Moses, erected in the wilderness, and which was indeed about, or
little after, the times of Job; but it cannot be reasonably thought he
did or could attend there; nor the tabernacle of his body, now in great
pain and anguish, in which there were no rest nor soundness, being
filled with sore boils and burning ulcers; but his dwelling house, which
was built as a tent or tabernacle: such were the houses of the eastern
people, made to move from place to place, for the sake of pasturage for
their flocks and herds, in which their wealth consisted; so Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, dwelt in tabernacles; and hence in later times more
firm, fixed, and stable dwellings, were so called; David calls his
palace the tabernacle of his house, [Psa
132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003); though this also includes all
that dwelt in his house, his family; and the meaning is, that should he
behave aright under the afflicting hand of God, his family should live
in concord, harmony, and love; there should be no discord, animosity,
and contention among them, but they should be at peace and in unity
among themselves; as indeed Job's children were while he had them, and
before this calamity came upon him; and that also they should be secure
from enemies, and dwell unmolested by them; and be in the utmost safety,
enjoying all kind of prosperity, inward and outward, temporal and
spiritual; which the word peace includes, as used in eastern countries,
whose common salutation was, "peace be with thee"; thereby wishing all
kind of happiness: or the words may be rendered, "peace shall be thy
tabernacle" (i) as is a good man's tabernacle: he dwells in God, who is
all love, all peace, in whom there is no wrath or fury; he dwells by
faith in Christ, who is his peace, his peace maker, and peace giver; and
in whom he has peace amidst all the tribulation he meets with in the
world; the peace of God, which passes all understanding, keeps and
guards him in Christ, as in a garrison, safe and secure; and he enjoys
much peace, as the fruit of the Spirit, arising from a view of interest
in the blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of Christ; and when he dies
he enters into peace, and dwells and abides in it as his everlasting
mansion, [Isa 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002); now all this,
Eliphaz says, Job, behaving well, should know; that is, have an
experience of it; should really enjoy it, and find it in fact true what
he asserted:

and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin; meaning not his
wife, as some interpreters, Jewish and Christian, understand it; and so
in the Talmud (k), the word being rendered "she that tarried at home",
[Psa 68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012); which is a description of
a good housewife, that keeps at home and minds the affairs of her
family; but rather it designs the same as his tabernacle in the
preceding clause, his dwelling house, and signifies a fine, fair, and
beautiful one; a spacious and goodly building, and well stored with rich
household goods; and including his family also: and to "visit" this is
to take care of his family, rule and govern them well, protect and
defend them, and provide all things necessary for them; as well as to
inspect into the affairs of his house, inquire, examine, and see how
things are managed; to know the state, condition, and circumstances it
is in; which is looking well to the ways of his household: and this he
should do, and "not sin"; not that a man, even a good man, can so
conduct himself always in his family as not to be guilty of any sin at
all, but not of sin in common, or continually; at least not any gross
and notorious ones: the sense is, that he should not sin himself, while
making such a visit and inquiry, by an undue heat, excessive anger, by
rash and passionate expressions, things not being entirely to his mind;
or be the cause of sin in others, by provoking his children to wrath, by
threatening and menacing his servants in a severe, boisterous, and
blustering manner; but reproving both, as there may be occasion, in a
mild and gentle way; or else not sin by conniving at it and not
correcting for it, which was the fault of Eli: Ben Gersom thinks Eliphaz
tacitly suggests, and strikes at, Job's indulgence to his children; and
so Sephorno: the word used having the signification of wandering and
straying, some take the sense to be this; that he should have a sure and
certain dwelling place to come into, and abide in, and should not wander
about (l), or be as a stroller and vagabond in the earth: though this
has sometimes been the case of good men; as of the godly in the times of
the Maccabees, who wandered in deserts and mountains, in caves and dens
of the earth; and even of the disciples of Christ, who had no certain
dwelling place; yea, of Christ himself, who had not where to lay his
head: rather, since the word signifies to miss the mark, and so be
disappointed; in which sense it is used in [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016); the sense may be, that when he
visited his habitation he should find nothing amiss or wanting, but
everything should answer his expectations and wishes, so Aben Ezra; and
Mr. Broughton renders it, "shalt not misprosper"; and others, "shalt no
be frustrated" (m); balked, disappointed of thine ends and views,
designs, hopes, and wishes.

\(i\) "quod pax tentorium tuum", Montanus, Bolducius; so Cocceius,
Schmidt, Schultens. (k) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 34. 1. Yebamot, fol. 62. 2.
& 63. 1. Sanhedrin, fol. 76. 2. (l) "non errabis, i.e. non eris erro et
palans", Codurcus; "non aberrabis", Beza, Piscator, Cocceius. (m) "Nec
votis frustrabere", Schultens.

[Job 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 5:25</span></span>

Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great,.... Not his seed sown
in the earth, and the increase of that, but his children, as the next
clause explains it, as Bar Tzemach well observes; and designs either
their greatness in worldly things, in wealth and riches, in honour and
dignity, in power and authority, or else their numbers; for the word may
be rendered "much" or "many" (n), a multitude of children being reckoned
a great temporal blessing; but this seems rather intended in the
following words:

and thine offspring as the grass of the earth; as numerous as the spires
of grass, which can no more be told than the stars of the heavens, or
the sand of the sea, by which the same thing, a numerous progeny, is
sometimes illustrated: this is to be understood not of his immediate
offspring, but his descendants in successive ages and generations, and
which should be as beautiful as the grass of the earth when in its
verdure; pointing at the comeliness of their persons, their honour and
dignity raised unto, the largeness of their substance, the greatness of
their prosperity, and flourishing circumstances they should be in;
though it may also denote the original of them, amidst all, being of the
earth and earthy, and their frailty and fading condition; for which
reason all flesh is said to be as grass, and men are frequently compared
unto it, see [Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005).

\(n\) "multum", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Mercerus, Piscator,
Schmidt, Michaelis.

[Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 5:26</span></span>

Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age,.... Or, "go into thy grave"
(o), which is represented as a house to enter into and dwell in; and so
the wise man calls it man's long home, and Job his house, and which is
appointed for all living, [Ecc 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#005);
for all men must die, and so come to the grave, good men as well as bad,
the righteous and the wicked: this is not to be understood literally,
for the dead cannot go or come to their graves, but are carried thither,
as Stephen was, and all are; but it denotes their willingness to die,
who choose to be absent from the body, that they may be present with the
Lord, and are desirous to depart this world, and be with him, as the
Apostle Paul was; and therefore cheerfully give up the ghost, and resign
their souls into the hands of Christ, desiring him to receive them; and
rejoice when they observe the grave is near, and ready for them; while
others have their souls demanded and required of them, and are forced to
death and the grave against their wills, and are driven away in their
wickedness: now this, with respect to good men, is said to be "in a full
age", not "in abundance", as the Vulgate Latin version, in an abundance
or fulness of wealth and honour, and with great pomp and splendour,
which is not the case of all good men, but of very few; nor in the full
time which God has determined and appointed men should live, which may
be called "the fulness of time"; for in this every man comes to the
grave, good and bad, young and old; no man dies before or lives beyond
it, see [Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005) but in the full age
of men or the common term of man's life; the highest which he usually
attains unto, which is threescore years and ten, and at most fourscore,
[Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010); and such who die before
this are said to die before their time, the usual term of life; who die
before the midst of this, are said not to live out half their days, [Ecc
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#017); but he that arrives to this dies
in a good old age, and has filled up his days, which men, at most,
ordinarily live: Mr. Broughton renders it, "in lusty old age", enjoying
great health, strength, and vigour; and so Nachmanides takes the word to
be compounded of "as", and "moist", lively, strong, and lusty; as if the
sense was, that Job should die indeed in old age, but, when old, be as
hearty as a young man in his full strength, and whose bones are
moistened with marrow; as was the case of Moses, whose eyes were not
dim, nor his natural force or radical moisture abated, [Deu
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007); but the word denotes extreme
decrepit old age (p), coming from the root in the Arabic language, which
signifies to be of an austere, rugged, wrinkled, contracted countenance
(q), which is usually the case of old men: now this is to be understood,
not as if every good than arrives to such an age, or that none but good
men do; for certain it is, that some good persons, as Abijah, die in
their youth, and many wicked men live to a great age, see [Ecc
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015); but Eliphaz here speaks suitably
to the legal dispensation under which he was, in which temporal
blessings were promised to good men, as shadows of spiritual things, and
this of long life was a principal one, see [Psa
91:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#016); this is illustrated by the
following simile:

like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season; there is a very great
resemblance between ripe corn and old age; corn, when it is in its full
ear, and ripe, its ears will hang down; the stalks, being dry and
withered, are weak, and not able to bear the weight of them; so old men
stoop, their knees bend, the strong men bow themselves, being unable to
bear the weight of the body; fields of corn, ripe for the harvest, look
white, and so the hairs of a man's head in old age; the almond tree
flourishes, which, when in full bloom, is a lively emblem of the hoary
head: and there is a great likeness between ripe corn, and shocks and
sheaves of it, and a good old man; a good man is comparable to a corn of
wheat that falls into the ground, to which Christ compares himself, [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024); and to wheat the compares his
saints, [Mat 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030); for their
choiceness, excellency, purity, and solidity; and these, like a corn of
wheat, grow up gradually in grace, in spiritual light, knowledge, faith,
and experience, and at length come to maturity; the good work is
performed and perfected in them, and they come to the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ; and then they are cut down with the
scythe or sickle of death, which is the proper time, like corn "in his
season"; which, if cut before it is ripe, would not be fit for use, and,
if it stood longer, would shed and come to nothing: and then, as corn,
when cut down and reaped, is put up in shocks and sheaves, which are
lifted up from the earth, and made to "ascend", as the word (r)
signifies, and are laid in carts and wagons, and carried home with
expressions of joy, (hence we read of the joy of harvest,) and are laid
up in the barn or granary; so the saints are carried by angels, the
reapers, into Abraham's bosom, as Lazarus was, into heaven, and as all
the elect will be gathered by the angels at the harvest, the end of the
world; attended with their shouts and acclamations, and with expressions
of joy from Gospel ministers, who now go forth bearing the precious seed
of the word, and sow it in tears, but then shall return with joy,
bringing their sheaves with them, see [Mat
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030).

\(o\) "ingredieris in sepulchrum", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus,
Drusius, Michaelis; "intrabis ad tumulum", Schultens. (p) "in summa
senectute", Michaelis; "in decrepita senectue", Schultens. (q) p. 232.
"austero et tetrico (corrugato) vultu fuit", Golius, col. 2057. Castell.
col. 1733. So Hinckelman. Praefat. ad Alcoran. p. 29. Hottinger. Smegina
Oriental. l. 1. c. 7. p. 162. Thesaur. Philolog. l. 2. c. 1. p. 507,
508. (r) "sicut ascendere", Montanus, Bolducius, Schmidt, Michaelis;
"sicut ascendit", Pagninus, Mercerus.

[Job 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 5:27</span></span>

Lo this, we have searched it,.... This is the concluding part of
Eliphaz's first oration or speech to Job; and in order to engage his
attention to it, observes, that what he had said was not his own single
opinion, but the sentiment of the rest of his friends; and that it was
the result of laborious and diligent investigation; that they had
searched the records of former times, and inquired of ancient people, as
well as had made the strictest observations on things during their
course of life;

so it is; and the sum and amount of all was what he had declared, and
which they had found to be sure and certain, the truth of the matter;
that it is an undoubted truth, which should not be disputed and called
in question, but to be held as a first principle, which was this; that
wicked men are punished for their sins, and that good men are never
greatly afflicted, at least not to such a degree as to be stripped of
all the necessaries of life, and to be in a most desolate and perishing
condition; and since this had been so thoroughly investigated by them,
and such "a probatum est" was written upon it, he exhorts Job to

hear it; agree to it, believe it, receive it, and make a proper use of
it, as he hoped he would:

and know thou it for thy good; or "for thyself" (s); take it to thyself,
as belonging to thee, as suitable to thy case; apply it to thyself,
learn some lessons from it, and make good use of it; which is what is
proposed by all that has been said.

\(s\) "scito tibi", Montanus, Mercerus, &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 6](job006)

</div>
