<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](luk024)  [Next](joh001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOHN

The author of this Gospel is John, the son of Zebedee and Salome, the
brother of James the greater; he outlived the rest of the disciples, and
wrote this Gospel after the other evangelists; and in it many things are
recorded, which are not in the other Gospels; as various discourses of
Christ, and miracles done by him; several incidents in his life, and
circumstances that attended his sufferings and death: the occasion of it
is generally thought to be the errors of Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied
the divinity of Christ, asserted he was a mere man, and that he did not
exist before his incarnation; and the design of it is to confute them:
and it is easy to observe, that he begins his Gospel with the divinity
of Christ; asserts him to be God, and proves him to be truly and
properly so, by the works of creation, which were wrought by him, as
well as shows that he was really man. Clemens (a) calls this Gospel of
John, pneumatikon euaggelion "a spiritual Gospel", as indeed it is;
consisting of the spiritual discourses of our Lord, on various
occasions, both at the beginning, and in the course of his ministry, and
especially a little before his sufferings and death: and the same writer
observes, that John, the last of the evangelists, considering that in
the other Gospels were declared the things relating to the body of
Christ, that is, to him, as he was after the flesh; to his genealogy and
birth as man; to what was done to him, or by him, in his infancy; to his
baptism, temptations, journeys, &c. at the request of his familiar
friends, and moved by the Spirit of God, composed this Gospel. Moreover,
it is observed by some (b), that the other three evangelists only record
what was done by Christ, in one year after John the Baptist was cast
into prison, as appears from [Mat 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012)
wherefore John, at the entreaty of his friends, put these things into
his Gospel, which were done or said by Christ, before John was cast into
prison. He was called very early by Christ, though young; and was with
him throughout the whole of his ministry, and was an eye and ear witness
of what he here relates, and his testimony is to be received; he was the
beloved disciple, he leaned on the bosom of Jesus, and had great
intimacy with him; and might be privy to some things, which others were
not acquainted with; and though he was a Galilean, and an unlearned man,
[Act 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013) yet being endowed with the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, he was abundantly qualified to write
this book: for what some ancient writers (c) say of him, that he was a
priest, and wore a plate, that is, of gold upon his forehead, cannot be
true, since he was not of the tribe of Levi; and besides, only the high
priest wore that upon his mitre; unless they mean, as seems most likely,
that he was a Christian bishop: perhaps the mistake may arise from John
the Baptist, who was of the priestly order, and is called by some Jewish
writers (d), John the high priest. When and where this Gospel was
written, is not certain; some say in (e) Asia, after he had wrote his
Revelation in Patmos; and others say particularly, that it was wrote at
Ephesus; the title of it in the Syriac version, signifies much, which
runs thus;

"the holy Gospel, the preaching of John, which he spoke and published in
Greek at Ephesus.''

And to the same purpose is the title of it in the Persic version;

"the Gospel of John, one of the twelve apostles, which was spoken in the
city of Ephesus, in the Greek Roman tongue.''

\(a\) Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 14. (b) Ib. l. 3. c. 24. (c)
Polycrates in ib. l. 3. c. 31. & l. 5. c. 24. & Hieron. Catalog. Script.
Eccles. fol. 96. sect. 55. (d) Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 25. 2.
(e) Hieron. Prolog. Evang. Joannis.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 1](joh001)

</div>
