<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos002)  [Next](jos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA 3

Joshua removed from Shittim to Jordan, where he stayed three days, [Jos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001); the people are directed to move
when they saw the ark bore by the priests, and what distance they should
keep from it, [Jos 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#003); are bid to
sanctify themselves against the morrow, when wonders would be wrought,
[Jos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005); and the priests are ordered
to take up the ark, [Jos 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006); Joshua
is encouraged by the Lord, and instructed to command the priests when
they come to Jordan to stand still in it, [Jos
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007); and he declares to all the
people, as a token that God would drive the Canaanites from before them,
that as soon as the feet of the priests bearing the ark should rest in
the waters of Jordan, they should be parted, and make way for them to
pass through, [Jos 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#009); which
accordingly came to pass, so that all the Israelites passed over on dry
ground, [Jos 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014).

[Joshua 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 3:1</span></span>

And Joshua rose early in the morning,.... The morning after the spies
had returned and made their report; which, as Kimchi rightly observes,
was the ninth of Nisan; for on the morrow, which was the tenth, the
people passed over Jordan, see [Jos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005). Moses, according to the Jewish
writers, died on the seventh of Adar or February; the thirty days of his
mourning ended the seventh of Nisan or March; two days before they were
ended the spies were sent, who returned on the eighth day of the month;
and the morning following Joshua rose early, which shows his readiness
and alacrity to proceed in the expedition he was directed and encouraged
to:

and they removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan; from Shittim in the
plains of Moab, to the river Jordan:

he and all the children of Israel; he as their general, and they an army
of six hundred thousand fighting men under him, besides women and
children, and others that came along with them:

and lodged there before they passed over; lay there encamped a night
before they passed over the river Jordan.

[Joshua 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 3:2</span></span>

And it came to pass after three days,.... At the end of the three days
they were bid to prepare food for their expedition, and to go over
Jordan, [Jos 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#011),

that the officers went through the host; the camp of Israel; very
probably the same as in [Jos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010);
this was, no doubt, by the order of Joshua, and who was directed to it
by the Lord.

[Joshua 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 3:3</span></span>

And they commanded the people,.... In the name of Joshua, by whom they
were sent:

saying, when ye see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, and
the priests the Levites bearing it: the Targum reads, the priests and
Levites; so the Septuagint: it was the business of the Levites,
particularly the Kohathites, to bear the ark in journeying, but here the
priests, who also were Levites, were to carry it: it is remarked in the
Talmud (p), that there are three places in which the priests are said to
bear the ark; here, and when they surrounded Jericho, [Jos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#006); and when it was returned to its
place in the times of David, [Sa2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#029); and Kimchi and Abarbinel
observe a fourth, when it was brought into Solomon's temple, [Kg1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#006),

then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it; their usual
signal for marching was the cloud, when that was taken up, [Num
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017), &c. but now the ark, the clouds
of glory having removed at the death of Moses, and were seen no more, as
Abarbinel and other Jewish writers observe; and therefore it was proper
the Israelites should be made acquainted with this signal; for, as
Jarchi says, this journey was different from all the journeys (though
that of the three days journey from Sinai must be excepted, [Num
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033)), for all the time Moses was in
being, the pillar of cloud marched first and showed them the way, and
the ark moved after two of the standards (Judah and Reuben), and now the
ark went first: the cloud was a figure of the dark and cloudy
dispensation of the law, particularly the ceremonial law, the shadow of
good things to come, and which continued only during the former state,
and discontinued to be of any use when the Mosaic dispensation ceased,
and when Joshua or Jesus was come: the ark was a type of Christ, the
forerunner for us entered, and whom we are to follow whithersoever he
goes or directs to, in the exercise of grace and performance of duty;
and the ark being carried now by different persons, may denote that
Christ was held forth in a weaker manner under the legal dispensation,
and by his apostles and ministers under the Gospel dispensation in a
clearer and stronger manner, and who are to be followed no further or
longer than as they bear the ark or direct to Christ.

\(p\) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 33. 2.

[Joshua 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 3:4</span></span>

Yet there shall be a space between you and it,.... The ark; the Keri or
marginal reading is, "between you and them"; the priests that bear it:
hence sprung a fiction among the Jews, that there were two arks, the ark
of the Shechinah or divine Majesty, and the ark of Joseph, in which his
bones were put, which went together (q); which Jarchi, Kimchi, and
Abarbinel take notice of, but has no foundation in the text:

about two thousand cubits by measure; by a certain well known measure,
that of a common cubit; for the "caph" we render "about" is a note of
truth, reality, and certainty, and designs the exact precise measure
here given: this difference was to be observed, partly in reverence to
the ark, the symbol of the divine Presence; Christ is to be reverenced
by his people, and so his word and ordinances; and there is a reverence
and respect due to his ministers and priests that bear the ark; as also
that they might the better see the ark and go after it, as Ben Gersom;
or the way in which they should go, as is suggested in the following
clause; and likewise have the better view of the greatness of the
miracle, as Abarbinel; the dividing of the waters of Jordan as soon as
the ark came to it, and while it was in it: the Jews conclude from hence
that this was the measure of ground they may go on a sabbath day, and no
further, called a sabbath day's journey, [Act
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012),

come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go;
over Jordan into Canaan's land; for being at some distance from them
they could better discern that and the way he directed them to walk in:
Christ the antitype of the ark is the way to the heavenly Canaan, and
his ministers point out the right way of salvation by him, in the
ministration of the word, by attending to which the way is seen and
known in which men must go:

for ye have not passed this way heretofore; a path indeed untrodden by
any; neither they nor any other ever went into Canaan the way they were
now going, through the river Jordan as on dry land: the way to heaven by
Christ is only revealed in the Gospel, and only trodden by believers in
him, and especially the way to glory through Jordan's river; or death is
an untrodden path, which, though the way of all flesh, is a trackless
path, and gone through, but once, and those who pass it have never
before gone that way.

\(q\) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 13. 1.

[Joshua 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 3:5</span></span>

And Joshua said unto the people,.... On the third day; and the thirtieth
day of the mourning for Moses, Jarchi says, was the first of the three
days, and that being the seventh day of the month, this must be the
ninth, as it is most clear the morrow was the tenth:

sanctify yourselves; in a ceremonial sense, by washing their bodies and
their clothes, and abstaining from their wives; and in a moral sense, by
acts of religion and devotion, by prayer and meditation, and the
exercise of repentance and, good works: it may denote that
sanctification is necessary to our passage over Jordan, or through death
to the heavenly Canaan, for without holiness no man shall see the Lord:

for tomorrow the Lord will do wonders among you: in their sight and
presence, and for them, by dividing the waters of Jordan, that they
might pass through it as on dry land; this, as Kimchi says, was the
tenth of Nisan, as is plain from [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019).

[Joshua 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 3:6</span></span>

And Joshua spoke unto the priests,.... On the morrow, that is, on the
tenth day of the month, the day on which they went over Jordan:

saying, take up the ark of the covenant; in which the law was put, which
was the covenant between God and the people, from whence the ark had
this name; and in which it was typical of Christ, in whom both the law,
the covenant of works, was fulfilled, and with whom the covenant of
grace was made; who is the Mediator; surety, and messenger of it, and in
whom all the blessings and promises of it are, and with whom it is, and
will be kept for evermore: the ark, the priests were ordered to take up
and bear on their shoulders; for no other way might they carry it; these
typified the ministers of Christ who bear his name, his Gospel in the
world, see [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015),

and pass over before the people; over the river Jordan, to direct them
in the way through it, and encourage them to follow them:

and they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people;
from the place where they had lodged the night before to the brink of
the river.

[Joshua 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 3:7</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Joshua,.... Out of the tabernacle:

this day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel; by
working the miracle afterwards related; dividing the waters, which was
done on this day, and was but the beginning of wonders; for other great
and marvellous things were done for him and by him, by which it appeared
he was high in the favour of God, greatly esteemed and honoured by him,
and so would be great and honourable in the account of the people:

that they may know that as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; by
dividing the waters of Jordan for him, as he had divided the waters of
the Red sea for Moses; which, as it was a token of his powerful presence
with him, this would be a like token of it with Joshua. The Targum
is,"as my Word was for the help of Moses, so shall my Word be for thy
help.''

[Joshua 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 3:8</span></span>

And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the Lord,....
Who were subject to Joshua, the chief governor of the nation, and
general of the army, as well as the common people; and whose commands
they were to obey, and especially when they appeared to be from the
Lord:

saying, when ye come to the brink of the water of Jordan; not of the
bank of it, but of the water, which had now overflowed its bank; that
is, the brink or extremity of it, which was nearest to them, and to
which they first came; though it is a notion of some Jewish commentators
(t), and which some Christian interpreters (u) have given into, and both
of considerable note, that this was the further extremity, or the brink
on the other side of the river; but, according to this notion, they must
pass the river to the other side before the waters were divided, which
is not credible; and must return again into the midst of the river,
which is not probable; and besides, it is expressly said, that as soon
as their feet dipped in the brim, or extremity of the water, the waters
parted, which must be the first brim or extremity they came at, [Jos
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015),

ye shall stand still in Jordan; after the waters were parted; upon their
coming to, and touching, the brink of them, they proceeded, and went
into the middle of the river, where they were ordered to stop and stand
still.

\(t\) Kimchi, Abarbinel. (u) Masius, Drusius.

[Joshua 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 3:9</span></span>

And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, come hither,.... Very
probably to the door of the tabernacle:

and hear the words of the Lord your God; which he was about to deliver
to them as from him, and in his name.

[Joshua 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 3:10</span></span>

And Joshua said,.... To the people as follows:

hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you; who has life in
and of himself, and is the author of life to all his creatures; and is
so called in opposition to the lifeless idols of the Gentiles: and it
may be, as Abarbinel observes, to suggest to them, that though Moses was
dead, the Lord lived, and lives for evermore; and by the following
miracle of dividing the waters of Jordan, it would be a plain case that
the Lord was yet among them, to protect and defend them, deliver and
save them:

and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites,
and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the
Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites; all the seven nations
are mentioned, even the Girgashites, who are sometimes omitted, to
assure them of the expulsion of them all, to make way for their entire
possession of the land of Canaan, as had been promised them.

[Joshua 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 3:11</span></span>

Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth,.... Some
both Jewish and Christian interpreters, because there is a
distinguishing accent on the word "covenant", read the words "the ark of
the covenant, even the Lord of all the earth"; so in some copies of our
English Bible, as if the ark was called the Lord of all the earth,
because of his presence and dwelling there; but, as Kimchi observes,
either the word "ark" is wanting, or the word "covenant", and may be
supplied either thus,"the ark of the covenant, the ark (I say) of the
Lord of all the earth;''or thus,"the ark of the covenant, which is the
covenant of the Lord of all the earth:''the true meaning is what
Abarbinel gives,"the ark of the covenant of the Lord, who is the Lord of
the whole earth;''the Maker and possessor of the whole earth, the whole
terraqueous globe; and can do what he pleases in the earth, or in the
water; and can control the powers of nature, and do what is beyond them,
things miraculous and astonishing:

passeth before you into Jordan; not only unto it, but into it, into the
river itself; and, by the power of him whose presence was with it, the
waters of Jordan were to be divided, to give them a passage through it
as on dry land, and so it came to pass.

[Joshua 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 3:12</span></span>

Now therefore take ye twelve men,.... For what end and purpose is not
mentioned. Abarbinel is of opinion, that they were chosen and appointed,
that every man might pitch upon and take a place for his tribe to encamp
in, when they came on the other side Jordan: whether this was Joshua's
view or no is not certain; however, the use he made of these, thus
provided by divine direction, is related [Jos
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#002),

and these were to be taken out of the tribes of Israel, out of every
tribe a man; Levi not reckoned, having no part in the land; and so we
find that tribe left out in other accounts, when there was a choice of
twelve men out of each of the tribes, [Num
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#004).

[Joshua 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 3:13</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the
priests that bear the ark of the Lord,.... Which they were bid to take
up and carry, [Jos 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006),

the Lord of all the earth; this shows that not the ark, but the Lord, is
called "the Lord of all the earth"; see Gill on [Jos
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#011),

shall rest in the waters of Jordan; the meaning is, as soon as their
feet should touch them, or they should set their feet in them, when they
came to the brink of them:

that the waters of Jordan shall be cut off from the waters that come
down from above; from above the place where the priests came, and the
children of Israel after passed over:

and they shall stand upon an heap; or one heap; stop and rise up high,
as if piled up one upon another, and stand unmoved. This had been made
known to Joshua by divine revelation, and is what he hints at, [Jos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005); and now plainly speaks out, and
foretells before it came to pass; and which must serve to magnify
Joshua, as in [Jos 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007); and give him
great credit and honour among the people.

[Joshua 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 3:14</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents to pass
over Jordan,.... Which they had pitched very near it, upon their removal
from Shittim, and in which they had lodged the night past:

and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people; at
the distance of two thousand cubits.

[Joshua 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 3:15</span></span>

And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan,.... Not to the
bank, which was overflowed, but to the extremity of the water
overflowing:

and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of
the water; which was doubtless the first they came to, and not the brim
or extremity of it on the other side:

for Jordan overfloweth all its banks all the time of harvest; that is,
of barley harvest, as appears from the time of year; for it was in the
first month, the month Nisan, or Abib, which answers to part of March,
and April, it used to overflow, [Ch1
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#015); and it was now the tenth day of
that month, [Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019); on the
sixteenth of which, at the time of the passover, the sheaf of the
firstfruits of barley harvest was offered up, [Lev
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010); the inundation continued all
the time of harvest; and so Aristeas (w) testifies, that"the river being
filled, it overflows as the Nile in the time of harvest, and waters much
of the country:''it overflows its banks both on the one side and on the
other, the eastern and western shores. This overflow is supposed to be
occasioned either by the latter rains, which fell about this time; or
rather by the snow on Mount Lebanon melting at this time of the year,
when the sun has great strength in those parts, and which poured down in
great quantities into this river, that took its rise from thence.
Josephus (x) speaks of Mount Lebanon and of the fountains of Jordan
together; and says they have their rise from the mountain; and of the
snow of Lebanon see [Jer 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014). This
river continued to overflow at this season in the times of David, [Ch1
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#015); and in the times of Aristeas,
who lived in the reign of Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of Egypt, as before
observed; and some late travellers (y) observe,"it generally happens in
the month Nisan; that is, from the middle of March to the middle of
April, the time of the first harvest;''but Mr. Maundrell (z), who was
upon the spot in 1697, and at the proper time of its overflowing,
perceived nothing of it. He says,"there is a small descent, which you
may fitly call the, first and outermost bank of Jordan, as far as which
it may be supposed the river does, or at least did anciently, overflow;
but at present (whether it was because the river has by its rapidity of
current worn its channel deeper than it was formerly, or whether because
its waters are diverted some other way) it seems to have forgot its
ancient greatness; for we could discern no sign or probability of such
overflowings when we were there, which was the thirtieth of March, being
the proper time for these inundations; nay, so far was the river from
overflowing, that it ran at least two yards below the brink of the
channel.''However, at this time of the passage of the children of Israel
through it, it was overflowing; which made the miracle the greater.

\(w\) Hist. de 72. Interpret. p. 41. (x) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 22.
(y) Egmont and Heyman's Travels, vol. 1. p. 335, 336. (z) Journey from
Aleppo to Jerusalem, p. 81, 82.

[Joshua 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 3:16</span></span>

That the waters which came down from above,.... Above where the priests'
feet rested, and which came down from Mount Lebanon, and the fountains
of Jordan northward:

stood and rose up upon an heap; they stopped their current, and as the
water came down they rose up on high, and made one vast heap of waters:

very far from the city of Adam, that is, beside Zaretan; the Cetib, or
textual reading, is, "in Adam the city"; we follow the marginal reading,
"from Adam": both readings, as is usually, if not always the case, are
to be received; and the meaning is, that this heap of waters, though the
river was at a considerable distance from Adam; yet through the overflow
of it, it reached to, and was "in Adam": this city was in Perea, on the
other side Jordan, that side on which the Israelites were before their
passage; and Zaretan, which is supposed to be the same with Zartanah,
and Zarthan, [Kg1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012), was on this
side, in the tribe of Manasseh; and the sense is, not that Adam was on
the side of Zaretan, or near it, for it was on the other side of the
river; and according to the Talmudists (a) was twelve miles from it; but
the construction is with the word "heap", "which heap was on the side of
Zaretan"; it was there where the waters were heaped up; it seems as if
they reached on the one side to Adam, and on the other side to Zaretan:

and those that came down towards the sea of the plain, even the salt
sea, failed, and were cut off; those waters, which were below where the
priests' feet rested, ran down into the lake Asphaltites, where Sodom
and Gomorrah formerly stood, the sea of the plain, or vale of Siddim,
[Gen 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#003); sometimes called the dead
sea, and here the salt sea, its water being exceeding salt; so, Mr.
Maundrell, the above mentioned traveller (b) testifies on his own
knowledge;"the water of the lake (the lake Asphaltites, or dead sea,
says he) was very limpid, and salt to the highest degree; and not only
salt, but also extreme bitter and nauseous;''

so that these waters running down thither, and those above stopped, made
a dry channel for sixteen or eighteen miles: and the people passed over
right against Jericho; which was the city Joshua had in view to attack
first, and had sent spies thither to get intelligence of it, and the
disposition of the people in it: See Gill on [Jos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001).

\(a\) T. Hieros. Sotah, fol. 21. 4. (b) Maundrell, ut supra, (Journel
from Aleppo to Jerusalem) p. 84. Ed. 7.

[Joshua 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 3:17</span></span>

And the priests that bare the ark of the Lord stood firm on dry ground
in the midst of Jordan,.... Which for its breadth Mr. Maundrell, the
above mentioned traveller, says (c) might be about twenty yards over,
and its depth exceeded his height; but Dr. Shaw (d), a later traveller
still, says,"the river Jordan is by far the most considerable river,
excepting the Nile, either of the coast of Syria, or of Barbary. I
computed it to be about thirty yards broad, but the depth I could not
measure, except at the brink, where I found it to be three yards.''Now
in the midst of this river the priests bearing the ark stood firm on dry
ground, the waters above being stopped and those below cut off. This
perhaps might give rise to the fables among the Heathens of the river
Scamander being swelled for the destruction of Achilles, and dried up by
Vulcan, of which Homer (e) makes mention; and of the river Inachus,
dried up by Neptune, as the Grecians fable; however, if Heathens can
credit these accounts, surely we Christians ought to believe this,
attested by divine revelation. And this may denote the presence of
Christ with his people in afflictions, who will not suffer those waters
to overflow them, and in death itself, when the swellings of Jordan
shall not come near them to distress them; and when the covenant of
grace will appear firm and sure, and be their great support; and when
also the feet of the ministers of Christ stand firm, and their faith
fails not; which is of great use, and very encouraging to the spiritual
Israel of God:

and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground; the waters being
divided to a space large enough for such a body of people to pass over,
and which continued

until all the people were clean passed over Jordan; perfectly and
completely, not one being left behind, or lost in the passage through
it; in the midst of which the priests stood until all were passed over.
So the spiritual Israel of God must all go over Jordan's river, or must
all go through the valley of the shadow of death; and they will all go
over safe to Canaan's land, to the heavenly glory; their souls go
immediately to heaven at death, and their bodies will be raised at the
last day, and be reunited to them, and partake of happiness with them;
nor will anyone of them be lost; they all clean pass over, and arrive
safe; for they are the chosen of God, the care and charge of Christ, the
purchase of his blood, partake of his grace, and have the earnest of his
Spirit.

\(c\) Maundrell, Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem, p. 83. (d) Travels,
p. 346. (e) Iliad. 21.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 4](jos004)

</div>
