<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1019)  [Next](kg1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 20

This chapter relates the siege of Samaria by the king of Syria, and his
insolent demand of Ahab's wives, children, and riches, [Kg1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001), the sally made out upon him, at
the direction of the prophet, and the route made of the Syrian army,
[Kg1 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013), the return of the Syrian
army the next year, when there was a pitched battle between them and
Israel, in which the former were entirely defeated, [Kg1
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#022), the peace Ahab made with the
king of Syria, [Kg1 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#031), and the
reproof one of the sons of the prophets gave him for it, which made him
very uneasy, [Kg1 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#035).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 20:1</span></span>

And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together,.... This
was Benhadad the second, the son of that Benhadad, to whom Asa sent to
help him against Baasha, [Kg1 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#018).

and there were thirty and two kings with him; these were heads of
families, so called, and at most governors of cities under Benhadad;
petty princes, such as were in the land of Canaan in Joshua's time:

and horses and chariots; how many is not said:

and he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it; he went up
with such an intent, but had not as yet done it in form; what moved him
to it cannot be said precisely, whether an ambitious view of enlarging
his dominions, or because the king of Israel paid not the tribute his
father had imposed upon him, see [Kg1
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#034), however, so it was, through the
providence of God, as a scourge to Ahab for his impiety.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 20:2</span></span>

And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel, into the city,.... Who
there remained, and attempted not to go forth and meet him, and stop his
progress, though he must have passed great part of his dominions to come
to Samaria:

and said unto him, thus saith Benhadad; by them, his messengers, as
follows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 20:3</span></span>

Thy silver and thy gold is mine,.... Not of right, but reckoning it as
good as in his hands, Ahab not being able to resist him:

and thy wives also; for it seems he had more than Jezebel:

and thy children; which were many, for he had no less than seventy sons,
[Kg2 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001),

even the goodliest are mine: some aggravate this, as if his view was to
commit the unnatural sin with his male children, when in his possession.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 20:4</span></span>

And the king of Israel answered and said, my lord, O king,.... So he
said to Benhadad's messengers, representing him, as acknowledging his
sovereignty over him:

according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have: which he
understood of holding all that he had of him, by giving him homage, and
paying him tribute; not that he was to deliver all his substance, and
especially his wives and children, into his hands.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 20:5</span></span>

And the messengers came again,.... From Benhadad:

and said, thus speaketh Benhadad, saying, although I have sent unto
thee, saying: at the first message:

thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy
children; into his possession, and not as Ahab understood it, that he
should be his vassal, and pay a yearly tribute for his quiet enjoyment
of them; yet even this he would not now abide by, growing still more
haughty upon the mean submission of Ahab, as by what follows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 20:6</span></span>

Yet I will send my servants unto thee tomorrow about this time,.... He
gave him twenty four hours to consider of it:

and they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; the
royal palace, and the houses of the noblemen, and even of every of his
subjects in Samaria:

and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant (or desirable) in thine
eyes, they shall put it in, their hand, and take it away; not be content
with what should be given, but search for more; and if any in particular
was more desirable to the possessor than anything else, that should be
sure to be taken away; which was vastly insolent and aggravating.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 20:7</span></span>

Then the King of Israel called all the elders of the land,.... His poor
sneaking spirit was a little aroused with the last message, and
therefore called a council of the elders of the people upon it, which
was a piece of wisdom in him:

and said, mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeketh mischief;
nothing less than the entire ruin of the nation:

for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my
silver, and for my gold, and I denied him not; in the sense he
understood him, which was, that he was to be a vassal, and tributary to
him, for the sake of holding these, which yet was very mean; but he
wanted to have these in hand, and not them only, but the pillaging of
all his subjects.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 20:8</span></span>

And all the elders and all the people said unto him,.... They were
unanimous in their advice:

hearken not unto him, nor consent; promising, no doubt, that they would
stand by him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 20:9</span></span>

Wherefore he sent unto the messengers of Benhadad,.... Upon the advice
the elders had given him, and encouraged thereby, though in a poor
sneaking manner after all:

tell my lord the king, all that thou didst send for to thy servant at
the first I will do; owning him as his lord, and himself as his servant,
and promising to grant his first demand, though so insolent, in the
sense he understood him, of paying tribute to him for it:

but this thing I may not do; to have not only all put into his hands,
but his and his servant's houses to be searched and pillaged, because
the elders of his people would not agree; and yet he seems to speak as
if he himself would have submitted to it, but was restrained by his
council:

and the messengers departed, and brought him word again; reported to
Benhadad the answer they received from Ahab.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 20:10</span></span>

And Benhadad sent unto him, and said,.... That is, to Ahab:

the gods do so unto me, and more also; bring greater evils upon me than
I can think or express:

if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people
that follow me, signifying that he made no doubt of it of reducing it to
dust by numbers of men he should bring with him, which would be so many,
that if each was to take an handful of dust of the ruins of Samaria,
there would not enough for them all; which was an hectoring and
parabolical speech, uttered in his wrath and fury.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 20:11</span></span>

Very mildly and very wisely:

tell him, let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he
that putteth it off; that is, he that prepares for the battle as he that
has got the victory; the sense is, let no man triumph before the battle
is over and the victory won; the events of war are uncertain; the battle
is not always to the strong.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 20:12</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Benhadad heard this message (as he was
drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions),.... Though it was at noon,
or before, [Kg1 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#016), which shows
that he and they were addicted to intemperance:

that he said unto his servants; some of the principal officers of his
army:

set yourselves in array; prepare for battle, betake yourselves to your
arms, invest the city at once, and place the engines against it to
batter it down:

and they set themselves in array against the city; besieged it in form,
at least prepared for it; for it seems after all that it was not
properly done.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 20:13</span></span>

And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel,.... Supposed
by the Jewish writers to be Micaiah the son of Imlah, [Kg1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#009) one of those perhaps that Obadiah
hid in the cave, and now is sent out publicly on an errand to Ahab:

saying, thus saith the Lord, hast thou seen all this great multitude?
considered what a vast number Benhadad's army consisted of:

behold, I will deliver it into thine hand this day; as great as it is:

and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; and not Baal, who can save by
few as well as by many, and from a great multitude.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 20:14</span></span>

And Ahab said, by whom?.... Knowing he had no army with him sufficient
to go out with against the Syrian army:

and he said, thus saith the Lord, even by the young men of the princes
of the provinces; either such, as Kimchi thinks, who were brought up
with him; or, as others, the sons of governors of provinces, who were
kept as hostages, that their fathers might not rebel; neither of which
is likely: but rather the servants of such princes who waited on them,
and lived delicately and at ease, and were not trained up to military
exercise, even by these should the victory be obtained:

then he said, who shall order the battle? begin the attack, we or they?
or who shall conduct it, or be the general of the army, go before it,
and lead them on? Ahab might think, being an idolater, that the Lord
would not make use of him, or otherwise who could be thought of but
himself?

and he answered, thou; thou must be the commander, go forth with the
army, and make the attack upon the enemy.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 20:15</span></span>

Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they
were two hundred and thirty two,.... A very small number to go forth
against so great an army as the host of the Syrians, and these raw
unexperienced young men:

and after them he numbered all the people, even all the children of
Israel, being seven thousand; which could never be the number of all the
people in the land, nor even in the city of Samaria, who were able to
bear arms; but it must mean such who were willing to go out to war on
this occasion: and the number being just the same as of those that bowed
not the knee to Baal, has led the Jewish commentators to conclude that
these were the men that were numbered for war; but it is not likely that
they were all in Samaria, or that none but those would go to war, though
it must be owned the number is remarkable.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 20:16</span></span>

And they went out at noon,.... From Samaria, the two hundred and thirty
two young men, and the 7000 Israelites, openly, with great spirit and
courage, fearless and undaunted; but it is not said that Ahab went out
at the head of them; it seems as if he did not by what is said, [Kg1
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#021),

but Benhadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions (or booths, or
tents), he, and the kings, the thirty two kings that helped him; who
either were his subjects, or his tributaries, or confederates; being
secure, and having nothing to fear from Ahab, he and they gave
themselves up to carousing and drinking, even at noon, and so
destruction came upon them unawares, as on Belshazzar.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 20:17</span></span>

And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first,....
From Samaria, before the 7000 did:

and Benhadad sent out; of his pavilion, a messenger or messengers to his
sentinels, to know what news, and how matters stood, whether Ahab had
sent any message, signifying his compliance with his terms:

and they told him, saying, there are men come out of Samaria; but upon
what account they could not say.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 20:18</span></span>

And he said, whether they be come out for peace,.... To propose terms of
peace:

take them alive; make them prisoners, which was contrary to the laws of
nations:

or whether they be come out for war, take them alive; he made no doubt
of their being easily taken; but he would not have them be put to death,
that he might examine them, and know the state of things in Samaria, and
what Ahab intended to do, that he might take his measures accordingly.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 20:19</span></span>

So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of the
city,.... First, as before observed, and marched forwards towards the
Syrian camp:

and the army which followed them; consisting of 7000 men.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 20:20</span></span>

And they slew everyone his man,.... The Syrian army, or at least a body
of men detached from them, met them, opposed them, and fought them, and
they slew of them 7232 men; as many as they themselves were:

and the Syrians fled; not expecting such a rebuff:

and Israel pursued them; to make some further advantage of their
victory:

and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on an horse, with the horsemen;
with two couple of horsemen, as the Targum; with these to guard him he
galloped away as fast as he could for his life.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 20:21</span></span>

And the king of Israel went out,.... Of Samaria; when he saw the Syrians
fleeing, and his army pursuing, he went forth, perhaps, with more
forces, who were now willing to join with him; Josephus (c) says, Ahab
had another army within the walls:

and smote the horses and chariots; that is, the men that rode on horses;
and in chariots, the Syrian cavalry:

and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter; how many were slain is not
said; but the Jewish historian (d) says they plundered the camp, in
which were much riches, and great plenty of gold and silver, and took
their chariots and horses, and returned to the city of Samaria.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 14. sect. 2. (d) Ibid.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 20:22</span></span>

And the prophet came to the king of Israel,.... The same that came to
him before:

and said unto him, go, strengthen thyself; exhorted him to fortify his
cities, especially Samaria, and increase his army, that he might be able
to oppose the king of Syria:

and mark, and see what thou doest: observe his moral and religious
actions, and take heed that he did not offend the Lord by them, as well
as make military preparations:

for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up against
thee; about the same time in the next year, at the spring of the year,
when kings go out to war, see [Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 20:23</span></span>

And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him,.... His ministers
of state, his privy counsellors:

their gods are gods of the hills, therefore they were stronger than we;
and beat them in the last battle; this notion they might receive from
what they had heard of Jehovah delivering the law on Mount Sinai to
Moses, and of the miraculous things done lately on Mount Carmel, as well
as of their worship being in high places, especially at Jerusalem, the
temple there being built on an hill, as was Samaria itself, near to
which they had their last defeat; and this notion of topical deities
very much obtained among the Heathens in later times, some of which they
supposed presided over rivers, others over woods, and others over hills
and mountains (e): so Nemestinus the god of woods, Collina the goddess
of hills, and Vallina of valleys (f); and Arnobins (g) makes mention of
the god Montinus, and Livy (h) of the god Peninus, who had his name from
a part of the Alps, so called where he was worshipped; and there also
the goddess Penina was worshipped; and Lactantius (i) speaks of the gods
of the mountains the mother of Maximilian was a worshipper of; and even
Jupiter had names from mountains, as Olympius, Capitolinus, &c. and such
was the great god Pan, called mountainous Pan (k):

but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be
stronger than they; and prevail over them, and conquer them.

\(e\) "Dii fumus agrestes, et qui dominemur in altis montibus.----"
Ovid. Fast. l. 3. (f) Vid. D. Herbert de Cherbury de Relig. Gent. c. 12.
p. 198, 112. (g) Adv. Gentes, l. 4. (h) Hist. l. 21. c. 38. (i) De Mort.
Persecutor. c. 11. p. 22. Vid. Ovid. Metamorph. l. 1. Fab. 8. ver. 320.
"Et numina montis adorant". See Ep. 4. ver. 171. (k) Sophoclis Oedipus
Tyr. ver. 1110.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 20:24</span></span>

And do this thing,.... Also take this further piece of advice:

take the kings away, every man out of his place: for being brought up
delicately, they were not inured to war, nor expert in the art of it;
and being addicted to pleasure, gave themselves to that, and drew the
king into it, which they observed was the case before, though they did
not care to mention it; and if they were tributaries or allies, they
would not fight as men do for their own country:

and put captains in their rooms; of his own people, men of skill and
courage, and who would fight both for their own honour, and for the good
of their country.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 20:25</span></span>

And number thee an army like the army that thou hast lost,.... Raise an
army of an equal number, which they supposed he was able to do:

horse for horse and chariot for chariot; as many horses and chariots as
he had before:

and we will fight against them in the plain; where they could make use
of their horses and chariots to greater advantage than on hills and
mountains, see [Jdg 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019).

and surely we shall be stronger than they; and beat them:

and he hearkened unto their voice, and did so; took their counsel, and
prepared an army, and placed captains in it instead of kings.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 20:26</span></span>

And it came to pass at the return of the year,.... In the spring, or
autumn, as some think; see Gill on [Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001).

that Benhadad numbered the Syrians; took a muster of his army, to see if
he had got the number he had before:

and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel; not that in Judah, [Jos
15:53](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#053), rather that in Asher, [Jos
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#030), but it seems to be that which
Adrichomius (l) places in Issachar, near to the famous camp of
Esdraelon, or valley of Jezreel, where it is probable the king of Syria
intended to have fought; the battle; and some travellers, as he
observes, say (m), the ruins of that city are still shown in that great
camp or plain, not far from Gilboa, to the east of Mount Carmel, and
five miles from Tabor; according to Bunting (n), it was fourteen miles
from Samaria; but it may be Aphaca near Mount Lebanon, and the river
Adonis (o), is meant.

\(l\) Theatrum Terrae Sanct. p. 35. (m) Brocard. & Breidenbach. in ib.
(n) Travels, &c. p. 164. (o) Vid. Sozomen. Hist. l. 2. c. 5.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 20:27</span></span>

And the children of Israel were numbered, and were all present,.... The
same as before; the two hundred and thirty two young men of the princes
of the provinces, and 7000 of the people, not one was missing:

and went against them; out of Samaria, towards Aphek:

and the children of Israel pitched before them like two little flocks of
kids: being few and weak, the two hundred and thirty two young men in
one body, and the 7000 in another:

but the Syrians filled the country: with their men, their horses, and
their chariots.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 20:28</span></span>

And there came a man of God,.... The same as before, [Kg1
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013) or had come (p) before the
little army went out to meet the Syrians; though he might go to Ahab
when encamped, for his encouragement:

and spake unto the king of Israel, and said, thus saith the Lord,
because the Syrians have said, the Lord is God of the hills, but he is
not God of the valleys; See Gill on [Kg1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023).

therefore will I deliver, all this great multitude into thine hand; not
for Ahab's sake would the Lord do this, who does not appear thankful to
God for the former victory, nor to be reformed from his idolatry, and
the better for it, but for the honour of his own name, which had been
blasphemed by the Syrians:

and ye shall know that I am the Lord; both of hills and valleys, the
omnipotent Jehovah, the only true God.

\(p\) "accesserat", Vatablus.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 20:29</span></span>

And they pitched one over against the other seven days,.... Very
probably the Israelites pitched upon an hill, and the Syrians waited
till they changed their position, not caring to fall upon them, though
so very supernumerary to them, for the reason before given:

and so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined; or they
that made war drew nigh, as the Targum, and both sides engaged in
battle:

and the children of Israel slew of the Syrians 100,000 footmen in one
day; which was a prodigious slaughter to be made by so small an army;
the hand of the Lord was visible in it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 20:30</span></span>

But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city,.... Which perhaps was in the
hands of the Syrians, and was designed for a retreat for them, should
they be beaten:

and there a wall fell upon twenty seven thousand of the men that were
left; not slain in the battle; here again the Lord might be seen, who,
as Abarbinel observes, fought from heaven, and either by a violent wind,
or an earthquake, threw down the wall upon them just as they had got
under it for shelter:

and Benhadad fled, and came into the city into an inner chamber; or,
"into a chamber within a chamber" (q), for greater secrecy.

\(q\) "cubiculo in cubiculum", Pagninus, Montanus.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 20:31</span></span>

And his servants said unto him,.... Being reduced to the utmost
extremity; for if he attempted to go out of the city, he would fall into
the hands of the Israelites, and there was no safety in it, the wall of
it being fallen down; and it could not be thought he could be concealed
long in the chamber where he was, wherefore his servants advised as
follows:

behold, now, we have heard that the kings of the Israel are merciful
kings; not only the best of them as David and Solomon, but even the
worst of them, in comparison of Heathen princes, were kind and humane to
those that fell into their hands, and became their captives:

let us, I pray thee; so said one in the name of the rest:

put sack cloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads; and so coming in
such a mean and humble manner, and not with their armour on, they might
the rather hope to have admittance; so, the Syracusans sent ambassadors
to Athens, in filthy garments, with the hair of their heads and beards
long, and all in slovenly habits, to move their pity (r);

and go out to the king of Israel: and be humble supplicants to him:

peradventure he will save thy life; upon a petition to him from him; to
which the king agreed, and sent it by them.

\(r\) Justin e Trogo, l. 4. c. 4.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 20:32</span></span>

So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their
heads,.... Signifying they came to surrender themselves to him as his
captives and prisoners, and he might do with them as seemed good to him,
hang them up if he pleased, for which they brought ropes with them, as a
token that they deserved it, see [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002),

and came to the king of Israel, and said, thy servant Benhadad saith, I
pray thee let me live: he that a little while ago insolently demanded
his wives, and children, and silver, and gold, as his property, now is
his humble servant, and begs, not for his crown and kingdom, but for his
life:

and he said, is he yet alive? he is my brother; which was intimating at
once, that not only they might expect he would spare his life, who
seemed to be so glad that he was alive, but that he would show him more
favour, having a great affection for him as his brother; this was a very
foolish expression from a king in his circumstances, with respect to one
who had given him so much trouble and distress, and had behaved with so
much haughtiness and contempt towards him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 20:33</span></span>

Now the men did diligently observe whether anything would come from
him,.... That would be a good omen to them, and encourage them to hope
for success; they observed him as diligently by his words and behaviour
as soothsayers do when they look out for a lucky sign; for the word is
sometimes used of divining (s):

and did hastily catch it; as soon as it was out of his mouth, and laid
hold on it to improve it to advantage, being wiser than him:

and they said, thy brother Benhadad; him whom thou callest thy brother;
he is thy brother, and is alive; this they caught, and expressed it, to
observe whether it was a slip of his tongue, and whether he spoke it
heartily, and would abide by it, or whether he would retract it:

then he said, go ye, bring him; meaning from the city to the place where
he was:

then Benhadad came forth to him; out of his chamber, upon the report of
his servants:

and he caused him to come up into the chariot; to sit and converse with
him there.

\(s\) "augurati sunt", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Vatablus.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 20:34</span></span>

And Benhadad said unto him,.... The word Benhadad is not in the original
text, and some, as Osiander and others, have thought they are the words
of Ahab last spoken of; which seems most likely, who not only took
Benhadad into his chariot, but in his great and superabundant kindness,
though the conqueror, said to him what follows:

the cities which my father took from thy father I will restore; that is,
those cities which Omri, the father of Ahab, had taken from the father
of Benhadad; for as Omri was a prince of might and valour, [Kg1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#016), it is more probable that he
took cities from the king of Syria, than that the king of Syria should
take any from him, and which Ahab in his circumstances weakly promises
to restore:

and thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father made in
Samaria; which confirms it that it is Ahab, and not Benhadad, that is
speaking; for Benhadad's father never had any power nor residence in
Samaria, whereas Omri, the father of Ahab, had, he built it, and made it
his royal seat; and, in like manner, Ahab promises Benhadad that he
should have his palace at Damascus, the metropolis of Syria, and
exercise power there, and over all Syria; whereby Ahab renounced all
right he had to the kingdom, and any of the cities of it: for by
"streets" are not meant those literally so called, for the making of
which there was no reason; nor markets to take a toll from, as some,
supposing them to be the words of Benhadad; nor courts of judicature, to
oblige them to pay it who refused it, as others; nor fortresses to keep
them in awe; but a royal palace, as a learned critic (t) has observed,
for Benhadad to reside in; this Ahab gave him power to erect, and added:

and I will send thee away with this covenant; or promise now made:

so he made a covenant with him; confirmed the above promises:

and sent him away; free, to enjoy his crown and kingdom, for which folly
and weakness Ahab is reproved by a prophet, [Kg1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042).

\(t\) Vallandi Dissert. ad 1. Reg. xx. 33, 34. Subsect. 2. sect. 4.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg1 20:35</span></span>

And a certain man of the sons of the prophets,.... Which the Jews take
to be Micaiah, and so Josephus (u), which is probable; the same that had
been with Ahab more than once; and, whoever he was, it is not unlikely
that he was the same, since Ahab knew him when his disguise was off,
[Kg1 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#041),

said unto his neighbour, in the word of the Lord, smite me, I pray thee;
told his neighbour, that by the command of God he was ordered to bid him
smite him, so as to wound him:

and the man refused to smite him; being his neighbour, and perhaps a
fellow prophet, and having an affection for him.

\(u\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 14. sect, 5.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 20:36</span></span>

Then said he unto him, because thou hast not obeyed the voice of the
Lord,.... In not smiting him; which, if he was a prophet, he must know
how great an evil it was to disregard or disobey what was said by a
prophet in his name; he must be inexcusable:

behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay thee.

And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and slew him;
which may seem severe, yet being an act of disobedience to the command
of God, by a prophet of his, was punishable with death.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg1 20:37</span></span>

Then he found another man, and said, smite me, I pray thee,.... This is
not said to be his neighbour, nor one of the sons of the prophets, but a
rustic man, and so stuck not to take him at his word:

and the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him; in his face;
made some incision in his flesh, broke the skin, and fetched blood of
him; perhaps somewhere about his eyes, by what follows: this he got done
to him, that he might look like a wounded soldier, and thereby get the
more easily to the speech of Ahab.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 20:38</span></span>

So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way,.... As he
went from Aphek, the place where the battle had been fought, to Samaria,
his royal seat:

and disguised himself with ashes upon his face; the Targum is, he
covered his eyes with a vail, or piece of cloth, which he wrapped about
his head, as men do when they have got a wound or bruise in such a part,
which seems very probable; for had he besmeared his face with ashes,
clay, or dust, or any such thing, he could not so easily have got it
off, as in [Kg1 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#041).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 20:39</span></span>

And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king,.... With a loud
voice, signifying he had something to say unto him, at which he stopped:

and he said, thy servant went out into the midst of the battle; this was
not real, but fictitious, an apologue, fable, or parable, by which he
would represent to Ahab his own case, and bring him under conviction of
his folly, just as Nathan dealt with David:

and, behold, a man turned aside; a superior officer in the army:

and brought a man unto me; he had made a prisoner of:

and said, keep this man; do not let him escape:

if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or
else thou shalt pay a talent of silver; if he let him go willingly, or
by any means he should get out of his hands, then he should either die
for it, or be fined a talent of silver, which of our money is three
hundred and seventy five pounds; and to this it seems he agreed.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 20:40</span></span>

And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone,.... Employed in
one thing or another relative to the battle, his prisoner committed to
his care made his escape:

and the king of Israel said unto him, so shall thy judgment be, thyself
hast decided it; the sentence was plain and open against him, that
either he must die or pay the money, for he himself had agreed to it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 20:41</span></span>

And he hasted, and took away the ashes from his face,.... Took off the
linen cloth from his eyes, unveiled or unmasked himself:

and the king of Israel discerned him, that he was of the prophets; he
knew him again, having seen him once or twice before; otherwise there
could be nothing in his face that could discover him to be a prophet,
rather he was to be known by his habit.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 20:42</span></span>

And he said unto him, thus saith the Lord,.... He spake not his own
sense, and in his own words, but in the name of the Lord, for which he
had authority, that it might have the greater weight with Ahab:

because thou hast let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter
destruction; meaning Benhadad; or "the man of my anathema or curse" (w);
cursed of God for his blasphemy of him, and devoted by him to ruin on
that account; or "of my net" (x), being by his providence brought into a
net or noose at Aphek, out of which he could not have escaped, had not
Ahab let him go:

therefore thy life shall go for his life; as it shortly did, and that by
the hand of a Syrian soldier, [Kg1
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034),

and thy people for his people; which was fulfilled by Hazael king of
Syria, the sins of Israel rendering them deserving of the calamities
they endured by his means, see [Kg2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012).

\(w\) "vir anathematis mei", Montanus, Piscator. (x) "Vir retis mei"; so
some in Vatablus.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 20:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 20:43</span></span>

And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased,.... With
the prophet for what he had said, and with himself for what he had done
in letting Benhadad go; the Targum is, he was

"troubled and grieved,''

not so much for the sin he had committed, as for the punishment of it on
him and his people:

and came to Samaria; with a heavy heart, for the message of the prophet
had spoiled the joy of his victory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 21](kg1021)

</div>
