<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1021)  [Next](kg2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 22

This chapter relates, that after three years' peace with the king of
Syria, Ahab was inclined to go to war with him, to take Ramothgilead out
of his hands; and he drew in Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, to join him in
it, [Kg1 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#001), but before they went
into it, they took advice, Ahab of his four hundred prophets, which
Jehoshaphat not being satisfied with, a true prophet of the Lord,
Micahah, was sent for, [Kg1 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#005) who,
when he came, jeered Ahab with what his prophets had said to him;
intimated that he should be killed, and explained it to him how he came
to be deceived by his prophets, [Kg1
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#015) upon which he was smitten on the
cheek by Zedekiah, one of the false prophets, and imprisoned by the
order of Ahab, [Kg1 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#024), after which
the two kings went to the battle, and Jehoshaphat was in great danger of
his life; but Ahab was wounded, and died, [Kg1
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#029), and the chapter is concluded
with an account of the reign of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, [Kg1
22:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#041), and of Ahaziah king of Israel,
[Kg1 22:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#051).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">kg1 22:50</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers
in the city of David his father,.... In the city of Sion, where David,
Rehoboam, Abijam, and Asa, were buried:

and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead; who was now thirty two years
of age, and he reigned ten years.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">kg1 22:51</span></span>

Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah,.... It is observed, that
Jehoshaphat began to reign in the fourth year of Ahab, and Ahab reigned
twenty two years, see [Kg1 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#041), and
therefore Ahab's son must begin to reign in the eighteenth year of
Jehoshaphat; but perhaps he was made king in his father's lifetime,
before he went on his expedition to Ramothgilead, or Ahab's reign was
not twenty two years complete:

and reigned two years over Israel; not complete, as appears from [Kg2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:52](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">kg1 22:52</span></span>

Which evil was idolatry:

and walked in the way of his father; his father Ahab, who worshipped
Baal:

and in the way of his mother; his mother Jezebel, who was still living,
and served Baal and Astarte, the deities of her country:

and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat; who set up and worshipped
the golden calves:

who made Israel to sin; by the worship of the same, into which he drew
them by his example and authority.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:53](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">kg1 22:53</span></span>

For he served Baal, and worshipped him,.... That is, Ahaziah served him,
as his father had done, and his mother still did:

and provoked to anger the Lord God of Israel, according to all that his
father had done; of which there is an instance in the first chapter of
the following book; for falling through a lattice, and becoming sick
upon it, he quickly died, having sent messengers to inquire of the god
of Ekron whether he should die or not.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 22:1</span></span>

And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.
From the time that Benhadad made a covenant with Ahab; not three full
years, but part of them: it was threatened by Elijah from the Lord, that
Ahab's life should go for Benhadad's, because he had let him, go, [Kg1
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#042), but because of his humiliation,
as is thought by Ben Gersom and others, it was respited for those three
years; and now an opportunity and occasion would be given for the
fulfilment of what was threatened.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 22:2</span></span>

And it came to pass in the third year,.... Of the peace, before it was
expired:

that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel; to
Ahab, from Jerusalem to Samaria, reckoned thirty two miles (m); either
to make peace with him, and put an end to the wars which subsisted
between Israel and Judah since the division of the kingdom, [Kg1
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#044) or to contract an affinity with
him, by marrying his son to a daughter of Ahab, [Kg2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#018) or rather after peace was made,
and that strengthened by the marriage; and so he went merely to pay a
visit, as he judged he might then with great safety; and he and all his
retinue were entertained by Ahab in a very sumptuous and liberal manner,
[Ch2 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#001).

\(m\) Bunting's Travels, &c. p. 178. near 40, Rainold. Praelect. 31.
col. 266.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 22:3</span></span>

(And the king of Israel said unto his servants,.... His nobles, those of
his privy council, his ministers of state; or "had said" (n), some
little time before Jehoshaphat came:

know ye that Ramoth in Gilead is ours a city of refuge beyond Jordan, in
the tribe of Gad, and so of course must belong to the kingdom of Israel,
of which see [Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008).

and we be still, and take it not out of the hand of the king of Syria?)
neither demand it, nor take any measures to oblige him to deliver it up;
representing it as a great omission, and as a piece of negligence and
slothfulness, or cowardice.

\(n\) "et dixerat", Junius & Tremellius.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 22:4</span></span>

This affair being lately canvassed at the council board, and very much
on Ahab's mind, he puts this question to Jehoshaphat, his visitor,
relation, and ally; wisely considering that his own forces were small,
and that to have such an auxiliary might be of great advantage to him:

and Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as thou art, my people
as thy people, my horses as thy horses; meaning, that he and his
soldiers, foot and horse, were at his service.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 22:5</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, inquire, I pray thee, at
the word of the Lord today. Being a pious and religious prince, he did
not choose to go into a war at once, without consulting the Lord by his
prophets, whether it was his will and pleasure they should engage in it,
and should prosper; and he was desirous of having this done immediately,
before they proceeded any further.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 22:6</span></span>

Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four
hundred men,.... False prophets, as the Targum and Arabic version; and
they are called Ahab's prophets, and not the Lord's, [Kg1
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#023) perhaps these were the prophets
of the groves, that ate at Jezebel's table, and were preserved when the
prophets of Baal were destroyed, since the number agrees with them, see
[Kg1 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019).

and said unto them, shall I go against Ramothgilead to battle, or shall
I forbear? which would you advise to? signifying he should take their
advice:

and they said, go up; for the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the
king: which words are very ambiguous, like the oracles of the Heathens;
for they do not express who or what should be delivered up, for the word
it is a supplement, nor to what king the delivery should be made;
whether the Syrians, and the place they held should be given up to king
Ahab, which they would have understood; or whether the Israelites should
be delivered up to king Benhadad; so that, whichever had been the case,
the credit of their prophecy would be secured. They used the word
"Lord", and not Baal, in complaisance to Jehoshaphat, and perhaps as
directed by Ahab.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 22:7</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat said, is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides,
that we might inquire of him? He suspected these to be false prophets,
though he would not call them so; nor suggest that they were not the
prophets of the Lord, because he would not affront Ahab, who had an
opinion of them; and therefore asks, if there were no other that went
under the character of a prophet of the Lord, that he might inquire of
him for his further satisfaction.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 22:8</span></span>

And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, there is yet one man
(Micaiah the son of Imlah), by whom we may inquire of the Lord,.... And
but one in Samaria; Elijah and Elisha were elsewhere:

but I hate him, for he doth not prophesy of good concerning me, but
evil; who is thought to be the same that was several times with him when
engaged in the war with the king of Syria, [Kg1
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#013) and each time, excepting the
last, he brought him good tidings; but because, in his last message, he
told him, that, since he had let Benhadad go, his life should go for his
life, and his people for his people, for that he hated him:

and Jehoshaphat said, let not the king say so; which was very modestly,
though perhaps too gently, said; suggesting that the prophets of the
Lord should be heard, respected, and honoured, let their message be as
it would, since they spake not of their own mind and will, but what they
were moved unto by the Spirit of God.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 22:9</span></span>

Then the king of Israel called an officer,.... An eunuch, as the word is
sometimes used, one of pages:

and said, hasten hither Micaiah the son of Imlah; who, as it seems from
[Kg1 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#026) was in prison, where
perhaps Ahab had cast him for his last prophecy to him, and where he had
lain ever since; and this gives a reason why he could so readily send
for him, knowing where he was.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 22:10</span></span>

And the king of Israel, and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, sat each on
his throne,.... In great state and majesty:

having put on their robes; their royal robes, which they wore when they
appeared in pomp and grandeur:

in a void place in the entrance of the gate of Samaria; where courts of
judicature were held, and there was an open void space for the people to
assemble in to hear; the word has the signification of a corn floor, and
the Jews suppose they and their attendants sat in a semicircle like the
half of a corn floor, after the same manner in which they say the
sanhedrim at Jerusalem sat (o):

and all the prophets prophesied before them; concerning this affair of
going to Ramothgilead.

\(o\) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 5. 1. Vid. Kimchium in loc.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 22:11</span></span>

And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron,.... Horns are
emblems of power and might, and iron ones of greater strength still; the
prophets sometimes made use of visible signs, to represent the things
they prophesied of should come to pass, see [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002), and the same method this prophet
took:

and he saith, thus saith the Lord; imitating the true prophets: with
these shall thou push the Syrians until thou hast consumed them:
Abarbinel thinks he had in view the blessing of Joseph by Moses, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017) where he is compared to a
bullock with horns; and these said to be the ten thousands of Ephraim,
and the thousands of Manasseh; and Ahab being of the tribe of Joseph,
and ruling in Ephraim and Manasseh, the prophet chose to make use of
this emblem for his encouragement.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 22:12</span></span>

And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, go up to Ramothgilead, and
prosper,.... All encouraged the king to go up against this place, and
prophesied of victory, as Zedekiah did:

for the Lord shall deliver it into the king's hand; see Gill on [Kg1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 22:13</span></span>

And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him,.... By
the way, as they came along together, as Josephus (p) observes:

behold, now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the king with
one mouth; they are unanimous that he shall prosper in his undertaking
against the Syrians:

let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak
that which is good; which, as an ignorant man, he might advise to from
good will to the prophet, that he might not be branded with singularity,
and a spirit of contradiction, and that he might have the favour of the
king, and be released from prison, pitying his miserable condition in
which he found him.

\(p\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 15. sect. 4.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 22:14</span></span>

And Micaiah said, as the Lord liveth,.... He swore by the living God,
for the confirmation of what he was about to say:

what the Lord saith unto me, that will I speak; truly and faithfully,
keeping nothing back, nor adding anything, whether it be good or evil,
pleasing or displeasing; it looks as if as yet he had no instruction
from the Lord what to say, and yet the vision he later declares seems to
have been had by him before, [Kg1
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#017).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 22:15</span></span>

So he came to the king,.... Being introduced by the officer:

and the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go up against Ramothgilead
to battle, or shall we forbear? the same question in the same words that
was put to the other prophets, [Kg1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006), only there he uses the singular
number, here the plural, including Jehoshaphat with him:

and he answered him, go, and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into
the hand of the king; he answered not in the name of the Lord, saying,
"thus saith the Lord", nor did he speak his own sense and in his own
words, nor seriously, but by way of derision; he took up the words of
the prophets, and bantered them; it is as if he should say, the prophets
bid you go, and tell you that you shall "prosper", and that the city
will be delivered into the king's hand; do as they direct you, and see
what the issue will be, no doubt it will be good, since they are all
agreed; but he delivered the above words with such gestures, and such a
tone, and with a contemptuous smile in his countenance, which showed
that he spoke not seriously, but sarcastically; and this the king
plainly discovered, as appears by what follows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 22:16</span></span>

And the king said unto him, how many times shall I adjure thee,.... Not
that he had as yet adjured him at all, or not till now; but he asks him
how often he must be obliged to do it; and now he adjures him once for
all, that he might not be forced to repeat it:

that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in the name of the
Lord? for he observed he did not speak in the name of the Lord before,
and what he said was not in a serious but ludicrous manner, and not to
be regarded as truth.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 22:17</span></span>

And he said,.... The prophet, in a serious and solemn manner, being
adjured by the king:

I saw all Israel scattered on the hills, as sheep that have not a
shepherd; the armies of Israel routed, dispersed, and fleeing, some one
way and some another, on the mountains of Gilead near Ramoth, weak and
helpless, not knowing where to go for safety, having none to direct
them; and this was either now instantly represented to his mind, or what
had been before in a dream or vision:

and the Lord said, these have no master; these sheep have no shepherd
this army hath no general,

Israel has lost its king: let them return every man to his house in
peace, very few slain, Jarchi thinks Ahab only, see [Kg1
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#031) that part of the threatening,
[Kg1 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042) was now to he accomplished,
"thy life shall go for his life", but the other part, "and thy people
for his people", was to be deferred to another time.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 22:18</span></span>

And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat,.... Plainly perceiving
that the prophet foretold that he should fall in battle:

did not I tell thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but
evil? intimating that this proceeded from spite and malice, from ill
will to him and hatred of him, and was not from the Lord, and therefore
not to be regarded; he had told him three years ago his life should go
for letting Benhadad go; but it had not proved true, and no more would
this; and Jehoshaphat being an easy man, and too credulous, believed
what Ahab said of the character of this prophet, or otherwise it is not
to be accounted for that he should go with him to war after such a
declaration made.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 22:19</span></span>

And he saith, hear thou therefore the word of the Lord,.... Since he had
represented what he had said as proceeding from hatred to him, he would
make it clear and plain that what he had said was the word of the Lord,
and according to his mind; and that what the other prophets had said was
owing to a lying spirit in them, which the Lord suffered for his ruin;
all which are represented as in a vision, in which things are brought
down to the capacities of men, and not as really transacted:

I saw the Lord sitting on his throne; so it was represented to his mind,
as if he had seen with his bodily eyes the divine Being in a glorious
form, as a king sitting on his throne, to do justice and judgment; as
Ahab and Jehoshaphat were now sitting on their thrones, only as a far
greater King, even the King of kings, and in a more splendid manner:

and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his
left the ministering angels ready to do his will.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 22:20</span></span>

And the Lord said, who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall
at Ramothgilead?.... Not that it can be supposed that the Lord entered
into a consultation with the angels upon this subject; only that it was
the decree of God that he should go thither, and fall by the hand of the
man whom he had let go, as a just punishment of him:

and one said on this manner, and another said on that manner; not that
there was such an altercation among them; it only signifies, that there
are various ways and means, by which the purposes and decrees of God may
be and are brought about.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 22:21</span></span>

And there came forth a spirit,.... Not from the heavenly host on the
right hand or the left, for they are pure and holy spirits, and
impeccable, and cannot lie or deceive; but the evil spirit, Satan, the
father of lies, the old deceiver, who came forth from his own place and
his own company:

and stood before the Lord presented himself before him, as Satan did,
[Job 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006),

and said, l will persuade him; or prevail upon him; evil spirits love to
be employed in doing harm to men, they go about seeking whom they may
devour. This could not be the spirit of Naboth, as the Jews say (q),
seeking revenge on Ahab; that was in a state of happiness, could not
move from thence, and be capable of sinning.

\(q\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 89. 1. & 102. 2. Targum in 2 Chron. xviii.
20.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 22:22</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him, wherewith?.... What way and method did he
propose, to persuade Ahab to go up to Ramoth? the Lord is introduced in
this visionary narrative as asking this question, not as ignorant of the
scheme of the evil spirit, but in order to bring it out, and lead on to
the following account:

and he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth
of all his prophets; put them on encouraging Ahab to go up, and
promising him success, as he had in former battles with the king of
Syria, and which might both encourage them to give forth such a
prediction, and him to believe it to be true; this proposal was quite
agreeable to the character of the devil, as the father of lies:

and he said, thou shalt persuade him, and prevail also; not only make
use of this artifice to persuade, but succeed also; the Lord knew that
what he should suggest to the prophets, and they should deliver to Ahab,
would be agreeable to his inclination, nor would he do anything in the
course of his providence to hinder its taking effect:

go forth, and do so; which was giving leave to try his skill in the art
of persuasion, in which he knew he would succeed, and bring on the
righteous judgment of God upon Ahab; with this compare [Joh
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 22:23</span></span>

Now therefore behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in the mouths of
all these thy prophets,.... That is, suffered the lying spirit to
suggest a lie to them, and sent them strong delusions to believe that
lie, whose minds were disposed at any rate to flatter Ahab, to whom they
told it; which was the way designed to bring him to the ruin appointed
for him:

and the Lord hath spoken evil concerning thee: he had decreed it in
himself, declared it by Micaiah his prophet, and suffered all those
steps to be taken by Satan and the false prophets, to bring him to it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 22:24</span></span>

But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near,.... Stepped in haste and
passion from the place where he was:

and smote Micaiah on the cheek; in contempt of him, and to show his
indignation at what he said; this he did in open court, before two
kings; one he believed would favour and screen him in this lawless
action, and the other, out of his own jurisdiction, had not courage and
presence of mind to resent it:

and said, which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto
thee? hereby boasting that he had the Spirit of the Lord, and was
directed by him in what he said, and still remained with him, and could
not possibly go to Micaiah, and suggest the very reverse; and therefore
pertly asks him which way the spirit went, intimating that it was
impossible he could steer a course contrary to himself.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 22:25</span></span>

And Micaiah said, behold, thou shalt see in the day when thou shalt go
into an inner chamber to hide thyself. Who would either accompany Ahab
to the battle, and, upon his being wounded, flee to the first place of
secrecy for safety; or, upon the news of his defeat brought to Samaria,
would betake himself to a private chamber for security, fearing the
enemy would pursue to the very place; or else through fear of the
populace, who would attribute the death of the king to the advice of him
and the other prophets.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 22:26</span></span>

And the king of Israel said,.... To some of his officers:

take Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city: the
chief magistrate under the king; a sort of sheriff, who had the care of
malefactors, and of all committed to prison, from whom he was received
by the messenger, and now sent back to him:

and to Joash the king's son; who might be over his household, as
sometimes the king's son was, [Ch2
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#021) or might be viceroy while the
king was without the city, and at the gate of it, and about to go to
war.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 22:27</span></span>

And say, thus saith the king, put this fellow in prison,.... In the
common prison of the city, where he had been before, as it seems; and
might be now ordered into a more confined place in it, and what might be
called "little ease":

and feed him with bread of affliction, and with water of affliction;
with bad bread and foul water, and but little of either; just enough to
keep alive, and to continue starving:

until I come in peace; which he seemed confident of, and intimates that
then he would punish him more severely, even with death, as a false
prophet.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 22:28</span></span>

And Micaiah said, if thou return at all in peace, the Lord hath not
spoken by me,.... I am content to be reckoned a false prophet, and to be
punished as such:

and, he said, hearken, O people, everyone of you; he called aloud unto
them to observe what he had predicted, and mark the issue of it, and to
bear testimony for him, or against him, as things should be.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 22:29</span></span>

So the king of Israel, and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, went up to
Ramothgilead. Which, according to Bunting (r), was twenty four miles
from Samaria. That Ahab went is no wonder, it was his own motion first,
his inclination led to it, his prophets encouraged him, and, in bravado
to the prophet of the Lord, was determined upon it; but it may seem much
more strange that Jehoshaphat should, after such an account as Micaiah
had given, and who, doubtless, could observe a great difference between
him and the prophets of Ahab; and yet there is much to be said which
might incline him to go, as that there were four hundred prophets all
agreed, and who made use of the name of the Lord, and pretended to be
true prophets; and though he might suspect them, he could not confute
them; and Micaiah, he prophesied evil of Ahab only, and therefore
Jehoshaphat might think himself safe in going; and besides, he had given
his word to Ahab, and he did not choose to go from it; to which may be
added, that Ahab's cause was just, to recover a part of his own
dominions.

\(r\) Travels, &c. p. 178.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 22:30</span></span>

And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself,
and enter into the battle,.... Change his clothes, his royal robes, and
put on others, perhaps the habit of a common soldier; having, it may be,
been informed by some deserters or spies, of the design of Benhadad
against him. Abarbinel thinks the meaning is, that he would clothe
himself with a coat of mail, and take to him the each of the instruments
of war, and so go into the battle secure; this seems probable from [Kg1
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034) and this he might do to elude
the prophecy of Micaiah:

but put thou on thy robes; his royal robes, or rather keep them on, that
he might appear to be the chief commander of the army. There seems to be
a good deal of insincerity and treachery in this conduct of Ahab's,
whatever honour he might pretend to Jehoshaphat, or safety he might
promise him in such a situation; his view seems to be to save himself at
the hazard of the life of Jehoshaphat, especially if the Septuagint
version could be established, "and put on my clothes"; which is natural
enough, but would have been too barefaced:

and the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle; as
if he had been a common soldier.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 22:31</span></span>

But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that had the
rule over his chariots,.... This was the number of his kings in the
first battle with Israel, and of his captains in the second, [Kg1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001), and the same number he had now,
being very probably not only the number of his chariots, but the
division of his army was into so many battalions, under the command of
these captains of chariots:

saying, fight neither with small nor great; of those that belonged to
Jehoshaphat:

save only with the king of Israel; and his men; for it can hardly be
thought that his orders were to fight with none, nor kill any in the
battle but Ahab personally; though it is very probable he might give
them directions to aim at him chiefly, knowing that, if he was killed or
taken, his army would flee or surrender; and he might be desirous of
getting him into his hands, as he had been in his; and the rather his
spite was against him, as he was the mover of the war.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 22:32</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw
Jehoshaphat,.... In his royal robes:

that they said, surely it is the king of Israel; for they might not know
the persons either of Ahab or him, but judged by his habit:

and they turned aside to fight against him; pressed upon him with all
their force, either to take him or slay him:

and Jehoshaphat cried out; with a loud voice, either to the captains to
let them know who he was, or to his men to come to his assistance, or
rather to God to help and deliver him; since it is said in [Ch2
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#031) that the Lord helped him, and
moved or inclined the hearts of the captains to depart from him, as it
follows here.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 22:33</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it
was not the king of Israel,.... Against whom only their orders were to
fight:

that they turned back from pursuing him; for upon so great a force
coming upon him he could not withstand, he fled.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 22:34</span></span>

And a certain man drew a bow at a venture,.... Not aiming at the king of
Israel, or knowing whereabout he was. In the Targum on [Ch2
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#033), this man is said to be Naaman,
the general of the army of the king of Syria, and so Jarchi here; but
though he did this in his simplicity, as the word signifies, without any
intention to smite any particular person; yet God directed the arrow to
the man he had marked for destruction, and neither his disguise, nor
coat of mail, could secure from that:

and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: of which
the pieces of armour on him were joined together, the higher and lower
parts of it, the breastplate, and what covered the belly; and though
these were joined as close as they were capable of joining them in those
times, yet the arrow, guided by divine Providence, found its way into
his body:

wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, turn thine hand; or
hands, with which he held the reins, and turn the horses on one side:

and carry me out of the host; where the battle was hottest, to a place
more remote and private, that he might have the wound examined, and the
blood stopped, and return again, as it seems he did:

for I am wounded; or rather "I am sick" (s), or ill, as the Targum;
somewhat out of order, and therefore chose to retire a little while; not
caring it should be known that he was smitten and wounded, lest his
soldiers should be disheartened.

\(s\) "aegrotare factus sum", Vatablus; "aegrotus factus sum", Junius &
Tremellius.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg1 22:35</span></span>

And the battle increased that day,.... It went on, and did not stop upon
Ahab's going out of the host, but was very hot, and both sides fought
furiously:

and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians: the
Targum is,

"he strengthened himself, and stood;''

he exerted himself to the uttermost, and stood as long as he could, or
could be supported, fighting against the Syrians, to animate his army,
and that the Syrians might not have any notion of his being wounded:

and died at even: in his chariot:

and the blood ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot; or
"bosom" (t) of it, the hollow part of it.

\(t\) "ad sinum", Montanus; "in sinum", Vatablus.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 22:36</span></span>

And there went a proclamation throughout the host, about the going down
of the sun,.... Much about the time that Ahab died; and this
proclamation by an herald might be made by his order, as he was dying,
or by Jehoshaphat, when he understood he was dead:

saying, every man to his city, and every man to his own country; the
order was to cease fighting, and make the best of their way as fast as
they could to their own homes, since their shepherd and master was dead,
which fulfilled the vision of Micaiah, [Kg1
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#017). It seems to have been a drawn
battle, at least there is no account of the advantage on either side.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg1 22:37</span></span>

So the king died, and they brought him to Samaria,.... In the chariot he
died in:

and they buried the king in Samaria; where his father Omri was buried,
[Kg1 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#028).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 22:38</span></span>

And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria,.... After the body
was taken out, very likely the chariot driver, who drove it into the
pool, and plunged it into it, as the word signifies, to cleanse it from
the blood of his master:

and the dogs licked up his blood; mixed with the water of the pool; the
Septuagint adds, "the swine", which is not probable, such creatures not
being bred in the land of Israel:

and they washed his armour; his coat of mail, through the joints of
which the blood issued, and ran upon it. The word is sometimes used for
whores, and is so translated here in the Greek version, and by Munster
and Castalio; and both Ben Gersom and Abarbinel say, that women, who
were harlots, washed here in his blood, mixed with water; and so
Josephus (u) writes, that afterwards it was a custom for whores to wash
in this pool; though some say (w) two whores were painted on Ahab's
chariot, by the order of Jezebel, to inflame his lust, and these were
what were washed; but the word signifies armour, or rather ornaments,
clothes, jewels, &c.

and now all this was according to the word of the Lord which he spake;
both by Elijah, that as the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, so they
should his, as they now did, though not in the same place; nor was it
necessary to fulfil the prophecy; see Gill on [Kg1
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019), though some have thought (x)
that his blood, mixed with the water of the pool of Samaria, was carried
in a stream down to Jezreel, and there licked by the dogs, where
Naboth's was; but chiefly what was spoken by Micaiah is here respected,
that thus Ahab fell at Ramothgilead, as he had prophesied, [Kg1
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#017) and his life went for the life
of Benhadad, as he had before declared, [Kg1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#042).

\(u\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 15. sect. 6. (w) See Jarchi & Kimchi in loc. (x)
Kimchi in loc.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 22:39</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory
house which he made,.... Which, being a very curious and extraordinary
thing, is particularly mentioned; though perhaps it might not be made
wholly of ivory, but inlaid with it; we read of ivory houses in [Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015),

and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Israel? in which the acts of his
predecessors were recorded, see [Kg1
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#019) not the Scripture book of
Chronicles, for there none of these things are related.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 22:40</span></span>

So Ahab slept with his fathers, and Ahaziah his son reigned in his
stead, Of whom more is said in the latter part of this chapter, and in
the following book.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 22:41</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth
year of Ahab king of Israel. And as Ahab reigned twenty two years, [Kg1
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#029), Jehoshaphat must reign about
eighteen years with him, and seven years after him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 22:42</span></span>

Jehoshaphat was thirty five years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem,.... So that he must be sixty
years of age when he died:

and his mother's name was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi; but of what
family they were is not said.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 22:43</span></span>

And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father,.... Who was a good
prince:

he turned not aside from doing that which was right in the eyes of the
Lord; in his moral conversation, religious worship, and civil
government:

nevertheless, the high places were not taken away, for the people
offered and burnt incense yet in the high places; he took away the high
places and groves for idolatrous worship, [Ch2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#006), but not the high places in which
sacrifices were offered to the Lord, which ought to have been,
especially since the temple was built; and those in the tribes of Judah
and Benjamin were altogether inexcusable, being near to the temple, and
under no restraint, as those of the ten tribes were; but the people were
fond of them, because of their antiquity, and it was difficult for
religious princes to remove them, if inclined.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">kg1 22:44</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel. First with Ahab,
with whom he contracted an affinity, and joined with him in his
expedition to Ramothgilead, and with Ahaziah his successor.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">kg1 22:45</span></span>

And all the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and all his might that he
showed, and all his wars, are they not written in the book of the
Chronicles of the kings of Israel? Many of them are recorded in the
canonical book of Scripture, which bears the name of Chronicles; and
more might be in this referred to, out of which might be taken what God
has thought fit to transmit to future times; see [Ch2
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">kg1 22:46</span></span>

And the remnant of the Sodomites, which remained in the days of his
father Asa, he took out of the land. His father Asa removed many of
these filthy creatures, but not all; as many, no doubt, as came within
his knowledge, but some remained, whom this his son removed, being of
the same disposition with his father, see [Kg1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#012).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">kg1 22:47</span></span>

There was then no king in Edom, a deputy was king. Which had been the
case from the times of David, who subdued Edom, and placed garrisons in
it, and governors over it, [Sa2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014)
and continued through the reign of Jehoshaphat, unto the times of his
son, under whom the Edomites revolted, and set up a king of their own,
[Kg2 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020), with a view to which this
is observed, as also to account for it how Jehoshaphat could build ships
in Eziongeber, which was in the land of Edom, of which in the next
verse, because the whole country was governed by a viceroy, or deputy,
under him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">kg1 22:48</span></span>

Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish,.... Ships to go to sea, particularly
the Indian sea, [Kg1 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022). Tarshish
is used for the sea in general, [Psa
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007), in the Cetib, or text, it is
"ten"; in the Keri, or margin, it is "made", which we follow, and may be
put together, as in the Tigurine version, and read, "he made ten ships
to go by sea":

even to go to Ophir for gold; as Solomon did; of which place see [Kg1
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#028),

but they went not, for the ships were broken at Eziongeber; the port
where they were built: as soon as they were launched, or sailed, they
were broken to pieces against the rocks near the harbour, which stood up
like a man's backbone, whence the port had its name; See Gill on [Kg1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#026), and if this was Calzem, as there
observed, near to it was a dangerous place for ships, and where many
were lost, and is supposed to be the place where Pharaoh and his host
were drowned (y); the reason of this shipwreck was, because Jehoshaphat
joined himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, for which he was reproved by
the prophet Eliezer, and this was his punishment, [Ch2
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#035).

\(y\) Vid. Geograph. Nub. Climat. 3. par. 3. in fine.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 22:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">kg1 22:49</span></span>

Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat,.... Who very
probably had built some more ships on his own, having broke off his
partnership with Ahaziah:

let my servants go with thy servants in the ships; since he was refused
a part in the ships themselves, he desires leave to send men aboard them
to traffic for him abroad:

but Jehoshaphat would not; having been reproved by a prophet of the
Lord, and had suffered the loss of his ships by joining with him
already.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Introduction](kg2000)

</div>
