<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2004)  [Next](kg2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 5

This chapter gives an account of the leprosy of Naaman the Syrian, and
of the cure of it by Elisha; how he came to hear of him, and the
recommendation he had from the king of Syria to the king of Israel, [Kg2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001), who, coming to Elisha's house,
was ordered to dip himself seven times in Jordan, which made him depart
in wrath; but one of his servants persuaded him to do it, and he did,
and was cured, [Kg2 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009), upon which he
returned to Elisha, and offered him a present, which he refused, [Kg2
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015) but Gehazi, his servant, ran
after him with a lie in his mouth, and obtained it, and returned to his
master with another, for which he was smitten with the leprosy of
Naaman, [Kg2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 5:1</span></span>

Now Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria,.... The general of
Benhadad's army; for he was now king of Syria, though some think Hazael
his successor was:

was a great man with his master; high in his favour and esteem:

and honourable; not only acceptable to the king, and loaded with honours
by him, but greatly respected by all ranks and degrees among the people:

because by him the Lord had given deliverance unto Syria; out of the
hands of their enemies, and victory over them, and particularly in the
last battle with Israel, in which Ahab was slain, and, as the Jews
suppose, by the hands of Naaman; see Gill on [Kg1
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034) however, when any salvation was
wrought, or victory obtained, even by Heathens, and by them over Israel,
the people of God, it was of the Lord:

he was also a mighty man in valour; a very courageous valiant man:

but he was a leper; was stricken with the leprosy, which had deformed
and disgraced his person, and weakened his strength, and dispirited him;
all his grandeur and honour could not protect him from this loathsome
disease.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 5:2</span></span>

And the Syrians had gone out by companies,.... Not regular troops, but a
sort of banditti of robbers, which made excursions into the land of
Israel, to plunder and carry off what booty they could:

and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid;
for boys and girls were a part of the booty of such robbers, whom they
could sell for money, see [Joe 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001).
Jarchi and Kimchi say she was a girl of Naaron, a city so called:

and she waited on Naaman's wife; being either made a present of to the
general by those plunderers, or was bought by him of them for his wife's
service.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 5:3</span></span>

And she said unto her mistress,.... As she was waiting upon her at a
certain time, and perhaps her mistress was lamenting the case of her
husband as desperate and incurable:

would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria; meaning
Elisha, who, though sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another,
yet often at Samaria, and it seems was there when this girl was taken
captive:

for he would recover him of his leprosy; the maid had heard of the
miracles wrought by Elisha, and doubted not that at the request of her
lord he would be willing, as she believed he was able, to cure him of
this disease.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 5:4</span></span>

And one went in and told his lord,.... What the girl had said to her
mistress; one of the servants of the house that overheard it; or rather,
Naaman went and told his lord the king of Syria; for as this was said to
his wife, no doubt she told it to her husband, and not a servant; and
the following words require this sense, and is the sense of most Jewish
commentators:

saying, thus and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel; who
for her wit and beauty might be well known at court by the name of the
Israelitish girl.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 5:5</span></span>

And the king of Syria said, go to, go,.... On what Naaman related to him
from what the maid had said, he urged him by all means to go directly to
Samaria:

and I will send a letter unto the king of Israel; recommending him to
use his interest in his behalf; this was Jehoram the son of Ahab:

and he departed; set out on his journey immediately, as soon as he could
conveniently:

and took with him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of
gold; partly for the expenses of his journey, and partly to make
presents to the king of Israel's servants, and especially to the
prophet; a talent of silver, according to Brerewood (d), was three
hundred and seventy five pounds of our money; but, according to Bishop
Cumberland's (e) exact calculation, it was three hundred and fifty and
three pounds eleven shillings and ten and an half pence the pieces of
gold are, by the Targum, called golden pence, and a golden penny,
according to the first of the above writers (f), was of the value of our
money fifteen shillings; so that these amounted to 4500 pounds sterling:

and ten changes of raiment; both for his own use, and presents.

\(d\) De Ponder. & Pret. Vet. Num. c. 4. (e) Scripture Weights and
Measures, c. 4. p. 120. (f) Ut supra, (De Ponder. & Pret. Vet. Num.) c.
3.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 5:6</span></span>

And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying,.... The
contents of which were, so far as it concerned Naaman and his case,
which are only observed, these:

now when this letter is come unto thee; was received by him:

behold, I have therewith sent Naaman my servant unto thee; the bearer of
it:

that thou mayest recover him of his leprosy; meaning not he himself, but
that he would recommend him to the care of a proper person, his prophet,
and enjoin him to do the best he could for him; but the king of Israel
mistook his meaning, as appears by what follows.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 5:7</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that
he rent his clothes,.... As one in great distress, being thrown into
perplexity of mind by it, not knowing what to do; or, as some think, at
the blasphemy he supposed to be in it, requiring that of him which only
God could do:

and said, am I God, to kill and to make alive; or have the power of life
and death, which only belongs to the Supreme Being:

that this man doth send unto me to recover a man of his leprosy; for a
leper was reckoned as one dead, his disease incurable, his flesh upon
him being mortified by it, see [Num
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#012) and therefore not supposed to be
in the power of man, only of God, to cure; and therefore, in Israel,
none had anything to do with the leper but the priest, in the name of
God:

wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeketh a quarrel against
me; to pick a quarrel with him, in order to go to war with him as he
supposed. This seems to have been spoken to his lords and courtiers
about him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 5:8</span></span>

And it was so, when Elisha the man of God had heard that the king of
Israel had rent his clothes,.... And upon what account:

that he sent to the king, saying, wherefore hast thou rent thy clothes?
and thereby expressed so much concern and distress:

let him come now to me: meaning Naaman the Syrian leper:

and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel; able in the name of
the Lord to work miracles, which he should be sensible of and
acknowledge, to the glory of the God of Israel, by the cure that should
be wrought upon him; and hereby he taxed the king of Israel with
ignorance or neglect of him as a prophet.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 5:9</span></span>

So Naaman came with his horses, and with his chariot,.... In his chariot
drawn by horses; or "with horsemen and chariots", a great retinue, both
for his own grandeur, and for the honour of the prophet, and to make him
the more respectable by him:

and stood at the door of the house of Elisha; who now dwelt at Gilgal,
as is probable, see [Kg2 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038), hither
Naaman was directed, and here he stopped; and having sent a messenger to
Elisha to acquaint him who he was, and what was his business, he stayed
waiting for an answer.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 5:10</span></span>

And Elisha sent a messenger unto him,.... Or returned an answer by
Naaman's messenger; he did not go out to him, choosing to be retired, as
he commonly did; and being perhaps employed in prayer for the cure; and
it may be also to show his contempt of or little regard he had to
worldly grandeur and honour, as well as to mortify the pride of Naaman:

saying, go and wash in Jordan seven times; so, according to the law of
the cleansing the leper, he was to be sprinkled seven times, and on the
seventh day his flesh was to be bathed or dipped all over in water,
which is meant by washing here, [Lev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#007).

and thy flesh shall come again to thee; which was eaten and consumed by
the disease on him:

and thou shalt be clean; freed from this pollution, or filthy disease,
with which he was defiled; for a leper was reckoned unclean, [Lev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#003).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 5:11</span></span>

But Naaman was wroth with him,.... On more accounts than one:

and went away; not to Jordan, but from the prophet's house, with an
intention to return to his own country:

behold, I thought, he will surely come out to me this he said within
himself, making no doubt of it but that he would show him so much
respect and civility as to come out of his house to him, and converse
with him, or invite him into it and not doing this was one thing made
him wroth: and stand; he supposed that he would not only come out, but
stand before him, as inferiors before their superiors in reverence, but
instead of that he remained sitting within doors:

and call on the name of the Lord his God: he expected, that as he was a
prophet of the Lord, that he would have prayed to him for the cure of
him:

and strike his hand over the place; wave his hand to and fro, as the
word signifies, over the place of the leprosy, as the Targum, over the
place affected with it; or towards the place where he worshipped the
Lord, as Ben Gersom, toward the temple at Jerusalem; or towards Jordan,
the place where he bid him go and wash, as Abarbinel; but the first
sense seems best: "and recover the leper"; meaning himself, heal him by
the use of such means and rites.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 5:12</span></span>

Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the
waters of Israel?.... Abana is, in the marginal reading, called Amana,
and so the Targum; perhaps from the Mount Amana, from whence it sprung,
a mountain in Syria (g), mentioned with Lebanon, [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008). This river is thought to be the
Chrysorrhoas of Pliny (h), and other writers; there are no traces of its
name, or of the following, to be met with now; the only river by
Damascus is called Barrady, which supplies Damascus and its gardens, and
makes them so fruitful and pleasant as they be; it pours down from the
mountains, as Mr. Maundrell (i) describes it, and is divided into three
streams, of which the middlemost and biggest runs directly to Damascus,
through a large field, called the field of Damascus; and the other two
are drawn round, the one to the right hand, and the other to the left,
on the borders of the gardens. Pharpar is thought (k) to be the river
Orontes, which runs close to the walls of Antioch, and courses through
its large and spacious plain, being numbered among the rivers of Syria;
it takes its rise from Lebanon, and, sliding through the said plain,
falls into the Syrian sea. Benjamin of Tudela (l) speaks of these rivers
under their Scripture names; Abana or Amana as he says, passes through
the city and supplies the houses of great men with water through wooden
pipes; and Pharpar is without the city and runs among the gardens and
orchards, and waters them. Farfar is also the name of a river in Italy
(m):

may I not wash in them, and be clean? as well as in Jordan; or rather,
since they are better waters, and so not have been at this trouble and
expense to come hither; or have I not washed in them every day? I have,
and am I clean? I am not; which is the sense the several Jewish writers
give (n):

so he turned, and went away in a rage; in a great passion, swearing and
cursing perhaps, ordering his chariot driver to turn and be gone at
once.

\(g\) Tacit. Annal. l. 2. c. 83. (h) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 18. (i) Journey
from Aleppo, p. 122, 123. (k) Cartwright's Preacher's Travels, p. 7, 8.
Hiller. Onomast. Sacr. p. 908. (l) Itinerar. p. 55. (m) Servius in
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 7. p. 1243. (n) Ben Gersom in loc. & R. Joseph
Kimchi, & R. Jonah in Ben Melech in. loc.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 5:13</span></span>

And his servant came near, and spake unto him, and said, my father,....
Or my lord, as the Targum; this being not a familiar and affectionate
expression, but a term of honour, reverence, and submission:

if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have
done it? something that was hard and difficult to done, or painful to
bear, to go through some severe operation, or disagreeable course of
physic:

how much rather then when he saith to thee, wash, and be clean? which is
so easy to be done; though Abarbinel observes it may be interpreted, the
prophet has bid thee do a great thing, and which is wonderful; for
though he has said, wash and be clean, consider it a great thing, and
which is a wonderful mystery, and therefore do not despise his cure.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 5:14</span></span>

Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, according
to the saying of the man of God,.... He listened to the reasoning of his
servant, and his passion subsided, and did as the prophet ordered him:

and his flesh came again like unto the flesh of a little child; clear
and fresh, soft and tender as an infant, quite new flesh:

and he was clean; from the leprosy, and all the filthy symptoms of it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 5:15</span></span>

And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company,.... To give
him thanks for the advice he had given him, and by him to give thanks to
God for the cure he had received; for he was sensible it was from the
Lord, his words show:

and came and stood before him; for being admitted into the prophet's
house, instead of the prophet standing before him, as he before
expected, he now stood before the prophet in veneration of him, and
sensible of his obligation to him:

behold, now I know there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel;
though he did not before, but his cure fully convinced him of it:

I pray thee, take a blessing of thy servant; not a wish of health and
happiness, which the prophet would not have refused, but a present; the
Targum calls it an offering.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 5:16</span></span>

But he said, as the Lord liveth, before whom I stand,.... Whose minister
and prophet he was, and by whom he swears:

I will receive none: to let him know that this cure was not to be
attributed to him, but the Lord only; and that what concern he had in it
was not for the sake of money, but for the glory of the God of Israel:

and he urged him to take it, but he refused it; Naaman was very pressing
upon him to receive a gift from him, but he could not be prevailed upon
to accept it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 5:17</span></span>

And Naaman said, shall there not then, I pray thee, be given to thy
servant two mules' burden of earth..... Not that he desired of Elisha
that he would suffer his servant Gehazi to receive a present as much as
two mules could carry; but inasmuch as the prophet refused a present
from him, his servant, he asks a favour of him, that he would permit him
to take with him, out of the land of Israel, as much earth two mules
could carry, that is, to make an altar of earth, as the next words
indicate: but as he might have this any where without the prophet's
leave, some Jewish writers (o) think he requested it from his own house,
and from the place his feet trod on, as conceiving in a superstitious
way that there was a sort of holiness in it; or however, that
wheresoever he had it, if with the prophet's leave, a blessing would go
with it, or that would be a sort of a consecration of it; and having an
altar made of the earth of this land, would show that he was in the
faith of the same God, and performed the same worship to him Israel did:

for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor
sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the Lord: hence the Jews say, he
became a proselyte of righteousness (p), embraced the true religion, and
the worship of the true God, according to the laws given to Israel; and
the following words, rightly understood, confirm the same.

\(o\) Ben Gersom & Abarbinel in loc. (p) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 11.
2.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 5:18</span></span>

In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant,.... Which he next mentions,
and on account of which he desires the prayers of Elisha for him, as the
Vulgate Latin version; or it may be, this is a prayer of his own, put up
at this time to the true Jehovah, in whom he believed:

that when my master: meaning the king of Syria:

goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leaneth on my
hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow down myself in
the house of Rimmon; the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing; the
house of Rimmon was a temple of an idol of that name; what idol it was
is not easy to say; the Septuagint version calls it Remman, thought by
some to be the same with Remphan, [Act
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043), a name of Saturn, said to be
given him from a Greek word, which signifies to "wander" (q), he being
placed among the wandering stars in the supreme heavens; which is not
likely, for the word is certainly of a Syriac signification, and comes
either from which signifies "high", and so the same with Elioun, the
Phoenician deity, called the most high (r); or, as "Rimmon" is used for
a pomegranate, this is thought to design the Syrian goddess, to whom
this sort of fruit was sacred; or Juno, whose statue, in her temple at
Mycenas (s), had a pomegranate in one hand; or rather this Rimmon was
Jupiter Cassius, so called from Mount Cassius, which divided Syria from
Egypt, who is painted with his hand stretched out, and a pomegranate in
it (t); and may be the same with Caphtor, the father of the Caphtorim,
[Gen 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014) who might be deified after
his death, their names, Rimmon and Caphtor, being of the same
signification (u). But be this deity as it may, it was worshipped by the
Syrians; and when the king of Syria went in to worship, he used to lean
upon the hand of one of his officers, either being lame, or for state
sake, in which office Naaman was; and his request to the prophet, or to
the Lord, is, not for pardon for a sin to be committed; nor to be
indulged in his continuance of it; not to worship the idol along with
his master; nor to dissemble the worship of it, when he really
worshipped it not; nor to be excused any evil in the discharge of his
post and office; but for the pardon of the sin of idolatry he had been
guilty of, of which he was truly sensible, now sincerely acknowledges,
and desires forgiveness of; and so Dr. Lightfoot (w), and some others
(x), interpret it; and to this sense the words may be rendered:

when my master went in to the house of Rimmon to worship there; which
was his usual custom; and he leaned on my hand, which was the common
form in which he was introduced into it:

and I worshipped in the house of Rimmon, as his master did, for the same
word is used here as before:

in as much, or seeing I have worshipped in the house of Rimmon, have
been guilty of such gross idolatry:

the Lord, I pray, forgive thy servant in this thing; the language of a
true penitent.

\(q\) A "vagari", Hesychius. (r) Vid. Selden. de Dis Syris Syntagm. 2.
c. 10. (s) Pausan. Corinthiac. sive, l. 2. p. 114. (t) Achilles Tatius,
l. 3. Vid. Reland. Palestin. Illustrat. tom. 2. p. 934. (u) See
Clayton's Origin of Hieroglyphics, p. 113. (w) Works, vol. 1. p. 86. (x)
Vid. Quenstedt. Dissert. de. Petit. Naaman. sect. 21, 22.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 5:19</span></span>

And he said unto him,.... That is, the prophet said to Naaman:

go in peace: in peace of mind; be assured that God has pardoned this and
all other transgressions:

so he departed from him a little way; about a mile, as the Targum, and
so other Jewish writers; of this phrase; see Gill on [Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016), some say a land's length, that
is, about one hundred and twenty feet; rather it was a thousand cubits,
or half a mile.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 5:20</span></span>

But Gehazi the servant of Elisha the man of God said,.... Within
himself, observing what had passed:

behold, my master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at
his hands that which he brought: he speaks contemptibly of Naaman, as an
alien from the commonwealth of Israel, and reproaches his master for
letting him go free, without paying for his cure; when he thought he
should have taken what he brought and offered, and given it to needy
Israelites, and especially to the sons of the prophets, that wanted it;
and perhaps it mostly disturbed him, that he had no share of it himself:

but, as the Lord liveth, I will run after him, and take somewhat of him;
the word for "somewhat", wanting a letter usually in it, is what is
sometimes used for a blot; and Jarchi observes, that Gehazi taking
something from Naaman, was a blot unto him, and indeed such an one that
he could not wipe off.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 5:21</span></span>

So Gehazi followed after Naaman,.... As fast as he could:

and when Naaman saw him running after him; which he might observe,
looking back, or be informed of by some of his servants:

he lighted down from the chariot to meet him; in honour to the prophet,
whose servant he was:

and said, is all well? fearing something ill had befallen Elisha; or he
himself had done something wrong, which occasioned the servant to run
after him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 5:22</span></span>

And he said, all is well,.... He need give himself no uneasiness at the
coming and sight of him:

my master hath sent me, saying, behold, even now there be come to me;
just then, since he departed from him:

from Mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets: where
perhaps was a school of them:

give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two changes of garments:
which, as it was a downright lie, so highly improbable that Elisha
should ask so large a sum of money, with two changes of raiment, for two
young scholars, see [Kg2 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005) and which
Naaman, with a little reflection, might have seen through; but his heart
was so filled with gratitude for the benefit received, that he was glad
of an opportunity, at any rate, of showing respect to the prophet.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 5:23</span></span>

And Naaman said, be content,.... Or be pleased; do not object to it:

take two talents: a talent for each young man, which amounted to between
three hundred and four hundred pounds apiece:

and he urged; pressed him hard, insisted upon his taking them, who might
pretend a great deal of modesty, and a strict regard to his master's
orders:

and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of
garments; for each young man:

and laid them upon two of his servants, the servants of Naaman, not
choosing to burden Elisha's servant with them; for such a quantity of
money and clothes was pretty heavy:

and they bare them before him; both for his ease, and for his honour.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 5:24</span></span>

And when he came to the tower,.... Of Samaria, or which was near it; a
fortified place, and where was a watch, to whom he could safely commit
the money and clothes:

he took them from their hand; not willing they should go any further
with him, lest the affair should be discovered to his master:

and bestowed them in the house; deposited them there in the hands of
some person whom he could trust; or laid them out, or ordered them to be
laid out, in the purchase of houses, lands, vineyards, &c. see [Kg2
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#026).

and he let the men go, and they departed; to their master.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 5:25</span></span>

But he went in, and stood before his master,.... To know his will, and
minister to him, as he had used to do, and as if he had never been from
the house:

and Elisha said unto him, whence comest thou, Gehazi? where had he been,
and where was he last?

and he said, thy servant went no whither; he pretended he had never been
out of doors, which was another impudent lie; one would have thought
that he who had lived so long with the prophet, and had seen the
miracles wrought by him, and knew with what a spirit of prophecy he was
endowed, would never have ventured to tell such an untruth, since he
might expect to be detected; but covetousness had blinded his eyes and
hardened his heart.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 5:26</span></span>

And he said unto him, went not mine heart with thee?.... Did my heart or
knowledge go from me, that what thou hast done should be hid from me? so
Ben Gersom and others; or my heart did not go with thee, it was contrary
to my mind and will what thou didst; so Abendana; or rather, as the
Targum, by a spirit of prophecy it was shown unto me, &c. I knew full
well what thou wentest for, and hast done; and so Maimonides (y); was
not I employed in my thoughts? or, did I not think that so it was as
thou hast done? I did:

when the man turned again from chariot to meet thee? meaning Naaman the
Syrian:

is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments: as Gehazi had
now done:

and oliveyards, and vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and menservants, and
maidservants? that is, to purchase those with the two talents of silver
he had received, as he thought in his heart, or intended to do, as the
Targum; or had given orders to purchase such for him to the persons to
whom he had committed the care of them in the tower; this was not a
proper time, when the honour of the prophet, and the credit of religion,
and the good of this man, as a new proselyte, were in danger thereby.

\(y\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 1. c. 39.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 5:27</span></span>

The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy
seed for ever,.... As long as any of his race remained; as through his
covetousness he had his money, so for his punishment he should have his
disease:

and he went out from his presence; as one ashamed and confounded, and
discharged from his master's service:

a leper as white as snow; a leprosy of which colour is the worst, and is
incurable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](kg2006)

</div>
