<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2011)  [Next](kg2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 12

In this chapter some account is given of the reign of Jehoash, that it
was long, and the beginning of it good, during the life of Jehoiada,
[Kg2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001) how urgent he was to have
the temple repaired, and what methods were taken for that purpose, [Kg2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004), how meanly, as well as
impiously, he behaved, when the king of Syria was about to come up to
Jerusalem and besiege it, [Kg2 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#017),
and the chapter is closed with an account of his death, and the manner
of it, [Kg2 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#019).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 12:1</span></span>

In the seventh year of Jehu Jehoash began to reign,.... So that he
reigned twenty one or twenty two years contemporary with Jehu's reign,
for Jehu reigned twenty eight years:

and forty years reigned he in Jerusalem; the same number of years David
and Solomon reigned:

and his mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba; a city in the tribe of
Simeon, in the extreme part of the land of Canaan southward; her name in
the Chaldee dialect is Tabitha, the same with Dorcas in Greek, [Act
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 12:2</span></span>

And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all his
days,.... Worshipping the only true God, and ruling and walking
according to the law of God:

wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed him; and so long as he observed
his instructions, and as long as that priest lived, he reigned well; for
to that period "all his days must be limited"; for after his death he
was seduced by the princes of Judah to idolatry, and lived scandalously,
and died ignominiously; see [Ch2 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#002).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 12:3</span></span>

But the high places were not taken away,.... Used before the temple was
built, or set up in Rehoboam's time, [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023) contrary to the law of God,
which required that sacrifices should only be offered in the place the
Lord chose to dwell in, [Deu 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#004) the
people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places; as they
had done in the times of Athaliah, and though the pure worship of God
was restored at Jerusalem; and indeed this they did in all preceding
reigns; nor was it in the power of the best of kings, at least they did
not think it safe to attempt to remove them till Hezekiah's time; so
fond were the people of them because of their antiquity and supposed
sanctity, and for the sake of ease.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 12:4</span></span>

And Jehoash said to the priests,.... Being minded or having it in his
heart, to repair the temple, as in [Ch2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#004) not only because it was the
sanctuary of the Lord, though that chiefly, but because it had been a
sanctuary to him, where he was hid and preserved six years:

all the money of the dedicated things that is brought into the house of
the Lord: or rather, "that is to be brought", as De Dieu, and others
render it, the particulars of which follow:

even the money of everyone that passeth the account; or that passeth
among them that are numbered, as in [Exo
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013) that were upwards of twenty
years of age, and bound to pay the half shekel for the ransom of their
souls; and it is called the collection or burden Moses laid on them in
the wilderness, [Ch2 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#006).

the money that every man is set at; the price the priest set upon or
estimated a man at, or whomsoever that belonged to him, that he devoted
to the Lord, which by the law he was bound to pay for his redemption,
and, till that was done, he and they were not his, but the Lord's, of
which see [Lev 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#001) and here the
Targum calls it, the money of the redemption of souls, which is the gift
of a man for the redemption of his soul:

and all the money that cometh into any man's heart to bring into the
house of the Lord: vows and freewill offerings made of their own accord.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 12:5</span></span>

Let the priests take it to them, every man of his acquaintance,.... Of
those that were most known by them; for the priests had cities assigned
them in several parts of the land, and they that dwelt with them in
them, or in the parts adjacent to them, were best known by them; and
they were sent into all the cities, some to one and some to another,
where they were most acquainted, to collect money, both what was due by
law, and what the people should freely give, see [Ch2
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#005).

and let them repair the breaches of the house, wheresoever any breach
shall be found: that is, of the temple, which, according to the Jewish
chronology (i), had been built but one hundred and fifty five years; and
being built very strong, would have needed no considerable repairs as
yet, but that it had been broken up and misused by Athaliah and her
sons, [Ch2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#007).

\(i\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 18.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 12:6</span></span>

But it was so, that in the twenty and third year of King Jehoash, the
priests had not repaired the breaches of the house. Either the people
being backward to pay in the money, or the priests converted it to their
own use: or, however, were negligent of doing the work enjoined them by
the king, either in collecting the money, or in using it as they were
directed.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 12:7</span></span>

Then King Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and the other
priests,.... The common priests, Jehoiada being high priest:

and said unto them, why repair ye not the breaches of the house? in
which they appeared to him very dilatory; the reason might be, the
people were not forward to pay in their money, and they might not choose
to begin the repairs until they had got it all in, or at least what was
sufficient to carry them through them:

now therefore receive no more money of your acquaintance; suspecting
that what they had received they kept for their own use:

but deliver it for the breaches of the house; into other hands for that
use, and so dismissed them at once from collecting the money, and being
concerned in the repairs of the temple.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 12:8</span></span>

And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people,....
And delivered up what they had:

neither to repair the breaches of the house; being very willing to be
stop both services, and especially since they seemed to be suspected.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 12:9</span></span>

But Jehoiada the priest took a chest,.... By the commandment of the
king, [Ch2 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#008), to put the money
collected into, to prevent any fraud, or suspicion of any:

and bored a hole in the lid of it; to drop the money into, by which
means it could not be taken out without taking off the lid:

and set it beside the altar; the altar of burnt offering, in the court:

on the right side, as one cometh into the house of the Lord; that is, on
the north; for the entrance into the temple was at the east: in [Ch2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#008), it is said to be set without at
the gate of the house; which Dr. Lightfoot (k) thinks respects another
time, and that either another chest was made, or the same that was first
placed by the altar, in the court of the priests, and so in their hands,
and the money not coming in apace, was removed without the court at the
entrance of it, whither the people brought it readily:

and the priests that kept the door; the door of the outward court, the
levites, the porters, or rather, as the Targum, the priests, the
treasurers, who were appointed to this service in the room of the others
dismissed; and so Kimchi and other Jewish commentators interpret this of
the keepers of the vessels of the sanctuary, and not of the doors of it:

these put therein all the money that was brought into the house of the
Lord; by the people from the several parts of the country, who, by
proclamation, were required so to do, and very readily did, [Ch2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#009).

\(k\) Prospect of the Temple, ch. 30. p. 20, 22.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 12:10</span></span>

And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest,....
Which might easily be guessed at by the number of the people which
contributed:

that the king's and the high priest came up; to the temple; the high
priest did not choose to come alone, lest he should be suspected, but to
have the king's secretary with him, that the money might be taken out of
the chest, and told in the presence of them both: in [Ch2
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#011) instead of the "high priest", it
is the "high priest's officer", which the Targum there calls the Sagan
of the high priest, or his deputy, who, perhaps, attended when the high
priest could not:

and they put up in bags, and told the money that was found in the house
of the Lord; that is, they poured the money out of the chest, or emptied
it, as in [Ch2 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#011) and counted it,
and very likely set down the sum in writing, and put it up in bags, very
probably sealed.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 12:11</span></span>

And they gave the money, being told, into the hands of them that did the
work, that had the oversight of the house of the Lord,.... Who were
appointed overseers of the workmen employed in the repairs of the
temple; which overseers were laymen, and not priests, they being
discharged from any concern in the repairs: this money "told", Kimchi
interprets of its being coined; he supposes money coined and uncoined to
be brought, which was put in separate bags; and that, which was not
coined, they coined it before they delivered it to the overseers to pay
the workmen with:

and they laid it out to the carpenters and builders that wrought upon
the house of the Lord; paid them with it, some that wrought in cutting
the timber, and others in building with it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 12:12</span></span>

And to masons, and hewers of stone,.... Which they cut out of the
mountain, and the masons repaired the stone walls with:

and to buy timber; felled in Lebanon:

and hewed stone; fitted for building with:

to repair the breaches of the house of the Lord; where both timber and
stone were wanting:

and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it; in whatsoever
else it needed, as iron and brass to mend it, [Ch2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#012).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 12:13</span></span>

Howbeit there were not made for the house of the Lord, bowls of
silver,.... Either to hold the blood of the sacrifices, or the drink
offerings of wine:

snuffers; to trim the lamps; or, as Jarchi and other writers, both
Jewish and Christian, musical instruments:

basins; vessels to sprinkle the blood with, as the word signifies:

trumpets; silver ones, to call the assembly, blow over the sacrifices,
&c.

any vessels of gold, or vessels of silver; for any other use: these were
not made

of the money that was brought into the house of the Lord; yet, in [Ch2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#014), it is said they were, which is
to be reconciled thus; they did not make any of those things at first,
until the house was repaired, and the charges of it defrayed; and then
of what remained they made vessels for the house, which were wanting,
that Athaliah had bestowed on Baalim, [Ch2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#007).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 12:14</span></span>

But they gave that to the workmen, and repaired therewith the house of
the Lord. They took care that the workmen should first be paid for the
repairs of the temple.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 12:15</span></span>

Moreover, they reckoned not with the men into whose hand they delivered
the money to be bestowed on the workmen,.... That is, the king's
secretary and the high priest, or his officer, never called to account
the overseers of the workmen, to whom they committed the money to pay
them with; never examined how they laid it out, and for what:

for they dealt faithfully; they saw they acted such an honest and
upright part, and such an high opinion had they of them, that they never
examined their accounts, or called for their bills.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 12:16</span></span>

The trespass money and sin money was not brought into the house of the
Lord,.... Which was the money persons at a distance sent for their
trespass and sin offerings instead of cattle, with which the sacrifices
were bought; and what remained of the money was not brought into the
temple, and made use of in the above manner:

it was the priest's; the overplus of it, and such of the sacrifices
which by the law were appropriated to them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 12:17</span></span>

Then Hazael king of Syria went up and fought against Gath, and took
it,.... When Jehoiada was dead, and Jehoash was become an apostate, the
Lord suffered the king of Syria to be a scourge to him; who first
attacked Gath, and took it, which was formerly one of the principalities
of the Philistines, but was subdued by David, and had been in the hands
of the Israelites ever since; the king of Syria began with this, as
nearest to him, to open the way for what he had further in view:

and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem; he made such
preparations, and took such measures, as plainly indicated what his
design was.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 12:18</span></span>

And Jehoash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat,
and Jehoram, and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had
dedicated,.... To sacred uses, and had laid up in the temple:

and his own hallowed things: which he had devoted to the same uses:

and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of the
Lord: which were gifts and presents from divers persons for sacred
services:

and sent it to Hazael king of Syria, and he went away from Jerusalem; to
bribe him, that he might desist from his purpose; which showed a
meanness of spirit, and was the effect of his idolatry and apostasy,
having forsaken the Lord, and being forsaken by him; in whom should have
been his trust and confidence, and then he need not have been afraid to
meet the king of Syria.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 12:19</span></span>

And the rest of the acts of Jehoash, and all that he did, are they not
written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? In the
registers and annals of those princes; some of them are to be met with
in [Ch2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#001).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 12:20</span></span>

And his servants arose,.... This was after he had slain Zechariah the
son of Jehoiada, who reproved him for his idolatry; and after a second
expedition of the king of Syria, who came to Jerusalem, and spoiled it,
and left Jehoash diseased, as is recorded in [Ch2
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#023),

and made a conspiracy; not to get the kingdom into their hands, for his
son succeeded him, but to avenge the death of Zechariah:

and slew Jehoash in the house of Millo, which goeth down to Silla; these
are both names of places; perhaps the latter is mentioned, to
distinguish this Bethmillo from Millo in Zion; or rather that itself is
meant, and described by the descent from it to a causeway, as Silla may
signify, which led to the royal palace.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 12:21</span></span>

For Jozachar the son of Shimeath,.... Said to be an Ammonitess, and this
man's name Zabad, [Ch2 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#026),

and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants; who is said in the same
place to be the son of Shimrith a Moabitess:

these smote him, and he died; justly did he fall by the hands of such
persons for his idolatry:

and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David; but not in
the sepulchres of the kings, because of his idolatry and murder of a
priest of the Lord:

and Amaziah his son reigned in his stead; the conspirators not seeking
the kingdom, but vengeance on him for his sins, which, whether right in
them to do, was suffered by the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 13](kg2013)

</div>
