<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2023)  [Next](kg2025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 24

This chapter relates the rebellion of Jehoiakim against the king of
Babylon, which prepared the way for the ruin of the kingdom of Judah,
according to the decree of God, and also the death of Jehoiakim, and the
conquest the king of Babylon made of part of the land of the king of
Egypt, [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001) and the short and
wicked reign of Jehoiachin his son, when he and the royal family, with
great numbers of the inhabitants of the land, were carried captive to
Babylon, [Kg2 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008), and his uncle was
made king in his room, [Kg2 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 24:1</span></span>

In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up,.... Against
Jerusalem; this was in the latter end of the third, or the beginning of
the fourth of Jehoiakim's reign, and the first of Nebuchadnezzar, [Jer
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001), when Jehoiakim was taken, but
restored upon promise of subjection and obedience, and hostages given,
at which time Daniel and his companions were carried captive, with some
of the vessels of the temple; See Gill on [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), [Dan
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#002).

and Jehoiakim became his servant three years: which were the fifth,
sixth, and seventh years of his reign:

then he turned and rebelled against him; being encouraged by the king of
Egypt, who promised to assist him against the king of Babylon;
Nebuchadnezzar is the Nabocolasser in Ptolemy's canon; and Berosus (n)
testifies, that seventy years before the Persian monarchy he made war
against the Phoenicians and Jews, and it is from this time the seventy
years' captivity is to be dated.

\(n\) Apud Clement. Alex. Stromat. 1. p. 329.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 24:2</span></span>

And the Lord sent against him,.... By Nebuchadnezzar, against whom he
rebelled:

bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the
Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon; who were all subject to
the king of Babylon, or were voluntary troops in his service, and bore
an hatred to the Jews: according to Eupolemus (o), this army consisted
of Medes and Babylonians, and, besides 10,000 chariots, there were in it
180,000 foot, and 120,000 horse:

and sent them against Judah to destroy it; this was not until the
eleventh of Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar being diverted by the siege of
Tyre, or other important business, from chastising the king of Judah
until this time:

according to the word of the Lord, which he spake by his servants the
prophets; Isaiah, Jeremiah, Zephaniah, and Huldah the prophetess.

\(o\) Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 9. c. 39. p. 454.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 24:3</span></span>

Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove
them out of his sight,.... It was the sure and certain decree of God
they should be carried captive, and therefore he stirred up the spirit
of Nebuchadnezzar, and gave him orders to go against it:

for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did; which were still
continued among the Jews, and committed by them, though repented of by
Manasseh, and he returned from them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 24:4</span></span>

And also for the innocent blood that he shed, for he filled Jerusalem
with innocent blood,.... See [Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016) which cruel usage of the
prophets, and servants of the Lord, was still continued; see [Jer
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#021),

which the Lord would not pardon; he pardoned the sins of Manasseh, who
repented, but not the sins of those persons who imitated him, but
repented not; or though he personally pardoned the sins of Manasseh, so
that he was saved everlastingly, yet the temporal punishment of the
nation for those sins, in which they were involved with him, was not
averted.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 24:5</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,.... In [Ch2
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#008), it is added, "his abominations,
and that which was found in him": which besides his rebellion against
the king of Babylon, and his shedding innocent blood, is interpreted of
marks made in his body for superstitious and idolatrous purposes; so
Lyra.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 24:6</span></span>

So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers,.... He died as they did, but was
not buried with them, and indeed had no burial at all, according to the
prophecy of Jeremiah, [Jer 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018) for,
falling into the hands of the king of Babylon, he was bound in chains,
in order to be carried to Babylon, but died as soon as he came out of
Jerusalem, at the gates of which he was cast, and had no burial, [Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006). At this time also some of the
vessels of the temple were carried away, and put in the idol's temple at
Babylon, [Ch2 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007), and Eupolemus (p)
says, that whatever gold, silver, and brass, were in the temple, were
carried away:

and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead; called sometimes Jeconiah,
and by contempt Coniah, [Jer 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024).

\(p\) Ut supra. (Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 9. c. 39. p. 454.)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 24:7</span></span>

And the king of Egypt came not any more out of his land,.... To receive
the tribute he imposed on the land of Judah, or to help the kings there
of, Jehoiakim and Jehoiachin; not till the times of Zedekiah, and then
was obliged to retire, without giving any assistance, [Jer
37:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#007) the reason follows:

for the king of Babylon had taken from the river of Egypt unto the river
Euphrates, all that pertained to the king of Egypt; all that lay between
the river Nile, or the Rhinocolura, and the river Euphrates so that he
could not stir out of his dominions, which lay beyond.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 24:8</span></span>

Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign,.... In [Ch2
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009) he is said to be but eight years
old; which may be reconciled by observing, that he might be made and
declared king by his father, in the first year of his reign, who reigned
eleven years, so that he was eight years old when he began to reign with
him, and eighteen when he began to reign alone (q). Dr. Lightfoot (r)
gives another solution of this difficulty, that properly speaking he was
eighteen years old when he began to reign, but, in an improper sense,
the son of eight years, or the eighth year, as the Hebrew phrase is;
that is, he fell in the lot of the eighth year of the captivity of
Judah, which was in the latter end of the third, or the beginning of the
fourth of his father's reign, and the first of Nebuchadnezzar's, and it
was now in the eighth of Nebuchadnezzar that he was king, see [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012), but very probably in [Ch2
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009) there is a mistake in the copyist
of eight for eighteen, since in the Arabic and Syriac versions it is
there eighteen, as here:

he reigned in Jerusalem three months; the ten days besides are here
omitted for shortness, [Ch2 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#009).

and his mother's name was Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of
Jerusalem; a person no doubt well known in those times.

\(q\) So in Seder Olam Rabba, c. 25. (r) Works, vol. 1. p. 122.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 24:9</span></span>

And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, according to
all that his father had done. Being partner with him in his throne, he
was in his sins, and continued therein, see [Kg2
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#037).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 24:10</span></span>

At that time,.... When Jehoiachin reigned:

when the year was expired; so it is in [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010) or at the revolution of the
year; which some take to be autumn, the beginning of the civil year with
the Jews; but rather it was the spring, the time when kings went out to
battle, [Sa2 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001).

the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against
Jerusalem; that is, his army, under proper generals and officers, and by
his orders:

and the city was besieged; in form by the Chaldean army.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 24:11</span></span>

And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came against the city,.... He came in
person, following his army:

and his servants did besiege it; very closely.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 24:12</span></span>

And Jehoiachin king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon,.... Not to
fight with him, but to submit to him, and to surrender the city to him,
and be at his mercy:

he and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officers;
the royal family, courtiers, and nobles:

and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign; Of
Nebuchadnezzar's reign, and which was the eighth of the first captivity,
and from whence the seventy years' captivity were reckoned.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 24:13</span></span>

And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the Lord,
and the treasures of the king's house,.... The gates of the city being
thrown open to him, he entered and plundered the temple, and the royal
palace, and took from thence all the riches thereof:

and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel
had made in the temple of the Lord, as the Lord had said; [Kg2
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017) and so the prophecy of Isaiah
was fulfilled. No more is said of these vessels in [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010) than that they were brought to
Babylon; and so Piscator renders the word here, "took", or "carried them
away"; and certain it is that they were carried whole to Babylon, [Dan
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002) but as Hezekiah is said to cut off
the doors of the temple, that is, strip or scrape off the gold of them,
[Kg2 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016) so Nebuchadnezzar cut off
from the temple, or stripped it of the golden vessels in it; of great
part of them, the greater part thereof; for that there were some left is
plain from [Jer 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 24:14</span></span>

And he carried away all Jerusalem,.... The inhabitants of it; not every
individual of them, but the chief of them, the more honourable, rich,
and useful; for the poorer sort were left, as afterwards expressed:

and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand
captives; which was the number of them in the whole; the particulars are
after delivered:

and all the craftsmen and smiths; besides the nobles and the soldiers,
he took all the artificers that exercised any handicraft trade or
business; carpenters and blacksmiths, as some interpret these two words;
so that there were none left to make arms for them; the last word may be
rendered "enclosers", and are by some interpreted of enclosers of jewels
in metals, as gold and silver:

none remained, save the poorest sort of the people of the land; who were
left to till it, and to dress the vines; see [Kg2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#012).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 24:15</span></span>

And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon,.... Where he continued at
least thirty seven years, [Kg2 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027).

and the king's mother; whose name was Nehushta, [Kg2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008).

and the king's wives; for though he was so young, it seems he had many
wives, as was the custom of those times; or his "women", who were either
his concubines, or servants in his family:

and his officers; in his court: and the mighty of the land; the princes
and nobles thereof; or "the fools of the land", as the word is written;
so the people generally were:

those carried he into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon; which,
according to Bunting (s), were six hundred and eighty miles distant from
each other.

\(s\) Travels, &c. p. 198.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 24:16</span></span>

And all the men of might, even seven thousand,.... The particulars of
the 10,000 carried captive are here given; 7000 of which were the
principal men of the land:

and craftsmen and smiths one thousand; which made 8000:

all that were strong, and apt for war; of these consisted the other
2000; so Abarbinel reckons them; but, according to the Jewish
chronologer (t), which Jarchi and other Jewish commentators follow, the
7000 were out of the tribe of Benjamin and the rest of the tribes, and
the 3000 out of the tribe of Judah, which are supposed to be those
Jeremiah speaks of, [Jer 52:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#028),

even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon; among these
were Ezekiel the prophet, and Mordecai, the uncle of Esther.

\(t\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 25.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 24:17</span></span>

And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah his father's brother king in his
stead,.... The third son of Josiah, [Ch1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#015).

and changed his name to Zedekiah; for the same reason the king of Egypt
changed the name of Eliakim, [Kg2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034) to signify his subjection to
him; though some think it was to put him in mind of the justice of God,
as the name signifies, that would overtake him, should he be treacherous
to him, and rebel against him; so the Jewish Midrash.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 24:18</span></span>

Zedekiah was twenty years old when he began to reign,.... So that he was
but between nine and ten years of age when his father Josiah died; for
Jehoahaz reigned three months, Jehoiakim eleven years, and his son three
months and ten days:

and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and his mother's name was
Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah; by which it appears that he
was the brother of Jehoahaz by father and mother's side, [Kg2
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031). This and the two following
verses are expressed in the same words as in [Jer
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001), (see Gill on [Jer
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001), [Jer
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#002), [Jer
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#003)), in [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010), besides what is here said, is
written, that he humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet of the
Lord, that spoke in his name, but opposed him; and rebelling against the
king of Babylon, broke his oath, and hardened his neck and heart against
the Lord, and was obstinate, stubborn, and self-willed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 25](kg2025)

</div>
