<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2001)  [Next](kg2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 2

This chapter relates, how that Elisha accompanied Elijah to several
places, and on the other side Jordan Elijah was taken up from him to
heaven, which occasioned great lamentation in him, [Kg2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001), but having the mantle of Elijah,
he divided the waters of Jordan, and passed over, [Kg2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#013), and the sons of the prophets at
Jericho, perceiving the spirit of Elijah on him, showed him great
respect, and proposed sending men to seek his master, which they did in
vain, [Kg2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015), when he healed the
waters at Jericho, at the request of the men of it, [Kg2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#019), and the chapter is concluded
with the destruction of forty two children at Bethel by bears, who
mocked him, [Kg2 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#023).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 2:1</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by a
whirlwind,.... Thereby lifting him up from the earth, and which, as it
was the purpose and will of God, Elijah had notice of, as appears by his
motions to different places, under a divine direction:

that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal, where it seems they met, a
place where the Israelites first pitched when they came over Jordan, and
where the tabernacle was for some time, and was famous for religious
services, see [Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 2:2</span></span>

And Elijah said unto Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee,.... Seemingly
unwilling he should go with him, and be present at his assumption; which
was either out of modesty, not affecting the spread of the honour and
glory to be conferred upon him; or to prevent the grief of Elisha at his
departure, or to try whether Elisha knew any thing of it, and what
affection he had for him:

for the Lord hath sent me to Bethel; to give some comfort and some
instruction and advice to the college of prophets there:

and Elisha said unto him, as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I
will not leave thee; being determined to see the last of him, and to
have the benefit of his company and conversation, his heavenly
discourse, and instruction from him as long as he could, and in hope of
receiving a blessing from him at parting:

so they went down to Bethel; together, which, according to Bunting (h),
was six miles.

\(h\) Travels, &c. p. 205.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 2:3</span></span>

And the sons of the prophets that were at Bethel,.... Or the disciples
of them, as the Targum; here, though a place where one of Jeroboam's
calves was set up, was a school of the prophets, perhaps founded by
Elijah as a nursery for religion, and a check upon the idolatry of the
times:

came forth to Elisha; out of their college: and said unto him, knowest
thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head today? who
was, as Abarbinel observes, the crown and glory of his head; or else
this is said, as generally thought, in allusion to disciples sitting at
the feet of their masters, and so they at the head of them; the rapture
of Elijah was by a spirit of prophecy revealed unto them:

and he said, yea, I know it; being revealed to him in the same way:

hold your peace: not caring to continue any discourse with them on the
subject, that his thoughts, which were intent upon it, might not be
interrupted, and that his master might not know that he knew of it, and
lest he should be snatched away from him, and he not see him, while
discoursing with them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 2:4</span></span>

And Elijah said unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee,.... At
Bethel:

for the Lord hath sent me to Jericho; to the school of the prophets
there, to strengthen, encourage, and advise them:

and he said, as the lord liveth, &c; using the same form of oath as
before:

so they came to Jericho; together, which, as the above writer says (i),
was four miles from Bethel.

\(i\) Travels, &c. p. 205.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 2:5</span></span>

And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho,.... For though this
place was lately rebuilt under a curse to the builder, yet was blessed
with a school of the prophets: whose disciples came to Elisha, and said
unto him; as in [Kg2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003) and to whom
he made the same reply.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 2:6</span></span>

And Elijah said unto him, tarry, I pray thee, here,.... At Jericho,
seemingly very desirous to get rid of him, that he might not see his
assumption:

for the Lord hath sent me to Jordan: where passing that he was to be
taken up:

and he said, &c; Elisha swore, as before, he would not leave him:

and they two went on; to Jordan, which was six miles from Jericho (k).

\(k\) Travels, &c. p. 205.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 2:7</span></span>

And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view afar
off,.... To have a view, if they could, of the assumption of Elijah to
heaven, and be witnesses of it:

and they two stood by Jordan; on the banks of it, even Elijah and
Elisha.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 2:8</span></span>

And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together,.... Folded it up
close together, in a position to smite with it; this is thought to be
not his hairy garment, but a shorter robe, that was worn upon his
shoulders; but the Greek version renders it by "melotes", and so in [Kg2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#014), which, according to Isidore (l),
was a goat's skin, hanging down from the neck, and girt at the loins;
and being thus clothed, perhaps, may be the reason of his being called
an hairy man, [Kg2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008),

and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither; just as
Moses lifted up his rod, and the waters of the sea were divided for the
Israelites:

so that they two went over on dry ground; in like manner as the
Israelites did through the sea.

\(l\) Origin. l. 19. c. 24.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 2:9</span></span>

And it came to pass, when they were gone over,.... Had got on the other
side Jordan:

that Elijah said unto Elisha, ask what I shall do for thee, before I be
taken from thee; for, having followed him so closely, he now made no
more a secret of his assumption, and having had full trial of his
attachment to him, and affection for him:

and Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon
me; the two parts of the gifts of the spirit he had, that of prophecy,
and that of doing miracles, as some think; or two parts out of three of
what Elijah was possessed of; or rather double as much, and which he
might desire, not from a spirit of vanity and ambition to be greater
than his master, but from an eagerness to promote the glory of God, and
the interest of religion, to reclaim the Israelites from their idolatry,
and establish the true religion, which he might observe Elijah was not
able to do with that measure of grace and gifts he had; or however this
phrase denotes an abundance, a large portion or measure, as it
everywhere does. Many, after Ben Gersom, have thought it refers to the
double portion of the firstborn, and that Elisha does not mean a double
portion with respect to Elijah, but with respect to the junior prophets,
with whom he might be considered as a firstborn, and so desired a double
or greater portion than they, and which may be most correct (m); and
when he asked this, he did not suppose it was in Elijah's power to give
him it, only that he would pray to God, at parting with him, that he
would bestow it on him.

\(m\) See Weemse of the Moral Law, l. 2. c. 7. p. 41.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 2:10</span></span>

And he said, thou hast asked a hard thing,.... Not a common privilege,
but what is rarely enjoyed, and difficult to obtain, few are so favoured
of God:

nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so
unto thee, but if not, it shall not be so; meaning, that if his rapture
was visible to Elisha, and he was favoured with a sight of his
assumption, and be an eyewitness of it, this would be a token both to
Elijah that it was agreeable to the Lord to ask of him this favour for
him, and to Elisha to expect it, otherwise not.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 2:11</span></span>

And it came to pass, as they still went on and talked,.... About the
donation of the gifts of the Spirit requested, about the state of
religion in Israel, and about the training up of prophets in the
colleges, and about Elisha's succession as a prophet in his room, and
his discharge of that office, and such like things, as may be supposed,
in which he gave him instruction and advice:

that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire;
either angels in this form, see [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004), in which they appeared for the
glory and honour of the prophet, and as emblems of his flaming love and
zeal for the purity of religion, and that his assumption might be
conspicuous to Elisha; and perhaps by this means might be seen by the
fifty men on the other side Jordan: this chariot, drawn with these
horses, was not seen in the heaven, but as running on the earth, and
came between the two prophets, and separated them from each other,
taking up Elijah into it by means of a wind whirling about him, and
which was no other than the ministry of angels; or these might be a
conflux of exhalations or clouds, formed in this likeness by a
supernatural power, and, by the solar rays striking on them, might
appear fiery or red; and so his assumption was much in such like manner
as our Lord was taken up in a cloud, [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009),

and Elijah went up by a whirlwind to heaven; body and soul; such a
change passing on him, as he went through the region of the air, which
divested him of his mortality and corruption, and fitted him for the
invisible world.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 2:12</span></span>

And Elisha saw it,.... The ascension of Elijah to heaven, the manner of
it, and all relative to it, as the disciples saw the ascension of
Christ, between which and this there is a great agreement, see [Act
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009), and so Elisha had the token by
which he might expect to have the double portion, as the disciples after
the ascension of Christ had an extraordinary effusion of the Spirit and
gifts upon them:

and he cried, my father, my father; or my master, my master, as the
Targum; Elijah being a father to Elisha, and the rest of the prophets,
in the same sense as disciples of the prophets are called sons:

the chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; who was a greater
defence to Israel, and was of more service to them by his instructions
and prayers, than an army consisting of chariots and horsemen; so the
Targum,"he was better to Israel by his prayers than chariots and
horsemen:"

and he saw him no more; he was carried up in the above manner into the
heaven of heavens, out of the sight of mortals, and never seen more, but
at the transfiguration of Christ on the mount:

and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces; not on
account of Elijah's case and circumstances, who was now in a most happy
and glorious state and condition, but as lamenting his own loss, and the
loss of the public.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 2:13</span></span>

He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him,.... Which he
had now no further need of, and Elisha had, having rent his clothes in
two; and this falling into his hands was a token of his succeeding him
in his office, and that he should have the double portion of his spirit:

and he went back, and stood by the brook of Jordan; at the place where
he and Elijah had passed over together.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 2:14</span></span>

And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the
waters,.... He wrapped it together, as Elijah had done, and smote the
waters in like manner, to make trial whether he had the same spirit and
power conferred on him:

and said, where is the Lord God of Elijah? let him appear now, and show
his power as he did by him; he knew the mantle would not do without the
Lord, and the exertion of his might:

and when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither and thither;
as when Elijah smote them. The words "aph-hu", rendered "he also", is
left untranslated by the Septuagint, and is interpreted by Theodoret (n)
"hidden". They stand immediately after "the God of Elijah", and may be
rendered, "yea he", even he himself; meaning not Elijah, as if he was
inquired after, or was present and smote the waters; but rather, as we
and others, Elisha, even he also smote the waters; though some take it
to be the name of God, as "Hu" was, and is with the Arabs to this day;
see Gill on [Isa 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013). Athanasius (o)
interprets it of God, "Appho"; and so Elisha calls him by his title and
attribute, "Aph-hu": but the words may be an answer to the prophet's
question, "where is the Lord God of Elijah?" here he is, even he
himself, in the faith of which the water, being smitten, parted; and
with this agrees Abarbinel's note on the text; the meaning is, though we
are deprived of Elijah, yet not of the providence of God; and though the
servant is wanting, the Lord or master is not; for even he, the blessed
God, is in his room, and his excellency is as it was before; which sense
is approved of by Frischmuth (p).

and Elisha went over; the river Jordan, as on dry land.

\(n\) Apud Flamin. Nobil. in loc. So Suidas in voce (o) De Commun.
Essent. Patris, &c. vol. 1. p. 374. See Weemse of the Moral Law, l. 1.
c. 7. p. 162. (p) Dissert. de Eliae Nomine, &c. sect. 11, 12.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 2:15</span></span>

And when the sons of the prophets, which were to view at Jericho, saw
him,.... Who went out from thence towards Jordan, to have a sight if
they could of the assumption of Elijah; these, when they saw Elisha come
over Jordan, the waters being parted by him:

they said, the spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha; or he has the same
power and spirit to work miracles as he had, which they discerned by his
dividing the waters of Jordan with his mantle:

and they came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before
him; in reverence of him as their master, in the room of Elijah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 2:16</span></span>

And they said unto him, behold, now, there be with thy servants fifty
strong men,.... Perhaps meaning themselves, [Kg2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#007) who were young, stout, and strong,
and able to travel for days together:

let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master; for though they knew he
was to be taken away, yet knew not for what time, and imagined he might
be found again:

lest peradventure the Spirit of the Lord hath taken him up; as it seems
he was wont to do, see [Kg1 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012).

and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley; where he sometimes
had his abode; or they might fancy, if he was taken up to heaven, yet in
his soul only, and that, when that was separated, his dead body would be
left on a mountain, or in a valley; and therefore they were desirous of
seeking and finding it, that it might not be exposed to birds and beasts
of prey, but that they might bury it in a decent and honourable manner:

and he said, ye shall not send; he knew it was to no purpose, since he
was translated to heaven, body and soul, and which he was an eyewitness
of.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 2:17</span></span>

And when they urged him until he was ashamed,.... To deny them any
longer, being so very pressing and importunate:

he said, send; lest they should think he had not the respect for his
master he should have had; or was so fond of his office, that he did not
choose he should be found alive if he could, and return and reassume it:

they sent therefore fifty men; some one way, and some another:

and they sought three days, but found him not; and then returned.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 2:18</span></span>

And when they came again to him, for he tarried at Jericho,.... Waiting
their return to hear the report they made: which when they had:

he said unto them, did I not say unto you, go not? assuring them it
would be fruitless, and to no purpose; though this search of theirs
served both to confirm the assumption of Elijah, and the truth of Elisha
being a prophet of the Lord.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 2:19</span></span>

And the men of the city said unto Elisha,.... The inhabitants of
Jericho, perceiving him to be a prophet, and endowed with a power of
working miracles:

behold, I pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord
seeth; in a plain, surrounded with gardens and orchards, with vineyards,
oliveyards, and groves of palm trees, and other odoriferous ones:

but the water is naught, and the ground barren; that is, that part of it
where this water was, or ran, for from thence it became barren; or
"caused to miscarry", as the word signifies (q); not only trees cast
their fruit, which it watered, but women became abortive that drank of
it, as Josephus says (r), and so cattle. Abarbinel thinks it was so from
the times of Joshua, being cursed by him; but, if so, it would not have
been inhabited again; rather this was owing to a new curse, upon its
being rebuilt; though this might affect only a small part of the ground,
not the whole, as before observed.

\(q\) "orbans", Montanus, Vatablus; "facit abortum", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator. (r) De Bello Jud. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 3.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 2:20</span></span>

And he said, bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein,.... One that
had never been used, that it might not be thought that the virtue was
owing to anything that had been, or was, put into it:

and they brought it to him; the pot with the salt in it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 2:21</span></span>

And he went forth unto the spring of the waters,.... The fountain from
whence they flowed, the head of them:

and cast the salt in there; which was an unlikely means of making bad
water good, since that makes it brackish, and not so drinkable, and what
makes ground barren; but this method, contrary to nature, was taken,
that the miracle might appear the greater; or, as the Jews express it,
be a miracle within a miracle:

and said, thus saith the Lord, I have healed these waters; he did not
pretend to heal them in his own name, and by his own power, but in the
name and by the power of the Lord, to whom he would have it ascribed:

there shall not be from thence any more death, or barren land; or
miscarrying; no more noxious and mortal diseases should be got by
drinking them, nor any abortions occasioned by them in women, cattle,
and fruit trees, as had been.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 2:22</span></span>

So the waters were healed unto this day, according to the saying of
Elisha which he spake. In the name of the Lord; and not only they
remained so unto the time of the writer of this history, but to the
times of Josephus, as he testifies (s), and even to ours; for there is a
spring now called Elisha's spring or fountain, of which Mr. Maundrell
says (t),"its waters are at present received in a basin about nine or
ten paces long, and five or six broad; and from thence issuing out in
good plenty, divide themselves into several small streams, dispersing
their refreshment to all the field between this and Jericho, and
rendering it exceeding fruitful.''So some other travellers (u) say of
it, that the water is very clear and cool, and issues in a copious
steam. Pliny (w) gives it the name of "Calirroe", the beautiful stream,
and speaks of it as hot, wholesome, and medicinal, and of great note.

\(s\) De Bello Jud. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 3. (t) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p.
80. (u) Egmont and Heyman's Travels, vol. 1. p. 331. (w) Nat. Hist. l.
5. c. 16.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 2:23</span></span>

And he went up from thence unto Bethel,.... From Jericho, which lay in a
plain, to Bethel, situated on an hill, and therefore is said to go up to
it; hither he went, to acquaint the sons of the prophets with the
assumption of Elijah, to condole their loss of him, and to comfort and
encourage them, and confirm his own authority among them as a prophet in
his stead:

and as he was going up by the way; the ascent to the city:

there came forth little children out of the city; the word for
"children" is used of persons of thirty or forty years of age; and
though these are said to be "little", they were so well grown as to be
able to go forth out of the city of themselves, without any to guide
them, or to take care of them; and were of an age capable not only of
taking notice of Elijah's baldness, but knew him to be a prophet, and
were able to distinguish between good and evil; and, from a malignant
spirit in them, mocked at him as such, and at the assumption of Elijah;
which they had knowledge of, and to whom, taught by their idolatrous
parents, they had an aversion: some Jewish writers (x) say, they were
called "Naarim", which we render "children", because shaken from the
commandments, or had shaken off the yoke of the commands; and "little",
because they were of little faith:

and mocked him, and said unto him, go up, thou bald head; go up, thou
bald head; meaning not up the hill to Bethel, where his coming was not
desirable to the greater part in it, being idolaters; and perhaps these
children were sent out to intimidate him with their flouts and jeers
from entering there; but having heard of Elijah going up to heaven, as
was said, they jeeringly bid him go up to heaven after him, and then
they should have a good riddance of them both; thus at the same time
mocking at him for his baldness, and making a jest of the wondrous work
of God, the assumption of Elijah; which, with behaving so irreverently
to an hoary head, a prophet of the Lord, was very heinous and wicked,
and therefore what befell them need not be wondered at.

\(x\) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 46. 2.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 2:24</span></span>

And he turned back, and looked on them,.... With a stern countenance,
thereby reproving them, and in order to intimidate them, and make them
ashamed, and cause them to leave off, but to no purpose; they repeated
their mockeries with great vehemence:

and cursed them in the name of the Lord; moved thereunto, not from
passion and a spirit of revenge, but by an impulse of the Spirit of God:

and there came forth two she bears out of the wood; which are fiercest,
and especially when bereaved of their whelps, as these might be; the
wood seems to be near to Bethel, perhaps in the wilderness of Bethel, of
which see [Jos 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#015), and Reland (y)
thinks it is the same with the wood of Ephraim, [Sa2
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#006), though the Jews, to increase the
miracle, say (z) there was no wood at all, and, if there was, that there
were no bears in it; but though those creatures are mostly in northern
countries, yet there were of them in Judea, see [Sa1
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034).

and tare forty and two children of them; it seems there were more than
these; but such a number of them they tore to pieces and destroyed;
which was very extraordinary, and was an awful punishment for their
wickedness, which they knowingly and willingly committed, and of their
parents in them, who had trained them up in such impiety, and put them
upon it, and sent them out to do it.

\(y\) Palestin. Illustrat. p. 378. (z) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 47. 1.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 2:25</span></span>

And he went from thence to Mount Carmel,.... Where Elijah used to
frequent, and where also there might be a school of the prophets; this,
according to Bunting (a), was fifty six miles from Bethel:

and from thence he returned to Samaria; the capital of the kingdom of
Israel; there to bear his testimony against idolatry, to reprove for it,
and reclaim from it; this, as the same writer says (b), was thirty two
miles from Carmel.

\(a\) Travels, &c. p. 206. (b) Ibid.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 3](kg2003)

</div>
