<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2020)  [Next](kg2022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 21

In this chapter a short history is given of the two wicked reigns of
Manasseh and Amon; Manasseh is charged with great idolatry, with
enchantments and witchcrafts, and seducing the children of Israel, [Kg2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001) and a prophecy is given out of
the destruction of Jerusalem for his sins, [Kg2
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#010), and an account is given of his
death and burial, [Kg2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#017), and of
his son and successor Amon, and the evils committed by him, [Kg2
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019) and of the conspiracy against
his life, which succeeded, and Josiah his son reigned in his stead, [Kg2
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#023).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 21:1</span></span>

Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign,.... So that he was
born three years after Hezekiah's recovery from his sickness, and in the
seventeenth year of his reign:

and reigned fifty five years in Jerusalem: among which must be reckoned
the time of his captivity in Babylon; his reign was the longest of any
of the kings of Judah: and his mother's name was Hephzibah; the name the
church goes by, and signifies, "my delight or pleasure is in her", [Isa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004), no doubt she was a good woman,
or Hezekiah would not have made choice of her for a wife; it is a
tradition of the Jews (a), that she was the daughter of Isaiah, whose
name, they say, is not mentioned, because so wicked a king was unworthy
of such a grandfather.

\(a\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Paralipom. fol. 86. F.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 21:2</span></span>

And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord,.... Was guilty
of idolatry:

after the abomination of the Heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the
children of Israel: the old Canaanites; he committed idolatry in
imitation of them, and as the Phoenicians now did before the children of
Israel: the old Canaanites; he committed idolatry in imitation of them,
and as the Phoenicians now did.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 21:3</span></span>

For he built up again the high places which Hezekiah his father had
destroyed,.... The temples and altars upon them, see [Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004),

and he reared up altars for Baal; in the high places he rebuilt:

and made a grove, as did Ahab king of Israel: which was either an idol
itself, or a shade of trees where idols were placed; or rather Asherah,
rendered "a grove", is the same with Astarte, the goddess of the
Zidonians, the figure of which he made and worshipped; for groves were
not so soon and easily planted, raised, and made; so the same in [Kg1
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#033).

and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them: the sun, moon,
and stars, particularly the planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and
Venus.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 21:4</span></span>

And he built altars in the house of the Lord,.... In the holy place, as
distinct from the courts in the next verse; and these were sacred to the
idols of the Gentiles:

of which the Lord said, in Jerusalem will I put my name; in the temple
there, devoted to his service, called by his name, and where his name
was called upon, see [Deu 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005) and to
erect altars to idols here must be very abominable to him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 21:5</span></span>

And he built altars for all the host of heaven,.... Sun, moon, and
stars:

in the two courts of the house of the Lord; in the court of the priests,
and in the court of the people; and all this must be supposed to be
done, not as soon as he began to reign, but when he was grown up to
man's estate, and had children, as the next verse shows; unless it can
be thought that those nobles in Judah, who liked not the reformation
made by Hezekiah, took the advantage of his youth, and advised him to
these idolatries.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 21:6</span></span>

And he made his son pass through the fire,.... To Molech, after the
manner of the old Canaanites and Phoenicians; his son Amon, that
succeeded him, and other children, as appears from [Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006), where mention is made of the
place where it was done, the valley of the son of Hinnom:

and observed times; lucky or unlucky, which was judged of by omens, and
by the position of the stars:

and used enchantments, and dealt with familiar spirits and wizards; to
get knowledge of things to come; all which are forbid and condemned by
the law of Moses; see [Deu 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010),

he wrought much wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to
anger; in all those evils before mentioned, which were very abominable
in the sight of God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 21:7</span></span>

Which was either an image that had been placed in a grove planted by
him, and now removed into the house or temple of the Lord; or, as some
think, this was a representation of a grove, a carved grove of gold or
silver, in the midst of which an image was placed in the temple; though
what Selden observes (b), seems best of all, that this was an image of
Asherah, as in the original text; that is, of Astarte or Ashtoreth, the
goddess of the Zidonians, [Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005),
the same the Phoenicians are said to call Astroarche, and affirm it to
be the moon (c): in [Ch2 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#007) it is
called a carved image the idol he had made; and an Arabic writer (d)
says, it had four faces, which seems to be a figure of the cherubim;
but, according to Suidas (e), it was the statue of Jupiter, who also
says it had four faces:

of which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his son: that is, of
which house or temple:

in this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the
tribes of Israel, will I put my name forever; see [Kg1
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#029); see Gill on [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003).

\(b\) De Dis Syris, Syntagm. 2. c. 2. p. 233. (c) Herodian. l. 5. c. 15.
(d) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. Dyn. 3. p. 66. (e) In voce

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 21:8</span></span>

Neither will I make the feet of Israel move any more out of the land
which I gave their fathers,.... Or suffer them to be carried captive
into another land, as in the times of the judges; that is, on the
following condition:

only if they will observe to do according to all the law that my servant
Moses commanded them by obedience to which they had the tenure of the
land of Canaan, [Isa 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 21:9</span></span>

But they hearkened not,.... To the voice of God in his law by Moses, and
were not obedient to it:

and Manasseh seduced them to do more evil than did the nations whom the
Lord destroyed before the children of Israel: he set up more idols, and
drew the people into more and greater idolatries, than the old
Canaanites; and these were the more aggravated by having a law given to
them, and prophets sent to instruct them in it, and by the benefits and
blessings bestowed upon them by the lawgiver, which laid them under
greater obligations to him; see [Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 21:10</span></span>

And the Lord spake by his servants the prophets,.... Who prophesied in
the days of Manasseh; and were, according to the Jewish chronology (f),
Joel, Nahum, and Habakkuk:

saying: as follows.

\(f\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 20. p. 55.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 21:11</span></span>

Because Manasseh king of Judah hath done these abominations,.... Before
named, [Kg2 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003),

and hath done wickedly above all that the Amorites did that were before
him; one of the seven nations of Canaan, a principal of them, and which
is put for all the rest:

and hath made Judah also to sin with his idols: the worship of them, as
the Targum; which he did both by his edicts, and by his example.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 21:12</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God of Israel,.... Who, though kind and
gracious to Israel as their covenant God, is yet just and righteous, as
well as he is a sovereign Being and Lord of all:

behold, I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever
heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle; it will make such a noise in
the world, and be so horrible and terrible; and if, he report of it
would be so dreadful as to make a man's ears tingle, and his heart
tremble, what must it be to endure it! [Eze
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#014).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 21:13</span></span>

And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria,.... The Targum
is, the line of destruction; and the sense is, that the same measure
should be measured to Jerusalem as was to Samaria; that is, the same lot
and portion should befall one as the other, that is, be utterly
destroyed:

and the plummet of the house of Ahab; the Targum is, the weight or
plummet of tribulation; signifying, that the same calamities should come
upon the families of Jerusalem, and especially on the family of Manasseh
as came upon the family of Ahab. It is a metaphor from builders that
take down as well as raise up buildings by rule and measure, see [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002).

and I will wipe Jerusalem, as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and
turning it upside down; as when one takes a dish or cup that has broth
in it, or any liquid, as oil; and the Septuagint render it alabaster, in
which ointment used to be put; and wipes it clean, that nothing may
appear in it; and then turns it with its mouth downward, that, if any
thing should remain, it might drain out; signifying hereby the emptying
o Jerusalem of its palaces and houses, wealth and riches and of all its
inhabitants; and yet the empty dish being preserved, seems to denote the
restoration of Jerusalem after the seventy years' captivity. According
to the Vulgate Latin version, the metaphor is taken from the blotting
out of writing tables, and turning and rubbing the style upon them till
the writing is no more seen.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 21:14</span></span>

And I will forsake the remnant of mine inheritance,.... The whole land
of Canaan was the Lord's inheritance; ten tribes in it were already
removed, only Judah with Benjamin was left, and the Lord threatens to
forsake that remnant:

and deliver them into the hands of their enemies, and they shall become
a prey and spoil to all their enemies; which was fulfilled in their
captivity in Babylon.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 21:15</span></span>

Because they have done that which was evil in my sight,.... Committed
idolatry:

and have provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came forth
out of Egypt, even to this day; being always prone to idolatry, so
provoking to God, and which they were guilty of quickly after they came
out of Egypt, in the worship of the golden calf, and had ever since at
times been criminal this way; and now the measure of their iniquity
being almost up, would be reckoned for together.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 21:16</span></span>

Moreover, Manasseh shed innocent blood very much,.... Putting to death
the prophets that reproved him and his people for their idolatries, and
such who would not comply therewith; and it is commonly said, both by
Jewish and Christian writers, that Isaiah was slain, and even sawn
asunder by him; see Gill on [Heb
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037),

till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; a metaphor taken
from filling a vessel brimful:

beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was
evil in the sight of the Lord; the sin of idolatry he drew them into,
and even obliged them to commit.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 21:17</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh and all that he did,.... Both good
and bad, for he repented, and was humbled, and did many good things
afterwards, though not recorded in this book:

and his sin that he sinned; his idolatry:

are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah? in which were recorded the most memorable events of their reigns;
and in the canonical book of Chronicles are many things concerning
Manasseh, which are not written here; see [Ch2
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 21:18</span></span>

And Manasseh slept with his fathers,.... Or died, after a reign of fifty
five years, and a life of sixty seven:

and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza;
whether the burial of him here was his own choice, judging himself
unworthy to lie with the kings of Judah, who had been guilty of such
great sins, or whether the will of others, on the same account, is not
certain; and as much at a loss are we for the reason of this garden
being called the garden of Uzza, whether from Uzzah that died for
touching the ark, [Sa2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006) or from
King Uzziah, [Kg2 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#007). The Jews
buried in gardens in the times of Christ, who himself was buried in one,
[Joh 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041). The Romans had sometimes
sepulchres in their gardens (g), Galba the emperor was buried in his
gardens (h); and so had other nations. Cyrus king of Persia was buried
in a garden (i):

and Amon his son reigned in his stead; of whom we have the following
account.

\(g\) Vid. Kirchman. de Funer. Romas. l. 2. c. 22. p. 274. (h) Eutrop.
Hist. Roman. l. 7. Sueton. Vit. Galb. c. 20. Tacit. Hist. l. 1. c. 49.
(i) Strabo. Geograph l. 15. p. 502.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 21:19</span></span>

And Amon was twenty two years old when he began to reign,.... Being born
in the forty fifth of his father's life, and in the thirty third of his
reign:

and he reigned two years in Jerusalem; which, as Abarbinel observes, was
the usual time the sons of wicked kings reigned, and instances in the
son of Jeroboam, Baasha, and Ahab, [Kg1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#025). An Arabic writer (k) says, he
reigned twelve years, but according to the Jews only two:

and his mother's name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah;
there was a place called Jotbath, which was one of the stations of the
children of Israel in the wilderness, [Num
33:33](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#033) but it can scarcely be thought
to be the same place.

\(k\) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. Dyn. 3. p. 67.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 21:20</span></span>

And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord,.... Committed
idolatry:

as his father Manasseh did: he imitated him in that, but not in his
repentance and humiliation, [Ch2
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#023).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 21:21</span></span>

And he walked in all the ways that his father walked in,.... In his
wicked way, his idolatry, witchcraft, and murders:

and served the idols that his father served, and worshipped them; Baal,
Ashtoreth, and all the host of heaven, and all the carved images his
father made, which it seems he only removed, but did not break in
pieces, [Ch2 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#022).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 21:22</span></span>

And he forsook the Lord God of his fathers,.... Of David, Solomon, &c.

and walked not in the way of the Lord; prescribed by him in his law for
the worship of him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 21:23</span></span>

And the servants of Amon conspired against him,.... Some of his domestic
servants, and perhaps his courtiers, not on account of his idolatry, but
for some ill usage of them:

and slew the king in his own house: which they had an opportunity to do,
being his servants.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 21:24</span></span>

And the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against King
Amon,.... On occasion of his death, there seems to have been an
insurrection of the people in a body, to avenge the death of their king,
who might be beloved on account of his idolatry, so depraved was the
nation; or it may be only to avenge his death because he was their king,
whose life these men ought not to have taken away: and the rather this
may be thought to be the reason by what follows:

and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead; who
had been prophesied of by name above three hundred years before, see
[Kg1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 21:25</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in
the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? See Gill on [Kg2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#017).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 21:26</span></span>

And he was buried in his sepulchre, in the garden of Uzza,.... Where his
father Manasseh was buried, [Kg2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#018),

and Josiah his son reigned in his stead; of whom many things are said in
the two following chapters.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 22](kg2022)

</div>
