<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2017)  [Next](kg2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 18:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 18

This chapter begins with the good reign of Hezekiah king of Judah, the
reformation he made in the kingdom, and the prosperity that attended him
when Israel was carried captive, [Kg2
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001) and gives an account of the siege
of Jerusalem by the king of Assyria, and of the distress Hezekiah was
in, and the hard measures he was obliged to submit unto, [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013) and of the reviling and
blasphemous speech of Rabshakeh, one of the generals of the king of
Assyria, urging the Jews to a revolt from their king, [Kg2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 18:1</span></span>

Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of
Israel,.... That is, in the third year of his rebelling against the king
of Assyria, when he shook off his yoke, and refused to be tributary to
him any longer, see [Kg2 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001),

that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign; having
finished the account of the kingdom of Israel, and the captivity of the
people, the historian returns to the kingdom of Judah, and the things of
it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 18:2</span></span>

Twenty and five years old was he when he began to reign,.... Now as Ahaz
his father began to reign at twenty, and reigned sixteen, he must die at
thirty six; so that this son of his must be born to him when at eleven
years of age, for only so many years there be between twenty five and
thirty six, which may seem wonderful; but, as Grotius observes, Hezekiah
had now entered into the twenty fifth year, and he might be just turned
of twenty four, and so his father might be twelve years of age at his
birth: besides, as it is usual for the divine historian to take away or
add the incomplete years of kings, Ahaz might be near twenty one when he
began to reign, and might reign almost seventeen, which makes the age of
Ahaz to be about thirty eight; and Hezekiah being but little more than
twenty four, at his death there were thirteen or near fourteen years
difference in their age, and which was an age that need not be thought
incredible for begetting of children. Bochart (f) and others (g) have
given many instances of children begotten by persons under that age,
even at ten years of age (h): four years after his birth, the famous
city of Rome began to be founded (i), A. M. 3256, and before Christ 748,
as commonly received, though it is highly probable it was of a more
early date; according to Dionysius Halicarnassensis, it was founded in
the first year of the seventh Olympaid, in the times of Ahaz, A. M. 3118
(k):

and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem; so that he reigned
twenty three years or more after the captivity of the ten tribes:

his mother's name also was Abi the daughter of Zachariah; perhaps the
daughter of the same that was taken by Isaiah for a witness, [Isa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003) who very probably was a very good
woman, and took care to give her son a religious education, though he
had so wicked a father.

\(f\) Ep. Carbonell. tom. 1. oper. p. 920. (g) Vid. Hieronymi Opera,
tam. 3. Ep. Vital. fol. 25. C. (h) T. Bab. Avodah Zarah, fol. 44. 1. (i)
Usser. Annal. p. 86, 87. (k) Vid. Breithaupt. Not. in Hist. Gorion. Heb.
l. 5. c. 1.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 18:3</span></span>

And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to
all that David his father did. Some of the kings of Judah, that were
better than some others, are said to do that which was right, but not
like David; or they did as he did, but not according to all that he did,
as is here said of Hezekiah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 18:4</span></span>

He removed the high places,.... Which the best of the kings of Judah
never attempted, and which is observed of them to their discredit:

and broke the images, and cut down the groves; the idols his father set
up and served, [Kg2 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#004), groves and
idols in them, were early instances of idolatry; See Gill on [Jdg
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007), and their use for temples are
still continued, not only among some Indian nations (l), but among some
Christians in the northern parts of Europe (m):

and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made; which he
made in the wilderness, and which was brought by the children of Israel
with them into the land of Canaan, and was kept as a memorial of the
miracle wrought by looking to it, being laid up in some proper place
where it had been preserved to this day:

for unto those days the children of Israel did burn incense to it not
from the time it was brought into Canaan, nor even in later times, in
the days of Asa and Jehoshaphat, who would never have suffered it; very
probably this piece of idolatry began in the times of Ahaz, who
encouraged everything of that kind: for this serpent they had a great
veneration, being made by Moses, and a means in his time of healing the
Israelites; and they imagined it might be of some service to them, in a
way of mediation to God; and worthy of worship, having some degree of
divinity, as Kimchi and Ben Gersom; but Laniado (n) excuses them from
all show of idolatry, and supposes what they did was for the honour of
God only; hence sprung the heresy of the Ophites, according to
Theodoret:

and he called it Nehushtan; perceiving they were ensnared by it, and
drawn into idolatry to it, by way of contempt he called it by this name,
which signifies "brass"; suggesting that it was only a mere piece of
brass, had no divinity in it, and could be of no service to them in
divine things; and, that it might no longer be a snare to them, he broke
it into pieces; and, as the Jews (o) say, ground it to powder, and
scattered it to every wind, that there might be no remains of it.

\(l\) See Dampier's Voyage, vol. 1. p. 411. (m) Vid. Fabritii
Bibliograph. Antiqu. c. 9. sect. 11. (n) Cli Yaker, fol. 538. 2. (o) T.
Bab. Avodah Zarah, fol. 44. 1.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 18:5</span></span>

He trusted in the Lord God of Israel,.... To be his protector and
defender, and had no dependence on idols as an arm of flesh; the Targum
is, he trusted in the Word of the Lord God; not in Nehushtan, but in him
the brasen serpent was a type of, even in the Word and Son of God, his
alone Saviour and Redeemer:

so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah: for
though Josiah was like him in some things, yet not in all:

nor any that were before him; from the times of the division of the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah; and Ben Gersom and Abarbinel think that
David and Solomon are not to be excepted; David sinning in the case of
Uriah, and Solomon falling into idolatry, crimes that Hezekiah was not
guilty of.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 18:6</span></span>

For he clave to the Lord,.... To his worship and service; to the fear of
the Lord, as the Targum:

and departed not from following him; from his worship, as the same
paraphrase:

but kept his commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses; both moral,
ceremonial, and judicial.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 18:7</span></span>

And the Lord was with him,.... The Word of the Lord was for his help, as
the Targum:

and he prospered whithersoever he went forth; that is, to war:

and he rebelled against the king of Assyria: which is explained in the
next clause:

and served him not; he refused to be his servant, as his father Ahaz had
been, [Kg2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007), to which he was not
obliged by any agreement of his; and, if it was in his power, might
lawfully shake off his yoke, which is all that is meant by rebelling
against him; he refused to be tributary to him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 18:8</span></span>

He smote the Philistines even unto Gaza, and the borders thereof,....
Who in his father's time had invaded Judah, and taken many cities and
towns in it, which Hezekiah now recovered, and drove them to their own
territories, of which Gaza was one; see [Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018).

from the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city; that is, places both
great and small, cities, towns, and villages; of this phrase, see [Kg2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#009).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 18:9</span></span>

And it came to pass in the fourth year of King Hezekiah,.... In the
beginning of it:

which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel: the
beginning of his seventh:

that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged
it; see [Kg2 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 18:10</span></span>

And at the end of three years they took it,.... That is, at the first
end of them, at the beginning, in which sense the phrase is taken in
[Deu 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001), even in the sixth year of
Hezekiah, that is, the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was
taken: see [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 18:11</span></span>

And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria,.... Of the
places he disposed of them in, after mentioned; see Gill on [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 18:12</span></span>

Because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord,.... In his law, and by
his prophets:

but transgressed his covenant, and all that Moses the servant of the
Lord commanded; which evils are at large insisted on in the preceding
chapter as the cause of their captivity:

and would not hear them, nor do them; contrary to the agreement of their
fathers at Sinai, who promised to do both, [Exo
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 18:13</span></span>

Now in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah,.... Eight years after the
captivity of Israel:

did Sennacherib king of Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of
Judah, and took them; many of them, the frontier towns, and proceeded as
far as Lachish; ambitious of enlarging his dominions, his father having
subdued the kingdom of Israel, and being also provoked by Hezekiah's
refusing to pay him tribute. Mention is made of this king by name, by
Herodotus and other Heathen writers, see the note on [Isa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001) in the Apocryha:"Now when
Enemessar was dead, Sennacherib his son reigned in his stead; whose
estate was troubled, that I could not go into Media.'' (Tobit 1:15)he is
called Sennacherib, and is said to be son of Enemassat, that is,
Shalmaneser; however, he succeeded him in his kingdom; though some (o)
take him to be the same with Shalmaneser: he is said by Metasthenes (p)
to reign seven years, and was succeeded by Assaradon, who, according to
him, reigned ten years.

\(o\) Lud. Vives in Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 24. (p) De Judicio Temp.
fol. 221. 2.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 18:14</span></span>

And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish,.... A
city in the tribe of Judah, about twenty miles from Jerusalem, towards
the southwest (q); which the king of Assyria was now besieging, [Ch2
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#009) at first Hezekiah made provision
to defend himself, and encouraged his people not to be afraid of the
king of Assyria, [Ch2 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#001), but
understanding he had taken his fortified cities, and made such progress
with his arms, he was disheartened, and sent an embassy to him to sue
for peace; judging it more advisable to buy it than to expose his
capital to a siege; in which he betrayed much weakness and distrust of
the power and providence of God:

saying, I have offended; not the Lord, but the king of Assyria by
rebelling against him, or refusing to pay the yearly tribute to him; he
owned he had acted imprudently, and had given him, just occasion to
invade his land:

return from me; from his land, from proceeding to Jerusalem, which he
seemed to have a design upon, and go back to his own country with his
army, and make no further conquests:

that which thou puttest on me I will bear; what mulct or fine he should
lay upon him, or tribute he should impose upon him, or whatever he
should demand of him, he would submit to:

and the king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king of Judah three
hundred talents of silver, and thirty talents of gold; to be paid to him
directly; which, according to Brerewood (r), amounted to 247,500 pounds.

\(q\) Bunting's Travels, &c. p. 99. (r) De Ponder. & Pret. Vet. Num. c.
5.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 18:15</span></span>

And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of the
Lord, and in the treasures of the king's house. To make up the three
hundred talents of silver, for which purpose he exhausted both, which
had been done more than once before by the kings of Judah; these were
their resources in times of distress; see [Kg2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#018).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 18:16</span></span>

At that time did Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple
of the Lord,.... The plates of gold with which they were covered; or
scraped off the gold from them, as the Targum interprets it:

and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid: or the
posts, as the Targum, the lintel or side posts of the doors of the
temple; which though covered in Solomon's time, the gold was worn off,
or had been taken off by Ahaz, but was renewed by Hezekiah; and who, in
this time of distress, thought he might take it off again, no doubt with
a full purpose to replace it, when he should be able. This is one of the
three things the Talmudic writers (s) disapprove of in Hezekiah:

and gave it to the king of Assyria; to make up the thirty talents of
gold he demanded.

\(s\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 10. 2.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 18:17</span></span>

And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh from
Lachish to King Hezekiah with a great host against Jerusalem,....
Notwithstanding he took the above large sum of money of him, so false
and deceitful was he: these were three generals of his army, whom he
sent to besiege Jerusalem, while he continued the siege of Lachish; only
Rabshakeh is mentioned in [Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002) he
being perhaps chief general, and the principal speaker; whose speech, to
the end of this chapter, intended to intimidate Hezekiah, and dishearten
his people, with some circumstances which attended it, are recorded word
for word in [Isa 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001) throughout; See
Gill on [Isa 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001) and notes on that
chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 19](kg2019)

</div>
