<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](lam003)  [Next](lam005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LAMENTATIONS 4

The prophet begins this chapter with a complaint of the ill usage of the
dear children of God, and precious sons of Zion, [Lam
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001); relates the dreadful effects of
the famine during the siege of Jerusalem, [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003); the taking and destruction of
that city he imputes to the wrath of God; and represents it as
incredible to the kings and inhabitants of the earth, [Lam
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#011); the causes of which were the
sins of the prophets, priests, and people, [Lam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013); expresses the vain hopes they
once had, but now were given up entirely, their king being taken, [Lam
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#017); and the chapter is concluded
with a prophecy of the destruction of the Edomites, and of the return of
the Jews from captivity, [Lam 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021).

[Lamentations 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 4:1</span></span>

How is the gold become dim!.... Or "covered" (b); or hid with rust,
dust, or dirt; so that it can scarcely be discerned:

how is the most fine gold changed! this may be literally true of the
gold of the temple; and so the Targum calls it

"the gold of the house of the sanctuary;''

with which that was overlaid, and many things in it, [Kg1
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#021); and was sadly sullied and
tarnished with the burning of the temple, and the rubbish of it: its
brightness was lost, and its colour changed; but though there may be an
allusion to that, it is to be figuratively understood of the people of
God; for what is here expressed in parabolical phrases, as Aben Ezra
observes, is in [Lam 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002) explained in
proper and literal ones: godly and gracious men, there called the
precious sons of Zion, are comparable to gold, even the most fine gold;
partly because of their habit and dress; gold of Ophir; clothing of
wrought gold; the rich robe of Christ's righteousness; which, for its
brightness and splendour, is like the finest gold; and is as lasting and
durable as that; and in which the saints look like a mass of pure gold,
[Psa 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009); and partly because of the
graces of the Spirit in them, which are like gold for their purity,
especially when tried; for their value, and the enriching nature of
them, and their duration; particularly the graces of faith, hope, love,
humility, which are like rows of jewels, and chains of gold, and as
ornamental as they; see [Sol 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010); as
also because of the doctrines of grace received by them, which are more
to be desired than gold, than fine gold; and are better than thousands
of gold and silver, by reason of their intrinsic worth and value; for
their purity and brightness, being tried and purified, and because of
their duration, [Psa 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010); as well as
on account of the riches of grace and glory they are possessed of, and
entitled to: now this, in either of the senses of it, cannot be lost as
to substance, only become dim; may lose its brightness and glory, and
like gold change its colour, but not its nature; and; this may be the
case of good men, comparable to it; when there is a decline in them,
with respect to the exercise of grace; faith in Christ and his
righteousness is low, hope not lively, and love waxen cold; when there
is a veil drawn over the Gospel, a great opposition to it, and a
departure from it; or the doctrines of it are not so clearly and
consistently preached; and when there is a failure in a holy walk, and
conversation becoming it; all which is matter of lamentation:

the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street;
in the literal sense it may regard the costly stones of the temple,
which, when that was destroyed, not only lay in heaps; but many of them,
at least, were separated and scattered about, and carried into every
corner of the city, and the streets of it, and there lay exposed,
neglected, and trampled upon; see [Kg1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#017); but, in the figurative sense, it
designs the people of God; who, though they are taken out of the common
quarry and pit of mankind, and are by nature as common stones; yet by
the Spirit and grace of God are made living and lively ones, and are
hewn and fitted for the spiritual building the church; where they are
laid, and are as the stones of a crown, as jewels and precious stones;
but when there are animosities, contentions, and divisions among them,
so that they disunite, and are scattered from one another, their case is
like these stones of the sanctuary; and which is to be lamented. It is
by some Jewish writers (c) interpreted of great personages, as princes,
and great men of the earth.

\(b\) "rubigine obducetur", Montanus; "obtectum vel absconditum",
Vatablus. So Ben Melech. (c) Vid. R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 50. 1.

[Lamentations 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lam 4:2</span></span>

The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold,.... This explains
what is meant in [Lam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001); by gold,
fine gold, and stones of the sanctuary; not Josiah and his sons, as some
Jewish interpreters; but all the sons of Zion, or children of God; not
the inhabitants of Zion literally, but spiritually; see [Zac
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013). Zion is the church; her sons are
her spiritual seed and offspring that are born of her, she being the
mother of them all, and born in her, by means of the word; and brought
up by her, through the ordinances, and so are regenerate persons; and
these the sons of God: and who are "precious", not in themselves, being
of the fallen race of Adam; of the earth, earthly, as he was; of the
same mass and lump with the rest of mankind; in no wise better than
others, by nature; and have no intrinsic worth and value in them, but
what comes by and from the grace of God; nor are they precious in their
own esteem, and much less in the esteem of the men of the world; but in
the eye of God, and of his son Jesus Christ, and of the blessed Spirit,
and in the opinion of other saints; see [Psa
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003); in what sense these are
comparable to fine gold; see Gill on [Lam
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001);

how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the
potter! they are indeed earthen vessels with respect to their bodies,
frail, weak, and mortal; but they are the work of God's hands, even as
creatures, and particularly as new creatures, and are a curious piece of
his workmanship, and so valuable, and especially by him, who is as
tender and as careful of them as the apple of his eye; and yet these are
greatly disesteemed by carnal men, are reckoned as the faith of the
world, and the offscouring of all things; as earthen vessels, fit for no
use but common or dishonourable ones, or to be broke in pieces, and
rendered useless and contemptible: see [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012).

[Lamentations 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lam 4:3</span></span>

Even the sea monsters draw out the breast,.... Which some interpret of
dragons; others of seals, or sea calves; but it is best to understand it
of whales, as the word is rendered in [Gen
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021); and elsewhere: and Bochart (d)
has proved, out of various writers, that these have breasts and milk;
but that their breasts, or however their paps, are not manifest, but are
hid as in cases, and must be drawn out: and so Jarchi observes that they
draw their breasts out of a case, for their breasts have a covering,
which they uncover: so Ben Melech. Aristotle (e) says, that whales, as
the dolphin, sea calf, and balaena, have breasts or paps, and milk,
which he makes to be certain species of the whale; and each of these, he
elsewhere says, have milk, and suckle their young: the dolphin and
sturgeon, he observes (f) have milk, and are sucked; and so the sea
calf, he says (g), lets out milk as a sheep, and has two breasts, and is
sucked by its young, as four footed beasts are. Agreeably to which
Aelianus (h) relates, that the female dolphins have paps like women, and
suckle their young, with great plenty of milk; and the balaena, he says
(i), is a creature like a dolphin, and has milk. And Pliny, speaking of
the dolphins, observes (k), that they bring forth their "whelps", and so
the young of this creature are called here in the next clause in the
Hebrew text (l), and nourish them with their breasts, as the balaena;
and of the sea calves the same writer says (m) they feed their young
with their paps; but the paps of these creatures are not manifest, as
those of four footed beasts, as Aristotle observes; but are like two
channels or pipes, out of which the milk flows, and the young are
suckled;

they give suck to their young ones; as they do, when they are hungry;
which is mentioned, as an aggravation of the case of the Jewish women,
with respect to their behaviour towards their children, by reason of the
famine, during the siege of Jerusalem; which here, and in the following
verses, is described in the sad effects of it; and which had a further
accomplishment at the destruction of the same city by the Romans: now,
though the monsters suckled their young when hungry, yet these women did
not suckle theirs;

the daughter of my people is become cruel; or, is "unto a cruel one"
(n): that is, is changed unto a cruel one, or is like unto one, and
behaves as such, though of force and necessity: the meaning is, that the
Jewish women, though before tenderhearted mothers, yet, by reason of the
famine, having no milk in their breasts, could give none to their
children, and so acted as if they were cruel to them; nay, in fact,
instead of feeding them, they fed upon them, [Lam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010);

like the ostriches in the wilderness; which lay their eggs, and leave
them in places easily to be crushed and broken; and when they have any
young ones, they are hardened against them, as if they were none of
theirs, [Job 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013); and this seemed
now to be the case of these women; or, "like the owls", as the word is
sometimes rendered; and which also leave their eggs, and for want of
food will eat their young, as those women did. So Ben Melech says, it is
a bird which dwells in the wilderness, and causes a voice of hooping to
be heard.

\(d\) Hierozoic. l. 1. c. 7. p. 46. (e) Hist. Animal. l. 3. c. 20. (f)
Ib. l. 6. c. 12. (g) lbid. (h) Hist. de Animal. 1. 10. c. 8. (i) Ib. l.
5. c. 4. (k) Nat. Hist. l. 9. c. 8. (l) "catulos suos", Pagninus,
Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius. (m) Nat. Hist. l. 9.
c. 13. (n) "in crudelem", Montanus; "sub. mutata fuit", Piscator;
"similis est crudeli", Munster.

[Lamentations 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lam 4:4</span></span>

The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for
thirst,.... Through want of the milk of the breast, which is both food
and drink unto it:

the young children ask bread; of their parents as usual, not knowing how
the case was, that there was a famine in the city; these are such as
were more grown, were weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts,
and lived on other food, and were capable of asking for it:

and no man breaketh it unto them: distributes unto them, or gives them a
piece of bread; not father, friend, or any other person; it not being in
their power to do it, they having none for themselves.

[Lamentations 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lam 4:5</span></span>

They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets,.... That were
brought up in the king's palace, or in the houses of noblemen; or,
however, born of parents rich and wealthy, and had been used to good
living, and had fared sumptuously and deliciously every day, were now
wandering about in the streets in the most forlorn and distressed
condition, seeking for food of any sort, but could find none to satisfy
their hunger; and so, as the Vulgate Latin version renders it, perished
in the ways or streets:

they that were brought up in scarlet: in dyed garments, as Jarchi;
clothed with scarlet coloured ones, as was the manner of the richer and
better sort of people, [Pro 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#021); or,
"brought up upon scarlet" (o); upon scarlet carpets, on which they used
to sit and eat their food, as is the custom of the eastern people to
this day: these

embrace dunghills, are glad of them, and with the greatest eagerness
rake into them, in order to find something to feed upon, though ever so
base and vile; or to sit and lie down upon. Aben Ezra interprets it of
their being cast here when dead, and there was none to bury them.

\(o\) "super coccinum", Pagninus, Montanus; "super coccino", Piscator,
Michaelis.

[Lamentations 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lam 4:6</span></span>

For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people,.... In
the long siege of their city, and the evils that attended it, especially
the sore famine:

is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom; which was destroyed
at once by fire from heaven: or it may be rendered, "the iniquity of the
daughter of my people is greater than the sin of Sodom" (p); though the
men of Sodom were great sinners, the Jews were greater, their sins being
more aggravated; to this agrees the Targum, which renders the word
"sin", and paraphrases the words following thus,

"and there dwelt not in her prophets to prophesy unto her, and turn her
by repentance;''

as the Jews had, and therefore their sin was the greater; both senses
are true, and the one is the foundation of the other; but the first
seems best to agree with what follows:

that was overthrown as in a moment; by a shower of fire from heaven,
which consumed it at once; whereas the destruction of Jerusalem was a
lingering one, through a long and tedious siege; the inhabitants were
gradually wasted and consumed by famine, pestilence, and sword, and so
their punishment greater than Sodom's:

and no hand stayed on her; that is, on Sodom; the hand of God was
immediately upon her, and dispatched her at once, but not the hands of
men; as the hands of the Chaldeans were upon the Jews, afflicting and
distressing them a long time, which made their ease the worse.

\(p\) ldgyw "et ingens fuit iniquitas--prae peccato", Montanus; "et
major extitit pravitas--prae peccato", Cocceius. So V. L.

[Lamentations 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lam 4:7</span></span>

Her Nazarites were purer than snow,.... Such who separated themselves by
a vow to the Lord, and abstained from drinking wine and strong drink,
and by a moderate diet, and often washing themselves, as well as taking
great care of their hair, appeared very neat and comely, like snow,
without any spot or blemish. Some think such as were separated from
others in dignity, very honourable persons, the sons of nobles, are
meant, since the word has the signification of a "crown", and interpret
it, her princes; Jarchi makes mention of this sense, and rejects it; but
it is received by many: and the meaning is, that her young noblemen, who
were well fed, and neatly dressed, looked as pure and as beautiful as
the driven snow:

they were whiter than milk; this intends the same thing, expressed by
another metaphor:

they were more ruddy in body than rubies; or rather "than precious
stones"; and particularly "than pearls", which Bochart (q) proves at
large are designed by the word used, which are white, and not red; and
the word should be rendered, "clearer" or "whiter than pearls", as it is
by Lyra and others (r); and the word in the Arabic language signifies
white and clear (s), as pearls are; and so the phrase is expressive of
the beauty and comeliness of these persons: and Ludolphus (t) says, that
in the Ethiopic language it signifies "beautiful"; and he translates the
whole, "they were more beautiful than pearls"; denoting the clearness of
their skins, and the goodness of their complexion:

their polishing was of sapphire; or "their cutting, sapphire" (u); they
were as beautiful as if they had been cut out of sapphire, and polished;
which is a very precious stone, and looks very beautiful; so smooth were
their skins. The Targum is,

"their face or countenance is as sapphire.''

Braunius (w) thinks the word used signifies the veins full of blood,
which variously intersect the flesh like sapphirine rivers; and that the
sense of the words is,

"their bodies were white like snow and milk, yea, shining like pearls
(or red in the cheeks, lips, &c. like coral (x)); veins full of blood
running between like sapphire, of a most agreeable sky colour; which is,
a true description of a most fair and beautiful body.''

See [Sol 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014). All this is to be
understood of them before the famine, but, when that came upon them,
then they were as follow:

\(q\) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 5. c. 6. p. 688. (r) "lucidiores corpore
margaritis", Bochart; "candidi fuerunt in corpore prae margaritis",
Noldius. (s) "camelis tributum, candidus perquam albus", Giggeius;
"candidi coloris", Dorcas, Giggeius apud Golium, col. 49, 51. (t)
Comment. in Ethiop. Hist. l. 1. No. 107. (u) "sapphirus excisio eorum",
Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Calvin; "quasi sectio eorum esset ex
sapphiro", Munster. (w) De Vestitu Sacerdot. Hebr. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 7.
p. 676. (x) So Bootius, Animadv. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 8. p. 144. Lutherus &
Osiander in ib.

[Lamentations 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lam 4:8</span></span>

Their visage is blacker than a coal,.... Or, "darker than blackness";
or, "dark through blackness" (y); by reason of the famine, and because
of grief and trouble for themselves and their friends, which changed
their complexions, countenances, and skins; they that looked before as
pure as snow, as white as milk, as clear as pearls, as polished as
sapphire, now as black as charcoal, as blackness itself:

they are not known in the streets; not taken notice of in a
distinguished manner; no respect shown them as they walk the streets, as
used to be; nay, their countenances were so altered, and their apparel
so sordid, as not to be known by their friends, when they met them in
public:

their skin cleaveth to their bones; have nothing but skin and bone, who
used to be plump and fat:

it is withered, it is become like a stick; the skin wrinkled and
shrivelled up, the flesh being gone; and the bone became like a stick,
or a dry piece of wood, its moisture and marrow being dried up.

\(y\) "obscurior ipsa nigredine", Tigurine version; "magis quam nigredo
vel carbo", Vatablus; "prae caligines", Calvin; "ex nigredine",
Piscator.

[Lamentations 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lam 4:9</span></span>

They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be slain
with hunger,.... Not that they are better with respect to their state
after death, but with respect to their manner of dying. They that were
slain by the sword of the Chaldeans, as many were, either upon the
walls, or in sallies out against the enemy, these felt less pain, and
had less terror of mind in dying, than those did who perished by famine;
they died a lingering death, as it were by inches, and were in continual
pain of body and uneasiness of mind:

for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the
field: that is, those that died by famine gradually wasted or "flowed"
away, their fluid parts by degrees went off; and though they were not
run through with the sword, they were stabbed by famine, and were so
distressed in body and mind as if a sword had pierced them; not having
the fruits of the field, the corn and the wine, to support nature, and
keep them alive. Jarchi's note is,

"they that were slain with hunger were inflated at the smell of the
fruits of the field, when the enemies were roasting their flesh upon the
grass without the wall; the smell entered into those that swelled by
famine, and their bellies burst, and their excrements flowed out; and
this is the death worse than that of being slain with the sword.''

And to this agrees the Targum,

"more happy are they that are slain with the sword than they that are
slain with famine; for they that are slain with the sword flowed when
their bellies were burst, by that which they ate of the fruits of the
field; and those that were inflated with famine, their bellies burst
through "want" of food.''

Most interpreters refer this clause to those that died of famine: but
Gussetius (z) interprets it of those that were killed with the sword;
and renders and paraphrases the words thus, "for they being stabbed,
sent out"; by the open wounds, "a flux, which arose from the fruits of
the field"; their food and nourishment being yet in their belly and
veins, and so did not pine away through penury and famine; and their
misery was short and light, in comparison of others: and so Abendana.

\(z\) Comment. Ebr. p. 225.

[Lamentations 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lam 4:10</span></span>

The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children,.... Such
as were naturally, and agreeably to their sex, pitiful and
compassionate; merciful to the poor, as the Targum; and especially
tenderhearted to their own offspring; yet, by reason of the soreness of
the famine, became so cruel and hardhearted, as to take their own
children, and slay them with their own hands, cut them to pieces, put
them into a pot of water, and make a fire and boil them, and then eat
them, as follows:

they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people: at
the time of the destruction of Jerusalem. This strange and unnatural
action was foretold by Moses, [Deu
28:56](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056); and though we have no
particular instance of it on record, as done at the siege of Jerusalem
by the Chaldeans, yet no doubt there was, as may be concluded from the
words: and at the siege of it by the Romans, when many things here
spoken of had a fuller accomplishment, we have a remarkable instance of
it, which Josephus (a) relates; an illustrious woman, named Mary,
pressed with the famine, slew her own son, a sucking child, boiled him,
and ate part of him, and laid up the rest; which was found by the
seditious party that broke into her house, which struck them with the
utmost horror; See Gill on [Lam 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020).

\(a\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 3. sect. 4.

[Lamentations 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lam 4:11</span></span>

The Lord hath accomplished his fury,.... Which rose up in his mind, and
which he purposed in himself to bring upon the sinful people of the
Jews:

he hath poured out his fierce anger; the vials of his wrath in great
abundance, even all he meant to pour out upon them:

and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations
thereof: not in the strong hold of Zion only, but in the whole city of
Jerusalem, which was set on fire by the Chaldeans, as instruments,
according to the will of God; and which not only consumed the houses of
it, but even the foundations of them; so that it looked as if there was
no hope of its ever being rebuilt. Aben Ezra interprets this fire of the
famine.

[Lamentations 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lam 4:12</span></span>

The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world,.... Not
only the neighbouring nations, and the kings of them, but even such in
all parts of the world that knew anything of Jerusalem:

would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy would have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem; when it was besieging, they did not
believe it would be taken; and when they heard it was, it was incredible
to them; it being so strongly fortified by art and nature, with
mountains and hills, with walls and bulwarks, and had such a vast number
of people in it; and, especially, was the city of the great God, who had
so often and so signally preserved and saved it: the "adversary" and
"enemy" are the same, and design the Chaldeans. The Targum distinguishes
them, and makes Nebuchadnezzar the ungodly to be the adversary; and
Nebuzaradan the enemy, who entered to slay the people of the house of
Israel, in the gates of Jerusalem; this was a marvellous thing to the
nations round about. Titus, when he took this city, acknowledged it was
owing to God (b);

"God (says he) favouring us, we fought; God is he that has drawn the
Jews out of these fortresses; for human hands and machines could have
done nothing against these towers.''

\(b\) Joseph. De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 9. sect. 1.

[Lamentations 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lam 4:13</span></span>

For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests,....
Aben Ezra interprets this of the prophets of Baal, and the priests of
the high places; but though false prophets and wicked priests are meant,
yet such as were among the Jews, made choice of and approved of by them:
see [Ch2 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#014); not that the people
were faultless, but these were the principals, who by their examples led
on and encouraged the common people in sin:

that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her; not the blood
of innocent children, sacrificed to them by Moloch; but of good men in
general, whom they persecuted and slew; and of the true prophets of the
Lord in particular, whose blood they shed; and was the sin that brought
on the destruction of their city by the Romans, as well as of that by
the Chaldeans; see [Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035).

[Lamentations 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lam 4:14</span></span>

They have wandered as blind men in the streets,.... That is, the false
prophets and wicked priests; and may be understood either literally,
that when the city was taken, and they fled, they were like blind men,
and knew not which way to go to make their escape, but wandered from
place to place, and could find no way out; or spiritually, though they
pretended to great light and knowledge, yet were as blind men,
surrounded with the darkness of ignorance and error, and were blind
leaders of the blind:

they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch
their garments; or, "could not but touch it with their garments" (c);
or, "might not" (d); it was not lawful for them to do it: the sense is
either, that, which way soever these men took to make their escape, they
found so many dead carcasses in the streets, and such a profusion of
blood by them, that they could not but touch it with their garments; or
being besmeared with it, were so defiled, that others might not touch
them, even their garments; or these men had defiled themselves with the
shedding of the blood of righteous persons; so that they were odious to
men, and they shunned them as they would do anything that by the law
rendered them in a ceremonious sense unclean, and therefore said as
follows:

\(c\) "quem non possunt, quin tangent vestimentis suis", "Junius &
Tremellius. (d) "Tangebant eum (nempe sanguinem) vestibus eorum quem non
potuerunt", i.e. "jure", Gataker.

[Lamentations 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lam 4:15</span></span>

They cried unto them, depart ye, it is unclean,.... Or, O ye "unclean"
(e); that is, the people said so to the priests, being polluted with
blood; they abhorred them, did not care they should come nigh them, but
bid them keep at distance; they that cleansed others of leprosy were
treated as leprous persons themselves, and proclaimed unclean, and
shunned as such: and, to show their vehement abhorrence of them,
repeated the words,

depart, depart, touch not: that is, touch us not; they who had used to
say; to others, stand by yourselves, we are more holy than you, being
the Lord's priests and prophets, are treated after the same manner
themselves:

when they fled away, and wandered; fled from the city, and wandered
among the nations; or when they were swiftly carried away captives, and
became vagabonds in other countries:

they said among the Heathens, they shall no more sojourn there; being
among the Heathens, they took notice of them as very wicked men, and
said concerning them, now they are carried out of their own land, they
shall never return there any more, and dwell in Jerusalem, and officiate
in the temple, as they had formerly done.

\(e\) "immunde", Montanus; "immundi", Strigelius. "gens polluta",
Vatablus; "discedite polluti", Gataker.

[Lamentations 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lam 4:16</span></span>

The anger of the Lord hath divided them,.... Or, "the face of the Lord"
(f); the anger that appeared in his face, in the dispensation of his
providence, removed them out of their own land, and dispersed them among
several countries and nations of the world, and as they now are: these
are not the words of the Heathens continued, but of the prophet:

he will no more regard them; or, "he will not add to look on them" (g),
with a look of love, but continue his anger and resentment:

they respect not the persons of the priests, they favour not the elders;
which is to be considered either as the sin of the false prophets and
priests before described, which was the cause of their punishment; that
they east great contempt on the true prophets of the Lord, as Jeremiah
and others, and showed no regard to the elders of the people, or those
godly magistrates; who would have corrected and restrained them: or else
this is said of the nations among whom they were dispersed, as the
Targum; who would pay no respect to their characters as priests, or show
any pity to them on account of their age.

\(f\) "facies Domini", V. L. Montanus, Piscator. (g) "non addet aspicere
eos", Montanus.

[Lamentations 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lam 4:17</span></span>

As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help,.... Or, "while we
were yet" (h); a nation, a people, a body politic, in our own land,
before the city of Jerusalem was taken, we were looking for help, as was
promised us; but it proved a vain help, none was given us; for which we
kept looking to the last, till our eyes failed, and we could look no
longer; no help appeared, nor was there any prospect or probability of
it, and therefore gave all up:

in our watching we watched for a nation that could not save us; not the
Romans, as the Targum, but the Egyptians; these promised them help and
relief, and therefore in their watching they watched, or vehemently
watched, and wistfully looked out for it, but all in vain; for though
these made an attempt to help them, they durst not proceed; were obliged
to retire, not being a match for the Chaldean army, and so could not
save them, or break up the siege, and relieve them.

\(h\) "quum adhuc essemus", Munster: Piscator.

[Lamentations 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lam 4:18</span></span>

They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets,.... The
Chaldeans, from their forts and batteries, as they could see, they
watched the people as they came out of their houses, and walked about
the streets, and shot their arrows at them; so that they were obliged to
keep within doors, and not stir out, which they could not do without
great danger:

our end is near, for our days are fulfilled; for our end is come; either
the end of their lives, the days, months, and years appointed for them
being fulfilled; or the end of their commonwealth, the end of their
civil and church state, at least as they thought; the time appointed for
their destruction was not only near at hand, but was actually come; it
was all over with them.

[Lamentations 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lam 4:19</span></span>

Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heavens,.... That fly
in the heavens; and which, as they have a quick sight to discern their
prey afar off, are very swift to pursue it; they are the swiftest of
birds, and are so to a proverb. Apuleius (i) represents the swift
pursuit of their prey, and sudden falling upon it, to be like thunder
and lightning. Cicero (k) relates of a certain racer, that came to an
interpreter of dreams, and told him, that in his dream he seemed to
become an eagle; upon which, says the interpreter, thou wilt be the
conqueror; for no bird flies with such force and swiftness as that. And
this bird is also remarkable for its constancy in flying: it is never
weary, but keeps on flying to places the most remote. The poets have a
fiction, that Jupiter, being desirous of knowing which was the middle of
the world, sent out two eagles of equal swiftness, the one from the
east, and the other from the west, at the same moment; which stopped not
till they came to Delphos, where they met, which showed that to be the
spot; in memory of which, two golden eagles were placed in the temple
there (l). The swiftness and constancy of these creatures in flying are
here intended to set forth the speed and assiduity of the enemies of the
Jews, in their pursuit after them; who followed them closely, and never
ceased till they had overtaken them. The Chaldeans are designed, who
pursued the Jews very hotly and eagerly, such as fled when the city was
broken up; though not so much they themselves, as being thus swift of
foot, as their horses on which they rode; see [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013).

they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the
wilderness: or "plain" (m); there was no safety in either; such as fled
to the mountains were pursued and overtaken there; and such who
attempted to make their escape through the valleys were intercepted
there: the reference is to the flight of Zedekiah, his nobles, and his
army with him, who were pursued by the Chaldeans, and taken in the
plains of Jericho, [Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007); hence it
follows:

\(i\) Florida, l. 2. (k) De Divinatione, l. 2. p. 2001. (l) Vid. Strabo
Geograph. l. 9. p. 289. & Pindar. Pythia, Ode 4. l. 7, 8. & Schmidt in
ib. p. 174, 175. (m) "in plano", Gataker.

[Lamentations 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lam 4:20</span></span>

The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their
pits,.... Or "the Messiah", or "the Christ of the Lord" (n); not Josiah,
as the Targum; and so Jarchi and others; for though he was the Lord's
anointed, and the life of the people, being the head of them, as every
king is, especially a good one; yet he was slain, and not taken, and
much less in their pits, and that not by the Chaldeans, but by the
Egyptians; nor did the kingdom cease with him, or the end of the Jewish
state then come, which continued some years after: but rather Zedekiah,
as Aben Ezra and others, the last of the kings of Judah, with whom all
agrees; he was the Lord's anointed as king, and the preserver of the
lives and liberties of the people, at least as they hoped; but when the
city was taken by the Chaldeans, and he fled for his life, they pursued
him, and took him; he fell into their hands, their pits, snares, and
nets, as was foretold he should; and which are sometimes called the net
and snare of the Lord; see [Eze 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013);
See Gill on [Lam 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019). Many of the
ancient Christian writers apply this to Christ; and particularly
Theodoret takes it to be a direct prophecy of him and his sufferings.
Vatablus, who interprets it of Josiah, makes him to be a type of Christ;
as Calvin does Zedekiah, of whom he expounds the words; and the Targum,
in the king of Spain's Bible, is,

"the King Messiah, who was beloved by us, as the breath of the spirit of
life, which is in our nostrils.''

What is here said may be applied to Christ; he is the life of men, he
gives them life and breath, and in him they live and move; their
spiritual life is from him, and is maintained and preserved by him; he
lives in his people, and they in him, and they cannot live without him,
no more than a man without his breath: he is the Christ of God, anointed
with the Holy Ghost to the offices of Prophet, Priest, and King; and
from whom Christians have their holy unction and their name: he was
taken, not by the Chaldeans, but by the wicked Jews; who looked upon him
as a very mischievous person, as if he had been an evil beast, a beast
of prey, though the pure spotless Lamb of God; and they dug pits, laid
snares, and formed schemes to take him, and at last did, and with wicked
hands crucified him, and slew him; though not without his own and his
Father's will and knowledge, [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023);

of whom we said, under his shadow we shall live among the Heathen; in
the midst of the nations round about them, unmolested by them, none
daring to meddle with them; at least safe from being carried captive, as
now they were. Though Jeconiah was taken and carried into Babylon, yet
Zedekiah being placed upon the throne, the Jews hoped to live peaceable
and quiet lives under his government, undisturbed by their neighbours;
the wise and good government of a prince, and protection under it, being
sometimes compared in Scripture to the shadow of a rock or tree, [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002); but now it was all over with
them; their hope was gone, he being taken. Something like this may be
observed in the disciples of Christ; they hoped he would have restored
the kingdom to Israel, and they should have lived gloriously under his
government; they trusted that it was he that should have redeemed
Israel; but, when he was taken and crucified, their hope was in a manner
gone, [Luk 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021). True believers in
Christ do live peaceably, comfortably, and safely under him; they are
among the Heathen, among the men of the world, liable to their
reproaches, insults, and injuries; Christ is a tree, to which he is
often compared, one and another, that casts a delightful, reviving,
refreshing, and fructifying shadow, under which they sit with great
delight, pleasure, and profit, [Sol
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003); he is a rock, the shadow of which
affords rest to weary souls, and shelters from the heat of divine wrath,
the fiery law of God, and darts of Satan, and persecutions of men, [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002); and under his government,
protection, and power, they dwell safely, that sin cannot destroy them,
nor Satan devour them, nor the world hurt them; here they live
spiritually, and shall never die eternally, [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005).

\(n\) , Sept. "Christus Dominus", V. L. "Christus Domini", Pagninus.

[Lamentations 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lam 4:21</span></span>

Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom,.... The land of Idumea, and the
inhabitants of it, who did indeed rejoice at the destruction of
Jerusalem, [Oba 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012); and here, in an
ironic manner, are bid to go on with their mirth, if they could, like
the young man in [Ecc 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009), as Aben
Ezra observes; for it would not last long, their note would soon be
changed:

that dwellest in the land of Uz; not the country of Job, which had its
name from Uz the son of Nahor, [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001); but a country in Idumea, from
whence the whole was so called, and that from Uz the son of Dishan, one
of the sons of Seir: or else the sense is, that Edom or Idumea, and the
inhabitants of it, dwelt upon the borders of Uz; and so agrees very well
with the place of Job's residence, which was near the land of Edom. The
Targum, according to R. Elias (o), is,

"rejoice, O wicked Rome;''

but, in the king of Spain's Bible, it is,

"rejoice and be glad, O Constantine (that is, Constantinople), the city
of wicked Edom, which art built in the land of Armenia;''

and Jarchi says that Jeremiah prophesies concerning the destruction of
the second temple, which the Romans destroyed; but in other copies, and
according to Lyra, his words are, Jeremiah here prophesies concerning
the destruction of the Roman empire, because that destroyed the temple;
and it is usual with him, and other Rabbins, to interpret Edom of Rome;

the cup also shall pass through unto thee; the cup of God's wrath and
vengeance; which, as it had come to the Jews, and was passing from one
nation to another, in its turn would come to these Edomites; see [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015);

thou shall be drunken, and shall make thyself naked; be overcome by it;
as persons with wine, or any strong drink, reel to and fro, and fall;
and be utterly destroyed, lie helpless and without strength: "and be
made naked" (p), as it may be rendered; stripped of their riches and
wealth; or they should strip themselves of their clothes, and behave
indecently, and expose those parts which ought to be covered, as drunken
persons the sense is, they should be exposed, or expose themselves, to
shame and contempt. The Septuagint version is, "and thou shalt be
drunken, and pour out" (q); that is, vomit, as drunken men do; and so
Jarchi and Abendana interpret the word of vomiting; and the Targum is,

"and thou shalt be emptied.''

\(o\) In Tishbi, p. 227. (p) "nudaberis", V. L. (q) , Sept. "et eris
vomens", Pagninus, Vatablus.

[Lamentations 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lam 4:22</span></span>

The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of
Zion,.... In part in the seventy years' captivity in Babylon, and more
fully in their present captivity; for, as has been observed, there are
some things in the preceding account, which had a further accomplishment
in the destruction of Jerusalem, and the distress of the Jews by the
Romans. The Targum is,

"and after thine iniquity is fulfilled, O congregation of Zion, and thou
shalt be delivered by the hands of the Messiah, and of Elias the high
priest;''

he will no more carry thee away into captivity; he, the enemy; or the
Lord, as the Targum: that is, thou shall no more be carried captive:
this seems to confirm the above observation, that this chapter is a
prophecy of what would be, as well as a narrative of what had been; and
includes the destruction both of the first and second temple, and of the
Jews both by the Chaldeans and Romans; for it is certain, that, after
their deliverance from the captivity of Babylon, they have been carried
captive, and are now in captivity;

he will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; punish the Edomites
for their sins, as is elsewhere threatened, [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007), [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011); which was fulfilled by
Nebuchadnezzar as an instrument; and may have some respect to the
destruction of the Romans, when the Jews shall be converted, and return
to their own land. The Targum, in the king of Spain's Bible, is,

"and at that time I will visit thine iniquity, O wicked Rome, which art
built in Italy, and full of multitudes of the children of Edom; and the
Persians shall come and oppress thee, and make thee desolate;''

and so the copy used by Munster:

he will discover thy sins; by the punishment of them; as, when God
pardons sins, he is said to cover them; so, when he punishes for them,
he discovers them; see [Jer 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 5](lam005)

</div>
