<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev021)  [Next](lev023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 22

In this chapter several laws are delivered out, forbidding the priests
to eat of holy things, when in any uncleanness, or at any time what dies
of itself, or is torn of beasts, [Lev
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#001); also showing who belonging to
the priests might or might not eat of the holy things, [Lev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010); and others requiring that
whatever offerings were brought by the children, of Israel, they should
be perfect and without blemish, [Lev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#017); and also declaring what age a
creature should be of when sacrificed, and the time when thank offerings
were to be eaten, [Lev 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#026);
concluding with an exhortation to observe the commands of God, and
sanctify him, and not profane his name, [Lev
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#031).

[Leviticus 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 22:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Immediately after he had spoken
concerning blemishes in priests, and in a continued discourse
signifying, that though priests that had blemishes might eat of the holy
things, yet neither they, nor even such who had not any, if they were
under legal impurity, might eat of them:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 22:2</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron and to his sons,.... The priests; the children of
Israel or the common people are not mentioned, as having no concern in
the following laws about eating holy things:

that they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of
Israel; both from offering their lawful sacrifices, which was the
business of their office when pure, and chiefly from eating that part of
them which was their due, and was allowed them; neither of these they
were to do, particularly the latter, when they were in any uncleanness,
as the following words show:

and that, they profane not my holy name in those things which they
hallow unto me; which the children of Israel set apart and devoted to
his service; which they would do, by eating their part of them when
unclean, and thereby show little reverence to that holy name to which
they were devoted; or which the priests themselves sanctified, by
offering them to him; for Jarchi says, this takes in the holiness of the
priests themselves; but the former seems best, and is confirmed in [Lev
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#003),

I am the Lord; who is holy himself, and whose holy things these are, and
will be sanctified by those that draw nigh unto him.

[Leviticus 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 22:3</span></span>

Say unto them, whosoever he be of all your seed among your
generations,.... Whether male or female, in all succeeding ages, as long
as the ceremonial law lasted; for females as well as males of the
families of the priests ate of the holy things, provided they had no
uncleanness on them, but if they had, they might not:

that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow
unto the Lord: that approaches to any of the sacrifices which the
children of Israel have devoted to the Lord, either to offer them, or
even to touch them, and particularly to eat of them; and so Jarchi and
Ben Gersom observe, that this going or drawing near is no other than
eating; for touching only, a man was not guilty of cutting off:

having his uncleanness upon him; through a leprosy, or running issue, or
touching any unclean person or thing, as the following words explain it:

that soul shall be cut off from my presence; excluded from the
sanctuary, and the service of it, where the presence of God was; or be
removed out of the world by death, either by the civil magistrate, or by
the hand of God, by an immediate death, by the pestilence, as the Targum
of Jonathan:

I am the Lord; that will avenge the breach of such a law, able to
inflict such punishment, and faithful to accomplish every word of his,
whether in a way of threatening or promise.

[Leviticus 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 22:4</span></span>

What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper,.... A young, or an old
man, as the Targum of Jonathan, and indeed man or woman; for the wives
and daughters of the priests, if in this, and other circumstances
following, might not eat of the holy things until cleansed, who
otherwise might, see [Lev 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#002),

or hath a running issue; a gonorrhoea, whether man or woman, [Lev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002),

he shall not eat of the holy things until he be clean; he might eat of
the tithes, but not of the wave breast, or heave shoulder:

and whoso toucheth any that is unclean by the dead; not only that
touched the dead, which made unclean, but that touched any person or
thing that was made unclean by it:

or a man whose seed goeth from him; involuntarily when asleep, in a
dream, and through a lustful imagination; see [Lev
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#016).

[Leviticus 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 22:5</span></span>

Or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing, whereby he may be made
unclean,.... Jarchi thinks this respects the measure or quantity of what
is touched, as if but the quantity of a lentil or small pea, see [Lev
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#031),

or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he
hath; as of a leper, a profluvious, or a dead man; Jarchi interprets it
of the latter, and of the quantity which defiles, which is that of an
olive; who also observes, that the phrase, "whatsoever uncleanness",
includes touching a profluvious man or woman, a menstruous woman, and a
new mother.

[Leviticus 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 22:6</span></span>

The soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until even,....
Which is the time fixed by the several laws for such uncleannesses, see
[Lev 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#031),

and shall not eat of the holy things, unless he wash his flesh with
water; in forty seahs of water, as the Targum of Jonathan; yea, when the
evening is come, he may not eat of the heave or wave offerings, until he
has dipped himself all over in water; nor should any eat of the Lord's
supper under the New Testament, but such as are first baptized in water.

[Leviticus 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 22:7</span></span>

And when the sun is down he shall be clean,.... Having washed himself in
water, otherwise not, though the sun may be set:

and shall afterwards eat of the holy things; the families of the priests
lived upon:

because it is his food: his common food, his ordinary diet, that by
which he subsists, having nothing else to live upon; this being the
ordination of God, that he which ministered about holy things should
live on them; and these being his only substance, in compassion to him
they were detained from him no longer than the evening; and this was
done, to make him careful how he defiled himself, since thereby he was
debarred of his ordinary meals.

[Leviticus 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 22:8</span></span>

That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts,.... Whether fowls or
beasts, and even clean ones, which, had they been killed in a proper
manner, were fit to cut, but dying of themselves, or torn to pieces by
other birds or beasts of prey, might not, see [Eze
44:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#031),

he shall not eat, to defile himself therewith; being impure food, at
least in a ceremonial sense, and not fit to be eaten; these things were
forbid a common Israelite, and much less might a priest eat of them, see
[Lev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015),

I am the Lord; who enjoin this, and expect to be obeyed.

[Leviticus 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 22:9</span></span>

They shall therefore keep mine ordinance,.... The observance of my word,
as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, of his word of command; either
respecting the not eating of such creatures that died of themselves, or
were torn by beasts; or else the not eating holy things in uncleanness,
so Jarchi and Gersom; but Aben Ezra thinks the sanctuary is referred to,
which was to be kept by the priests, and which seems to agree with what
follows:

lest they bear sin for it: the sanctuary, by neglecting it, and so be
charged with the guilt of sin, and be obliged to bear the punishment of
it:

and die therefore if they profane it; by going into it in their
uncleanness, and eating of the most holy things there when in such
circumstances, and die by the hand of God, as Jarchi and Ben Gersom
interpret it, as Nadab and Abihu did, and even in like manner, by fire,
[Lev 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001); and so the Targum of
Jonathan,"lest they die by flaming fire:"

I the Lord do sanctify them; the priests, who were separated from
others, and devoted to his service, and therefore ought to be holy; or
the holy things separated for the use of the priests, but not to be
eaten in their uncleanness; the Arabic version renders it, "do sanctify
that", the sanctuary, and therefore it should not be profaned, but be
kept pure and holy.

[Leviticus 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 22:10</span></span>

There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing,.... Any one of the holy
things, as the heave shoulder, wave breast, &c. by a "stranger" is not
meant one of another nation; though indeed all such were called
strangers, and might not eat of these things, [Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012); but one that was not of the
family of a priest, though he might be an Israelite, and even a Levite;
anyone that was not of the seed of Aaron, as Aben Ezra; any common man
or laic, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, excepting those after
mentioned:

a sojourner of the priests, or an hired servant, shall not eat of the
holy thing: by the former is not intended an Heathen, a proselyte of the
gate, one that has renounced idolatry, and so permitted to live among
the Israelites, of it uncircumcised, who is often understood by one that
sojourneth in the gate, but here an Israelitish sojourner; and so the
Targum of Jonathan expressly has it,"a son of an Israelite, who is a
sojourner of the priests;''not that is a guest for a short time, or a
boarder with him; for if he may not eat of the holy things, what must he
live on while with him? but one that dwells in some part of his house:
and by the latter is meant anyone that is hired by the day, or week, or
year, and when the time is expired is at his liberty; though the Jewish
writers commonly, and particularly Jarchi, interpret the sojourner of
the servant that has his ear bored, and is bought with money, until the
year of jubilee, and serves for ever; and the hireling of one that is
purchased for years, and goes out in the sixth year; but the above
objection will lie against these.

[Leviticus 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 22:11</span></span>

But if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shall eat of it,....
Whether any of his own nation, who sometimes, when become poor, were
obliged to sell themselves; or a stranger, as the Targum of Jonathan;
one of another nation, a Canaanitish servant, as Jarchi. Now these being
his own purchase, and always to abide with him, became part of his
family, and so might eat of the provisions of it; and it is from hence
the Jews gather, as Jarchi and Gersom, that his wife might eat of the
holy things, because bought with his money; but there is a better reason
to be given for that, for of whatever family she was before, whether of
the priests or not, by marriage she became a part, yea, a principal of
his family, being one flesh with him, bearing the same name, and
entitled to all the privileges of his house. This is extended by some
Jewish writers (l) to cattle, for by any soul they understood also the
soul of a beast, which being bought by the priest's money, might eat of
the offerings of the tithes:

and he that is born in his house; they shall eat of his meat; whether
male or female, as Aben Ezra; these are children of handmaids, as
Jarchi, that were bought with his money; and these children being born
of them, became his property, and part of his family, and so had a right
to the provisions of his house. All this may teach us, that the holy
ordinances of the Gospel are not to be administered to strangers,
persons destitute of the grace of God, nor to such as are not of the
family or church of God, but to such as are bought and redeemed with the
blood of Christ, the high priest, and are born again of his Spirit and
grace.

\(l\) Misn. Trumot, c. 11. sect. 9. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. Hilchot
Trumot, c. 6. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 22:12</span></span>

If the priest's daughter also be married to a stranger,.... Not to an
Heathen, but to any Israelite, that is, a common man, or a layman, as
the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, one that is not a priest; but is
married either to a Levite, or an Israelite, as Jarchi:

she may not eat of an offering of the holy things; the heave shoulder or
wave breast, &c. being removed into another family by marriage, she is
not reckoned of her father's family, and so had no more a right to eat
of the holy things.

[Leviticus 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 22:13</span></span>

But if the priest's daughter be a widow or divorced,.... If her husband
be dead, or if living, and she is put away by him, whether a Levite, or
an Israelite:

and have no child: by him, as the Targum of Jonathan and Jarchi add, nor
is with child by him:

and is returned to her father's house, as in her youth, she shall eat of
her father's meat; not of all, or any part, only of some, of the heave
offering, but not of the shoulder or breast, which is the tradition of
the wise men, as Maimonides (m) relates. There are two cases in this
affair excepted by them, which they suppose are implied in this clause;
the one is, if she is detained and reserved for her husband's brother,
according to the law in [Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005); she
being without children; and so the Targum of Jonathan adds,"and is not
kept or reserved for her husband's brother,''which is implied by her
being returned to her father's house; and the other is, if she is with
child; for though she had no children by her husband, yet if she is
pregnant, that made her unlawful to eat of the holy things; for then she
is not as in her youth (n). The Jewish canon concerning such a person
runs thus (o); the daughter of a priest, married to an Israelite, may
not eat of the heave offering; if he dies, and she has a son by him, she
may not eat of the heave offering; if she is married to a Levite, she
may eat of the tithes: if he dies, and she has a son by him, she may eat
of the tithes: if she is married to a priest, she may eat of the heave
offering; if he dies, and she has a son by him, she may eat of the heave
offering; if her son by the priest dies, she may not eat of the heave
offering; if her son by the Levite dies, she may not eat of the tithes;
if her son by an Israelite, she may return to her father's house, as it
is said [Lev 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#013),

but there shall no stranger eat thereof; as not anyone of another
nation, so not anyone of another family beside the priest's, no, not the
son of a priest's daughter by an Israelite, which some think is
principally intended; and so Aben Ezra remarks this is said of a son, if
she had any, and upon whose account she herself might not eat.

\(m\) In Misn. Yebamot, c. 9. sect. 6. (n) Misn Yebamot, c. 7. sect. 4.
& Bartenora in ib. (o) Misn. Yebamot, c. 9. sect. 6.

[Leviticus 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 22:14</span></span>

And if a man eat of the holy thing unwittingly,.... Either not knowing
that it is an holy thing, or the heave offering, or any thing of that
kind; or else is ignorant of the punishment of such an action, as Gersom
observes; and this is to be understood of any man that was not a priest,
or was not of the priest's family, even any common Israelite; so the
Targum of Jonathan, a man of Israel, or an Israelite, one of the common
people:

then he shall put a fifth part thereof unto it; a fifth part of the
value of what he has eaten, to an equivalent for the whole, that is, he
shall pay the full value for what he has eaten, and a fifth part
besides:

and shall give it to the priest with the holy thing; the meaning is,
that he shall give the fifth part to the priest, with the equivalent for
what he has eaten; for he could not give the holy thing itself, but a
compensation for it; according to Gersom, he was to give the principal
to the priest, whose the holy thing was he ate of, and the fifth part he
might give to what priest he would. The Jewish canon, concerning this
matter, runs thus; he that ignorantly eats the heave offering pays the
principal, and the fifth part; and the same, either he that eats, or
drinks, or anoints; and whether the heave offering be clean or unclean,
he pays the fifth, and the fifth of the fifth; and he does not pay the
heave offering but of common things, rightly ordered, and they become an
heave offering, and the compensation of it; and if the priest would
forgive, he may not (p).

\(p\) Misn. Trumot, c. 6. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 22:15</span></span>

And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel,
which they offer unto the Lord. By causing or suffering strangers to eat
of them; so Jarchi, referring the words to the priests, who should be
careful that strangers ate not of sacred things; or by the strangers
themselves eating them, whereby they were profaned and used as common
things.

[Leviticus 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 22:16</span></span>

Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass,.... The punishment of
sin: either the strangers:

when they eat their holy things; the holy things belonging to the
priests, which they permitting them to do, suffer them to be liable to
the punishment incurred thereby, or else the priests themselves; so the
Septuagint version renders the word "themselves"; and in like manner
Jarchi interprets it; and then the sense may be, according to the
Targums of Jonathan and Onkelos, that the priests shall bear the
punishment of their sins,"when they shall eat the holy things in
uncleanness,''which is what is forbidden them in the former part of the
chapter; but this seems to be too remote; rather the former sense is
best:

for I the Lord do sanctify them; both the priests, to whom the holy
things belong, and the holy things for their use, and the use of their
families, and them only.

[Leviticus 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 22:17</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time; for having said
many things concerning the holiness of priests, whose business it was to
offer sacrifices, he adds various things concerning the nature,
condition, and circumstances of the sacrifices they were to offer:

saying, as follows.

[Leviticus 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 22:18</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons,.... The priests, whose work it was to
offer sacrifices, and therefore it behoved them to know what kind and
sort were to be offered by them, when brought to them:

and unto all the children of Israel: who were to bring the sacrifices,
and for whom they were to be offered, and therefore should be acquainted
with the nature and kind of what would be acceptable to God, and what
not:

and say unto them, whatsoever he be of the house of Israel; this phrase
includes women and servants, and even Gentiles, as say the Jewish
writers (q), who may vow vows, and make voluntary gifts, as well as the
Israelites:

or of the strangers in Israel: those of other nations that dwelt there,
either proselytes of the gate, or proselytes of righteousness, so Ben
Gersom; and Aben Ezra observes, that the text speaks of the stranger,
because there is some reason in the vows and freewill offerings of an
Israelite and stranger, as follows:

that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his freewill
offerings, which they will offer unto the Lord for a burnt offering; the
wise men, as Aben Ezra observes, distinguish between a vow and a
freewill offering; every vow is a freewill offering, but every freewill
offering is not a vow; and though these were both of them sorts of peace
offerings, yet they were not received from Gentiles under that notion,
but as burnt offerings, because they were offered in devotion to God,
and not to be eaten by Israelites; so Maimonides (r) says, they do not
receive from Gentiles but burnt offerings only, as it is said [Lev
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#025), "neither from a stranger's
hand", &c. even burnt offerings of fowls they receive from a Gentile,
though he be an idolater; but they do not receive of them peace
offerings, nor meat offerings, nor sin offerings, nor trespass
offerings; and so burnt offerings, which do not come by way of a vow, or
a freewill offering, they do not receive from Gentiles, as the burnt
offering of a new mother and the like unto it; a Gentile that brings
peace offerings, they offer them as burnt offerings, because the heart
of the Gentile is towards heaven.

\(q\) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 13. 2. Bartenora in Misn. Shekalim, c. 1.
sect. 5. (r) Hilchot Maaseh Hakorbanot, c. 3. sect. 2, 3.

[Leviticus 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 22:19</span></span>

Ye shall offer at your own will,.... For vows and freewill offerings
were at their own option, and depended on their own will and pleasure,
and when offered should be with a willing mind, and from their whole
heart: or "for good will to you"; as the Targums of Onkelos and
Jonathan; or for gracious, acceptation, that is, that they might be well
pleasing to God, and acceptable in his sight, so Jarchi; in order to
which the following direction was strictly to be observed:

a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, and of the goats;
bullocks, sheep, and goats, were the only sorts of beasts, out of which
sacrifices were taken, and those that were for burnt offerings were
always to be males, and unblemished, see [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003); but for other offerings, as peace
offerings and sin offerings, females might be used, see [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001). Fowls are not mentioned, though
burnt offerings were of them, because it was not required in them, only
of beasts, that they should be males, and without blemish; for, as
Jarchi observes, these were not rejected on account of a blemish, only
for want of a member.

[Leviticus 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 22:20</span></span>

For whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer,.... Which is the
general rule, the particulars of which are after given, and which has
been imitated by the Heathens. The Egyptians, as they only sacrificed
the males of beeves, so they were very curious in examining them, that
they might be entirely pure and perfect (s); and it was a custom among
the Romans, that such sheep should be chosen for sacrifice, in which
there was nothing wanting (t); and so, among the Grecians, Homer (u)
speaks of perfect goats offered in sacrifice to appease the gods:

for it shall not be acceptable for you; be grateful to God, and accepted
by him on their account, if blemished; see [Mal
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013).

\(s\) Heredot. Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 38. (t) Servius in Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 4. (u) Iliad. 1. ver. 66.

[Leviticus 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 22:21</span></span>

And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offering unto the Lord,....
This, as Ben Gersom observes, is distinguished from a burnt offering;
for though it was to be perfect, and without blemish, yet not obliged to
be a male as that, [Lev 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001). This was
either by way of thanksgiving for mercies received, [Lev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012), or

to accomplish his vow; made in any distress, that if God would deliver
him, then he would offer such a sacrifice:

or a freewill offering; either on account of favours received, or in
order to obtain them: which sacrifice, whether

in beeves or sheep; whether in bullocks or sheep, under which are
comprehended goats, both being of the flock, [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019),

it shall be perfect to be accepted; perfect in all its parts, not only
in those that are without and obvious to view, but in those that are
within: wherefore the Jewish writers say (w), if it had but one kidney,
or the spleen was consumed, it was unfit for the altar; wherefore, in
order to be an acceptable sacrifice to God, it was to be complete in all
respects:

there shall be no blemish therein; which is repeated for the
confirmation of it, and that it might be observed. Such sacrifices were
typical of Christ, the immaculate Lamb of God, who offered himself
without spot to him, [Pe1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019); and
shows that no sacrifice of man's can be so acceptable to God as to atone
for him, since none of theirs are perfect, and without blemish.

\(w\) Maimon. Hilchot Issure Mizbeach, c. 2. sect. 11.

[Leviticus 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 22:22</span></span>

Blind, or broken, or maimed,.... Which is "blind" of one eye, or both:
and so the Egyptians, as they would not sacrifice any of their oxen that
had any blemishes on them, and were of a different colour, or changed in
their form, so likewise such that were deprived of either of their eyes
(x). Some, as Aben Ezra observes, restrain that which is "broken" to its
being broken in the head; but others interpret it of any fracture of the
foot, as well as the head, and even of the tail, side, or rib; though
others think, that such fractures as were not open and visible are
excepted, as that of the rib; so Gersom; and with the Heathens, as Pliny
(y) would have remarked, as they were not used to sacrifice calves,
brought on men's shoulders, so neither anything that halted: that which
is maimed some understand of that whose foot is broken, as Aben Ezra
also remarks; but the word is by the Septuagint rendered, "cut in the
tongue"; and the Targum of Jonathan, "whose eyebrows are smitten"; and
Jarchi seems to take in both, interpreting it the eyebrow which is cut
or broken, and so the lip, which is cut or broken: but it is rather to
be understood more generally of its being maimed or mutilated in any
part of it; so with the Heathens, as Porphyry (z) affirms, beasts that
were mutilated were not to be sacrificed; and in the Comedian (a), a
sacrifice is objected to, because it had no tail; upon which the
Scholiast observes, that whatever was mutilated was not offered in
sacred services, nor was any thing imperfect or unsound sacrificed to
the gods; and particularly Servius (b) remarks, if their tongues were
cut or slit; which illustrates the Septuagint version, which is observed
by Grotius:

or having a wen: or full of warts, as others; the Targum of Jonathan is,
whose eyes are smitten with a mixture of white and black; and so Gersom
interprets it of a like defect in the eye, in the white of the eye; for
he says, if it was in the black or pupil of the eye, the eye would be
blind:

or scurvy or scabbed: the same of those in men; See Gill on [Lev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#020),

ye shall not offer these unto the Lord; any creatures defective in any
of these instances; three times this is said, as Jarchi observes, to
make them careful concerning the sanctification of them, and concerning
the slaying of them, and concerning the sprinkling of their blood:

nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the Lord; a
burnt offering on the altar of burnt offering, or burn the fat of them
upon it.

\(x\) Chaeremon. apud Porphyr. de Abstinentia, l. 4. sect. 7. (y) Nat.
Hist. l. 8. c. 45. (z) De Abstinentia, l. 2. sect. 23. (a) Aristoph.
Acharnens. ver. 784. (b) In Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6.

[Leviticus 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 22:23</span></span>

Either a bullock, or a lamb that hath anything superfluous,

or lacking in its parts,.... That has either more members than it should
have, as five feet, or two gristles in an ear, as Gersom says, or has
fewer than it should have; or, as Jarchi, that has one member longer or
shorter than another, as the leg or thigh; according to the Targum of
Jonathan, that is redundant in its testicles, or deficient therein; the
Septuagint version is, that hath its ear or its tail cut; and so the
Vulgate Latin version:

that mayest thou offer for a freewill offering: for the repair of the
sanctuary or temple, as Jarchi and Gersom; money, or the value of the
sacrifices, might be given to the priests for that use, but according to
them might not be offered upon the altar: but it rather seems to be an
exception to the above law, and allows of the sacrifice of them for
freewill offering, though not for a vow, as it follows

but for a vow it shall not be accepted; because the other was according
to a man's will and pleasure, and he might bring what he would on that
account; but when he made a vow that he would offer such a sacrifice, it
must be of creatures that were perfect, and without blemish.

[Leviticus 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 22:24</span></span>

Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which bruised, or crushed, or
broken, or cut,.... The Targum of Jonathan is, whose testicles are
pressed and bruised, and whose nerves are corrupted and bruised, and so
most Jewish writers interpret it:

neither shall you make any offering thereof in your land; any offering
of any sort, either burnt offering or peace offering, or any other; or
ye shall not do, that is, any such thing as here suggested, not bruise,
or crush, or break, or cut the testicles of any creature; so the above
writers.

[Leviticus 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 22:25</span></span>

Neither from a stranger's hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of
any of these,.... That is, from a Gentile, a proselyte of the gate, who
had renounced idolatry, and was willing to offer sacrifice to the true
God; but what had such defects and blemishes in them as before described
the priest might not take of his hands, and offer on the altar of God;
and this is the rather observed, because on the one hand the Gentile
might think such sacrifices would be acceptable, since he might have
been used to offer such to idols; and on the other hand, the priest
might think such would do well enough for Gentiles, though not for
Israelites:

because their corruption is in them; or they are corrupt through being
bruised, crushed, broken, or cut:

and blemishes be in them; which seems to be added to explain the former,
and may have respect to all the blemishes before named, and whatsoever
is included in them; for though there are but here mentioned, the Jews
reckon no less than fifty (c):

they shall not be accepted for you; to make atonement for you; Jarchi
says, or "from you", the priests; they shall not be accepted of the Lord
from their hands, and so be of no avail to the offerers, nor to those
for whom they are offered.

\(c\) Maimon. Hilchot Biath Hamikdash, c. 7. sect. 1, &c.

[Leviticus 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 22:26</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time, as before, in a
continued discourse, the subject being of the same kind, relating to
sacrifices:

saying, as follows.

[Leviticus 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 22:27</span></span>

When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth,.... Those three
are only mentioned, because they were only made use of in sacrifice, to
which this law refers:

then it shall be seven days under the dam; whether a calf, or a lamb, or
a kid of the goats; it was not to be taken from its dam and killed,
either for food or sacrifice, before it was seven days old: Fagius says,
the Hebrews give two reasons why a creature might not be offered before
the eighth day; one is, that a sabbath might pass over it, nothing being
perfect and consistent without it, that giving, as they say (d)
perfection and consistence to all the things of the world; and the
other, as the heavens and the earth being perfected in seven days, a
creature which lives so long seems to be, as it were, perfect; but he
observes, if we inquire after the mystical sense of it, a better reason
is to be given, namely, that Christ, the type of all the sacrifices, was
not to be offered, or suffer death in his infancy, which Herod
contrived, but at man's estate; and to show that no man is fit to be a
propitiatory sacrifice, through weakness and inability, being unable to
stand before the justice of God, only Christ, in whom is perfection of
strength:

and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an
offering made by fire unto the Lord; become an acceptable burnt offering
to God; so Pliny (e) says, that the young of sheep are fit for sacrifice
on the eighth day, and of an ox on the thirtieth day; see [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030).

\(d\) Tzerer Hammor, fol. 104. 2. (e) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 51.

[Leviticus 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 22:28</span></span>

And whether it be cow or ewe,.... Or "an ox or sheep" (f), for this law,
as Aben Ezra says, respects both male and female, and neither the one
nor the other with their young might be slain; though Jarchi says, the
custom is concerning the female, for it is forbidden to slay the dam and
its son, or daughter; but it is not the custom concerning males,
wherefore it is lawful to slay the father and the son:

ye shall not kill it and her young both in one day; or, "it and its son"
(g), the young, whether of a cow or ewe, and whether it be male or
female; though Gersom observes, that this law takes place only in the
dam and its female young, and not in the father and the son; for it is
not manifest, in many animals, who is their father, wherefore he is not
guilty of stripes, if the father and his son are slain in one day, even
though it is known it is its father: the reason of the law seems to be,
to encourage mercy and pity, and to discourage cruelty: hence the Targum
of Jonathan is,"and my people, the children of Israel, as our Father is
merciful in heaven, so be ye merciful on earth: a cow, or a sheep, &c.''

\(f\) "bovem vel pecus", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (g) "ipsum et filium
ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Leviticus 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 22:29</span></span>

And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the Lord,....
Which was a sort of peace offering, distinct from freewill offerings and
vows before spoken of:

offer it at your own will; just what they pleased, whether a bullock, a
sheep, or a goat, and whether a male or female; these were left to their
own option, or for acceptation to you, as the Targum of Jonathan, and so
Jarchi; that is, it was right in them, and they ought to be careful to
offer it in such manner, that it might be acceptable to God, by
observing the rules given concerning it, particularly what follows.

[Leviticus 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 22:30</span></span>

On the same day it shall be eaten up,.... Which is the law concerning
it; See Gill on [Lev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015),

ye shall leave none of it till the morning; of another day, as the
Vulgate Latin version adds, and much less the fat of them, and the most
holy things, as Ben Gersom observes, the one being to be burnt upon the
altar, the other to be eaten by the priests

I am the Lord; who has made this law, and expect it will be observed.

[Leviticus 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 22:31</span></span>

Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them,.... Both priests
and people, even all the commandments delivered at this time, as well as
all others; these they were to observe and take notice of, and keep them
in memory, and put them in practice:

I am the Lord; See Gill on [Lev 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#030).

[Leviticus 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 22:32</span></span>

Neither shall ye profane my holy name,.... By transgressing the laws of
God, particularly by offering blemished sacrifices, or before the proper
tithe; or by slaying the dam and its young on one day; for, as Aben Ezra
observes, this is said to the sons of Aaron:

but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel; by his priests
among them, and by themselves, conforming to all the precepts, and
particularly the last mentioned, which respects them, and their eating
up the peace offerings the same day:

I am the Lord which hallowed you; had separated them from all other
people, and had given them holy laws to walk by, through the observance
of which they would be at least externally holy.

[Leviticus 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 22:33</span></span>

That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God,.... Whereby
he showed himself to be their covenant God and Father, who had a kind
and gracious regard unto them, and which laid them under obligation to
fear, serve, and worship him as their God:

I am the Lord; that hath sovereign right unto them, and claim upon them,
and therefore they ought to be subject to his will, and observe his laws
ordinances.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 23](lev023)

</div>
