<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev023)  [Next](lev025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 24

This chapter treats of the oil for the lamps, and the ordering of them,
[Lev 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#001); of the making of the
shewbread cakes, and the setting of them on the table, [Lev
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005); and an Israelite having
blasphemed the name of the Lord, and inquiry being made what should be
done to him, he, and so any other person guilty of the same, is ordered
to be stoned to death, [Lev 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#010); on
occasion of which several laws are repeated concerning killing a man or
a beast, or doing injury to any man, [Lev
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#017).

[Leviticus 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 24:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After he had delivered to him the
laws concerning the purity of the priests, and the perfection of the
sacrifices they were to offer, and concerning the feasts the people were
to keep, he spoke to Moses of some other things which concerned both
people and priests:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 24:2</span></span>

Command the children of Israel,.... Moses was the chief magistrate under
God, and being clothed with authority from him, had power to command the
children of Israel to do what the Lord required of them:

that they bring unto thee pure oil olive, beaten, for the light; this
was to be at the public expense, and it belonged to the community to
supply the priests with oil for the light of the candlestick in the
temple, [Exo 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#006); and this oil was
not to be any sort of oil, as train oil, or oil of nuts, almonds, &c.
but oil of olives, and not any sort of that, but the purest, which was
the first that was taken from them; it seems there were three sorts, the
first of which was pure, and this beaten in a mortar, and not ground in
a mill; See Gill on [Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020),

to cause the lamps to burn continually; the lamps in the golden
candlestick, which were seven, [Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037); or "the lamp", in the singular
number, as it is in the original text; the western lamp, which is said
to be always kept lighted, from which the rest were lighted when out;
though the oil was undoubtedly for the supply of the lamps, that they
might burn always, night and day; or from night tonight, as Jarchi; and
both on sabbath days and working days, as the Targum of Jonathan.

[Leviticus 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 24:3</span></span>

Without the vail of the testimony,.... That is, on the outside of the
vail which divided between the holy and holy of holies, and which was
before the ark in which the testimony or law was:

in the tabernacle of the congregation; which the apostle calls the
first, namely, the holy place in which the candlestick, with its lamps,
stood, [Heb 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002),

shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning, before the Lord
continually, that is, the lamp or lamps, or candlestick, in which they
were, or the light of them; his business was, and so every priest's that
succeeded him, to supply the lamps with oil, to dress, him, and snuff
them, that they might burn clear, and burn always, and that before the
Lord, in the presence of the Lord:

it shall be a statute for ever in your generations; until the Messiah
should come, the true light, which would put out all such typical ones,
and by his Gospel spread light in all his churches throughout the world;
See Gill on [Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020) and See Gill on
[Exo 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021).

[Leviticus 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 24:4</span></span>

He shall order the lamps on the pure candlestick,.... So called, as
Jarchi suggests, for these two reasons, partly because it was made of
pure gold, and partly because it was to be kept pure and clean, and free
from ashes, by the priest; see [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031),

before the Lord continually; which both respects the situation of the
candlestick, and the work about it, which Aaron was to do continually
before and in the presence of the Lord. Jarchi thinks this ordering
respects the measure of oil for every night, which he says, according to
the wise men, was half a log for every lamp, which was about a quarter
of a pint of oil.

[Leviticus 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 24:5</span></span>

And thou shalt take fine flour,.... Of wheat, and the finest of it:

and bake twelve cakes thereof; answerable to the twelve tribes, as the
Targum of Jonathan, which were typical of the spiritual Israel of God:

two tenth deals shall be in one cake; that is, two tenth parts of an
ephah, which were two omers, one of which was as much as a man could eat
in one day of the manna: so that one of these cakes was as much as two
men could eat of bread in one day; each cake was ten hands' breadth
long, five broad, and seven fingers its horns, or was so high (g).

\(g\) Menachot, c. 11. sect. 4.

[Leviticus 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 24:6</span></span>

And thou shalt set them in two rows,.... The twelve cakes:

six on a row; not by the side of each other, but six upon one another:

upon the pure table; the shewbread table, so called because overlaid
with pure gold, and kept clean and bright, [Exo
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#024),

before the Lord; for this stood in the holy place, in the same place as
the candlestick did, which has the same position, [Lev
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#004); of the mystical and typical
sense of these cakes; see Gill on [Exo
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030).

[Leviticus 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 24:7</span></span>

And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row,.... Two cups of
frankincense, in each of which was an handful of it, and which were set
by each row of the cakes, as Jarchi observes:

that it may be on the bread for a memorial; or "for the bread", instead
of it, for a memorial of it; that being to be eaten by the priests, and
this to be burned on the altar to the Lord, as follows:

even an offering made by fire unto the Lord; not the bread that was
after a time taken away, and eaten by the priests, but the frankincense.

[Leviticus 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 24:8</span></span>

Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the Lord continually,....
That is, the priest or priests then ministering, who should bring new
cakes and place them in the above order, having removed the old ones,
which was done in this manner; four priests went in, two had in their
hands the two rows (of bread), and two had in their hands two cups (of
frankincense); four went before these, two to take away the two rows (of
the old bread), and two to take away the two cups (of frankincense); and
they that carried in stood in the north, and their faces to the south
and they that brought out stood in the south, and their faces to the
north; these drew away (the old bread) and they put them (the new), and
the hand of the one was over against the hand of the other, as it is
said, "before me continually", [Exo
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030) (h); that is, at the same time
the hands of the one were employed in taking away, the hands of the
other were employed in setting on; so that there was always bread upon
the table:

being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant; God
requiring it of them, and they agreeing to give it, as they did, either
in meal or in money; for this was at the expense of the community.

\(h\) Menachot, c. 11. sect. 7.

[Leviticus 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 24:9</span></span>

And it shall be Aaron's and his sons',.... The twelve cakes of the old
bread, when taken off the shewbread table; these were divided between
the courses of the priests that carried in and brought out; and the high
priest had half from each course, so that the half was for Aaron or the
high priest, and the other half for his sons, or the priests that
ministered (i):

and they shall eat it in the holy place; in the tabernacle or some court
of it, and not in their own houses: it is said the shewbread was not
eaten sooner than the ninth day, nor after the eleventh; how? it was
baked on the evening of the sabbath, and it was eaten on the sabbath,
the ninth day; if a feast day happened to be on the eve of the sabbath,
it was eaten on the tenth; if the two feast days of the beginning of the
year so fell, it was eaten on the eleventh day (k): the reason why it
was only eaten in the holy place is:

for it is most holy unto him; it was one of the most holy things, which
were only to be eaten by males, and in the sanctuary not as the light
holy things, which were eaten in the houses and families of the priests,
and by their wives and daughters also:

of the offerings of the Lord made by fire, by a perpetual statute; not
that the bread was a burnt offering, but the frankincense upon it, or by
it, and so having a connection with it, the whole is said to be an
offering by fire: the one was given to the priests of the Lord to eat,
and the other was consumed on the altar; and both were an offering to
the Lord; and the frankincense being offered by fire unto the Lord,
instead of the bread it was reckoned as if that was so offered.

\(i\) Maimon. Hilchot Tamidin, c. 4. sect. 12, 14. (k) Menachot, c. 11.
sect. 9.

[Leviticus 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 24:10</span></span>

And the son of an Israelitish woman,.... Whose name, and the name of his
mother, are afterwards given:

whose father was an Egyptian; Jarchi says, this is the Egyptian whom
Moses slew, [Exo 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#012); and so others
in Abendana:

went out among the children of Israel; went out of Egypt with them,
according to the Targum of Jonathan, and so was one of the mixed
multitude, which came from thence with them, which is not improbable;
some say he went out of Moses's court of judicature; but it is more
likely that the meaning is, he went out of his tent, so Aben Ezra, into
the midst of the camp, to claim his rank and place among the people of
Israel; though the Jewish writers, as Jarchi and Aben Ezra, take this
phrase, "among the children of Israel", to signify that he was a
proselyte, and became a Jew, or had embraced the Jewish religion in all
respects:

and this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove
together in the camp; which man of Israel, according to the Targum of
Jonathan, was of the tribe of Dan, as was the mother of the man he
strove with; what they strove about is not easy to say; Aben Ezra
suggests, because this stands connected with the above laws, as if this
man had said some things in a reviling way about the shewbread, the oil,
and the offerings, and so a dispute arose between them, concerning them;
but Jarchi says, it was about the business of the camp, and it is more
commonly received that this man claimed a place to fix his tent on in
the tribe of Dan, in right of his mother; but the other urged, that the
order of fixing tents was according to the genealogies, and with the
ensigns of their father's house, and therefore he had no right to rank
with them, his father being an Egyptian, and perhaps from words they
came to blows, see [Exo 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#022); though
the Jewish writers understand it of their contending, at least of its
issuing in a judiciary way, before a court of judicature: so it is said,
when Israel dwelt in the wilderness, he (the son of the Egyptian) sought
to spread his tent in the midst of the tribe of Dan, and they would not
suffer it, because the ranks of the children of Israel were, every man
according to his rank, with the ensigns according to the genealogy of
their fathers; and they began and contended in the camp, wherefore they
went into the court of judicature, the son of the woman of the daughter
of Israel, and the man, a son of Israel, who was of the tribe of Dan
(l).

\(l\) Targum Jon. in loc.

[Leviticus 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 24:11</span></span>

And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord, and
cursed,.... As they were striving together, or when the trial was over,
he being cast, fell into outrageous blasphemies against God, who made
such laws for the civil polity of Israel, and cursed the judges that had
given sentence against him; so the Targum of Jonathan; and so the Jews
generally understand by the "name" blasphemed, the name Jehovah, which
he spake out plainly, and which, they say, is ineffable, and ought not
to be pronounced but by the high priest in the sanctuary; but this man
expressed it in its proper sound, and made use of it to curse the man
that strove with him, or the judge that judged him; so it is said in the
Misnah (d),"a blasphemer is not guilty until he expresses the name;''but
it undoubtedly means blaspheming God himself, by whatsoever name:

and they brought him unto Moses; having heard his blasphemy, to charge
him with it before him, or in order to have due punishment inflicted on
him: as to the matter of contest between him and the Israelite, that had
been decided in a lesser court of judicature, such an one as had been
set up by the advice of Jethro; but though there was full proof of his
blasphemy and cursing, which, perhaps, were expressed in open court;
they might not know what punishment to inflict upon him for so horrid a
crime, of which, perhaps, they had never had an instance before, and
therefore sent him to Moses, to whom the hearing and decision of weighty
matters belonged; see [Exo 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#022),

and his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe
of Dan; which is observed, as it should seem, to show in what tribe this
affair happened, and what the quarrel was first about, even a place and
rank in this tribe.

\(d\) Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 5.

[Leviticus 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 24:12</span></span>

And they put him in ward,.... In some prison, a place known in the camp,
as Aben Ezra observes:

that the mind of the Lord might be shewed them; for, though this was a
breach of the third command, in which God declares he would not hold
such an one guiltless, [Exo 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007); yet
no particular punishment being expressed, it was not a clear case
whether the Lord would punish for it himself, by an immediate stroke of
his hand, or whether by the civil magistrate; and if by the latter, in
what manner; for though it might be concluded, without any hesitation,
that he was worthy of death, since cursing father or mother was death,
[Exo 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017); and much more blaspheming
God, yet what death to put him to they might be at a loss about; or if
that was understood of stoning, they might think this deserved a sorer
punishment, and therefore consulted God about it.

[Leviticus 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 24:13</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... From off the mercy seat in the holy
of holies, where he had promised to meet him and commune with him about
anything he should inquire of him, as he did at this time:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 24:14</span></span>

Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp,.... To show that he
had no part nor lot in Israel, and that he was unworthy to be a member
of their civil community, or of their church state; and, besides, the
place of stoning, or where malefactors suffered any kind of death, was
without the camp, as afterwards without the city, see [Heb
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012),

let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head; the Targum of
Jonathan adds,"and the judges;''so Jarchi remarks, that they that "heard
him" are the witnesses, and the word "all" comprehends the judges:
Maimonides says (e) the same, and observes that hands were laid on no
malefactor but the blasphemer; and this was done to show that the one
had bore a faithful testimony, and the other had pronounced a righteous
sentence on him; and that he had brought this guilt and punishment upon
himself by his sin; wherefore it was usual for them to say, as the same
writers observe,"thy blood be upon thine own head, and we not punished
for thy death, which thou hast been the cause of to thyself:"

and let all the congregation stone him; which Aben Ezra interprets of
the great men of Israel; nor can it be thought that every individual of
the people could cast a stone at him, but it was to be done by some of
them, in the presence of them all, or as many as could conveniently get
together to behold it; and this was done to show their detestation of
the sin, and to deter from the commission of it: it was the same kind of
punishment that was ordered to be inflicted on him that cursed his
father or mother, [Lev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009); God, the
God of mercy, requiring no sorer punishment, though it deterred a
greater, for such a sin against himself, than against a common parent.

\(e\) Hilchot Obede Cochabim, c. 2. sect. 10.

[Leviticus 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 24:15</span></span>

And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel,.... On this occasion,
and gave them some laws and rules concerning the above affair, and other
things:

saying, whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin; which some
understand of anyone of another nation, that cursed the God he used to
serve in his own country; but it can hardly be thought that a law should
be made by the one only living and true God, to preserve the honour and
credit of false gods, when he is so jealous of his own glory; and those
are spoken of in Scripture with the greatest contempt, as dunghill
deities, and are actually cursed, [Jer
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011); but they are rather to be
interpreted of judges and all civil magistrates, who, as Aben Ezra
observes, are sometimes called Elohim or gods, [Psa
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001); and the rather, as it is
probable this man had cursed his judges, and so this is a distinct sin
from what follows; and not only the manner of expressing it, but the
punishment of it, seem to be different; for the phrase, "to bear his
sin", is used where the punishment is not expressly declared, and is by
Jarchi and others interpreted of cutting off from his people, but in
what way is not certain; whereas the punishment of a blasphemer of God
is before and after clearly expressed; see [Lev
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#019).

[Leviticus 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 24:16</span></span>

And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord,.... Or, "but he that
blasphemeth", &c. from whence the Jews gather, that the name Jehovah
must be expressed, or it is no blasphemy; so Jarchi; but it is not bare
using or expressing the word Jehovah that is blasphemy, but speaking ill
and contemptuously of God, with respect to any of his names, titles, and
epithets, or of any of his perfections, ways, and works:

he shall surely be put to death; no mercy shall be shown him, no
reprieve or pardon granted him: hence it is said (f), there is no
atonement for it, by repentance, or chastisements, or the day of
atonement: so blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is not forgiven, neither
in this world nor in that which is to come, [Mat
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031),

and all the congregation shall certainly stone him; shall have no pity
on him, nor spare him, but stone him till he dies:

as well the stranger as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth
the name of the Lord, shall be put to death; even a proselyte of the
gate, a Gentile that sojourned among them, uncircumcised, and did not
profess the Jewish religion, as well as a proselyte of righteousness,
and an Israelite born; yet, if he blasphemed the God of Israel, was to
lose his life without any mercy shown him.

\(f\) R. Alphes, par. 1. Yoma, c. 1. fol. 261. 1.

[Leviticus 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 24:17</span></span>

And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. With the
sword, as the Targum of Jonathan adds; which restrains it to any man of
the children of Israel, but wrongly; for the original law respects any
man whatever, [Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006); and so it does
here; See Gill on [Exo 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#012).

[Leviticus 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 24:18</span></span>

And he that killeth a beast shall make it good,.... Pay for it, give the
value of it, or another as good as that instead of it, as follows:

beast for beast; or "soul for soul"; life for life, that is, a living
one for that the life of which is taken away, and one every way as good
as that.

[Leviticus 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 24:19</span></span>

And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour,.... Does him any hurt or
mischief, causes any mutilation or deformity in him by striking him:

as he hath done, so shall it be done unto him: not that a like damage or
hurt should be done to him, but that he should make satisfaction for it
in a pecuniary way; pay for the cure of him, and for loss of time, and
in consideration of the pain he has endured, and the shame or disgrace
brought on him by the deformity or mutilation, or for whatever loss he
may sustain thereby; See Gill on [Exo
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#018) and See Gill on [Exo
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#019).

[Leviticus 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 24:20</span></span>

Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,.... Which is not to be
taken strictly or literally, but for the price or value of those, which
is to be given in a pecuniary way; See Gill on [Exo
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024), [Exo
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#025),

as he hath caused a blemish in a man, shall it be done to him; unless he
gives satisfaction, and pays a valuable consideration for it.

[Leviticus 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 24:21</span></span>

And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it,.... The same as in
[Lev 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018), which is repeated for the
confirmation of it, and that it might be observed, though Jarchi takes
it to be a different law; before, he says, it speaks of him that kills a
beast, here of him that makes any wound or bruise in it, which he must
make good; and it must be allowed that the manner of expression is
different; there it is, he that smites the soul of a beast so that it
dies, here only he that smites a beast, though it dies not, yet having
some damage done it, satisfaction must be made:

and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death; or he that smites a
man, though he does not kill him, as Jarchi observes, only makes a wound
or bruise in him, because it is not said, the soul of a man, as before;
but such damages did not require death, but satisfaction in another way,
as in [Lev 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#019).

[Leviticus 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 24:22</span></span>

Ye shall have one manner of law,.... Respecting the above things,
blaspheming of the name of God, taking away the life of man, or of any
beast, and of doing damage to either:

as well for the stranger as for one of your own country; the above laws
were binding upon proselytes as well as Israelites, and proselytes of
the gate as well as proselytes of righteousness, though the Jews
commonly restrain it to the latter:

for I am the Lord your God; whose name is holy and reverend, and ought
not to be blasphemed; and who is the Maker and preserver of man and
beast, and made these laws respecting them, and expected they should be
obeyed, especially by the children of Israel, whose covenant God and
Father he was, and they under the greatest obligation to serve and obey
him.

[Leviticus 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 24:23</span></span>

And Moses spake unto the children of Israel,.... As the Lord had
commanded him:

that they should bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and
stone him with stones; which were the instructions God had given to
Moses upon inquiring his mind and will about this matter:

and the children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Moses; they took
the blasphemer, and led him out of the camp, put their hands on him, and
stoned him with stones till he died.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 25](lev025)

</div>
