<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev010)  [Next](lev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 11

This chapter treats of creatures clean and unclean, as fit or not fit to
be eaten; and first of beasts, whose signs are given, [Lev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001) then of fishes, which are
likewise described, [Lev 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009) after
that of fowls, and those that are not to be eaten are particularly
named, [Lev 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013) next of creeping
things, which are distinguished into two sorts, as flying creeping
things, of which those that are unclean, their carcasses are not even to
be touched, as neither the carcasses of unclean beasts, [Lev
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020) and creeping things on the
earth, which defile by touching, as well as eating, and make everything
unclean, upon which, being dead, they fall, [Lev
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029) and these laws are enforced from
the holiness and goodness of God, [Lev
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044) and the chapter is concluded
with a recapitulation of them, [Lev
11:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#046).

[Leviticus 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 11:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses, and unto Aaron,.... The one being the
chief magistrate, and the other the high priest, and both concerned to
see the following laws put into execution; according to Jarchi, the Lord
spoke to Moses that he might speak to Aaron; but being now in office,
and one part of his office being to distinguish between clean and
unclean, the following discourse is directed equally to him as to Moses:

saying unto them; as follows.

[Leviticus 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 11:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, saying,.... For to them only belong
the following laws, and not unto the Gentiles, as Jarchi rightly
observes; these were parts of the ceremonial law, which was peculiarly
given to them, and lay, among other things, in meats and drinks, and now
abolished; for it is not what goes into a man that defiles him; nor is
anything common or unclean of itself, but every creature of God is good
if received with thanksgiving. The sons of Noah had free liberty,
without any restraint or limitation, of using for food any living
creature that moved upon the face of the earth; in the choice of which
they were left to exercise their reason and judgment, and is the case
with us now; but as men have not so nice a smell as some animals have,
and cannot distinguish by their senses so well as they what food is most
wholesome, which makes the exercise of their reason and judgment
necessary, and the people of the Jews being a special people, and for
whom the Lord had a peculiar regard; for the sake of their health, and
to preserve them from diseases they were subject to, such as the leprosy
and others, and to direct them to what was most salubrious and
healthful, gave them the following laws; and which, though they are not
obligatory upon us, yet may be a direction to us, in the use of what may
be most suitable and proper food for us, the difference of climates, and
of the constitutions of men's bodies, being considered: not that we are
to suppose, that the case of health was the only reason of delivering
out these laws to the children of Israel, for other ends, besides that,
may be thought to be had in view; as to assert his sovereign right to
the creatures, and his disposal of them to them according to his will
and pleasure; to lay a restraint on their appetites, to prevent luxury,
and to teach them self denial, and compliance with his will; as also to
keep them the more from the company and conversation of the Gentiles, by
whom they otherwise might be led into idolatry; and to give them an
aversion to their idols, to whom the creatures forbidden them to eat,
many of them were either now or would be sacred to them; and chiefly to
excite to a care for purity, both inward and outward, and create in the
man abhorrence of those vices which may be signified by the ill
qualities of several of the creatures; and to instruct them in the
difference between holy and unholy persons, with whom they should or
should not have communion; see [Act
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011).

these are the beasts that ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on
the earth; they are not particularly mentioned here, but they are in
[Deu 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004) and they are these ten; the
ox, the sheep, and the goat, the hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow
deer, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the
chamois; of all which; see Gill on [Deu
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004), [Deu
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#005), here only some general things
are observed to describe them by, as follow.

[Leviticus 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 11:3</span></span>

Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is cloven footed,.... That is, whose
hoof is parted and cloven quite through; for there are some creatures
that have partitions in their feet, but not quite through, they are
parted above, but underneath are joined together by a skin; wherefore
both these phrases are used to describe the beasts lawful to be eaten:
the Egyptians seem to have borrowed this law from the Jews, for
Chaeremon says (x), that they abstain from such four footed beasts that
have only one hoof, or have many partitions, or have no horns: and so
the Targum of Jonathan adds here,"which have horns,''which, though not
in the text, agrees well with the creatures allowed by this law to be
eaten, see [Deu 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#004) for such are all
horned cattle; nor are there any cattle horned forbid to be eaten:

and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that shall ye eat: who having no
upper teeth cannot thoroughly chew their food at once, and therefore
bring it up again out of their stomachs into their mouths and chew it
over again, that it may be better prepared for digestion in the stomach,
and so yield better nourishment; and this makes the flesh of such
creatures fitter for food: and these creatures have more stomachs than
one; the ventricles for rumination are four; the first is the paunch,
which in oxen is so big as to hold food of fifty pound weight, the
second the honeycomb, the third the tripe, the fourth the honey tripe,
and to which are helpful the pectoral muscle, the abdomen, with the
diaphragm (y): all this might have a moral and spiritual meaning in it,
and may be applied either to ministers of the word; who ought rightly to
divide the word of truth, and give to everyone their part, and who
should walk uprightly according to it, and who should give themselves up
wholly to the meditation of it, and thoroughly digest it; and study to
show themselves workmen, that need not to be ashamed; or to private
Christians, who have a discerning spirit in spiritual things, and can
distinguish not only morality from immorality, but spiritual things from
carnal, heavenly things from earthly, the voice of Christ from the voice
of a stranger, and the doctrines of Christ from the doctrines of men;
and who also walk as they should do, by faith on Christ, in the ways of
God, and according to the Gospel; these chew the cud, meditate on the
word, feed upon it while delivered, recall it, and have it brought to
their remembrance by the divine Spirit, and ponder it in their hearts;
see [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001).

\(x\) Apud Porphyr. de Abstinentia, l. 4. sect. 7. (y) Scheuchzer.
Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 278, 279.

[Leviticus 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 11:4</span></span>

Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat,.... To whom one of these
descriptive characters may agree but not the other:

of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the hoof: there being
some that chewed the cud but did not divide the hoof; others that
divided the hoof but did not chew the cud, of which instances are given
as follow:

as the camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he
is unclean unto you; and not to be eaten, whether male or female; or
rather, "though he cheweth the cud"; and this account agrees with what
naturalists give of it; so Aristotle (z) says it has not both rows of
teeth, but wants its upper teeth, and chews as horned cattle do, and has
bellies like theirs; for they have more bellies than one, as the sheep,
and goat, and hart, and others; since the service of the mouth is not
sufficient to grind the food for want of teeth, this is supplied by the
bellies, which receive the food one after another; in the first it is
undigested, in the second somewhat more digested, in the third more
fully, in the fourth completely: and so many bellies the camel has, as a
very learned searcher (a) into these things observes; the first is the
biggest, the second very small, the third much greater than the second,
and the fourth equal to the second; in the second belly between the
tunics, he says, seem to be the hydrophylacia, in which the water they
drink is kept, very commodious for these animals passing through sandy
deserts, so that they can long bear thirst: Pliny (b) says four days:
Leo Africanus (c) relates a method used by travellers in the deserts of
Lybia, who being in extreme want of water kill one of their camels, out
of whose intestines they press out water; this they drink, this they
carry about till they find a well, or must die with thirst: and the
account also which is given of the feet of these creatures agrees; it
parts the hoof, but not thoroughly, it is not cleft quite through, and
so comes not up to Moses's descriptive character of clean creatures; its
hoof is divided in two, but so divided, as Aristotle (d) observes, that
it is but little divided on the back part unto the second joint of the
toes; the fore part is very little divided, to the first joint of the
toes, and there is something between the parts, as in the feet of geese:
and so Pliny says (e) it has two hoofs, but the lower part of the foot
is but very little divided, so that it is not thoroughly cleft: but
though the flesh of these creatures was forbidden the Jews, it was eaten
by people of other nations; both Aristotle (f) and Pliny (g) commend the
milk of camels; and by the former the flesh of them is said to be
exceeding sweet; and Diodorus Siculus relates (h), that what with their
milk and their flesh, which is eaten, as well as on account of their
carrying burdens, they are very profitable unto men; and Strabo (i)
says, the Nomades eat the flesh and milk of camels; and so the Africans,
according to Leo Africanus (k); and a countryman of ours (l), who lived
some time in Arabia, relates, that when a camel falls they kill it, and
the poorer sort of the company eat it; and he says that he himself ate
of camel's flesh, and that it was very sweet and nourishing: these
creatures, in the mystic sense, may be an emblem of such persons, that
carry their heads high, are proud and haughty, that boast of their
riches, or trust in their righteousness.

\(z\) De Part. Animal. l. 3. c. 14. (a) Scheuchzer. ib. p. 280. (b) Nat.
Hist. l. 8. c. 18. (c) Descriptio Africae, l. 1. p. 75. (d) Hist.
Animal. l. 2. c. 1. (e) L. 11. c. 45. (f) Hist. Animal. l. 6. c. 26. (g)
Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 41. (h) Bibliothec. l. 2. p. 137. (i) Geograph. l.
16. p. 535. (k) Descriptio Africae, l. 1. p. 48. l. 6. 617, 620. Arab.
Geogr. Clim. 1. par. 1. 3. (l) Pitts's Account of the Mahometans, c. 8.
p. 106. Vid. Hieron, adv. Jovinian. l. 2.

[Leviticus 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 11:5</span></span>

And the coney,.... Or rabbit:

because he cheweth the cud; or "though he cheweth"; which yet, some
observe, the coney or rabbit does not, it having upper teeth, and
therefore they think some other creature is meant by Shaphan, the word
here used; and Bochart (m) is of opinion, that the Aljarbuo of the
Arabians, a sort of mountain mouse, is meant, which chews the cud and
divides not the hoof, and resides in rocks, which agrees with the
account of the Shaphan in [Pro 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026)
but this is rejected by Dr. Shaw (n), who takes the creature here to be
the Daman Israel, or Israel's lamb, an animal of Mount Lebanon, a
harmless creature of the same size and quality with the rabbit, and with
the like incurvating posture, and disposition or the fore teeth, but is
of a browner colour, with smaller eyes, and a head more pointed, like
the marmots; the fore feet likewise are short, and the hinder are nearly
as long in proportion as those of the jerboa; and though this animal is
known to burrow sometimes in the ground, yet its usual residence and
refuge is in the holes and clifts of the rocks; but a learned man (o),
and very inquisitive in the things of nature, tells us, that the
"cuniculus", coney, or rabbit, this sort of animals do chew half an hour
after eating:

but divideth not the hoof; which is well known of this creature:

he is unclean unto you; not fit or proper to be eaten of, but to be
abstained from as an unclean animal; and may be an emblem of timorous
persons, as these creatures by Aristotle (p) are observed to be, and it
is well known they are; even of the fearful and unbelieving, reckoned
among the impure, who will have their portion in the lake of fire, [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008).

\(m\) Hierozoic par. 1. l. 3. c. 33. col. 1015, 1016. (n) Travels, p.
177, 348. Ed. 2. (o) Scheuchzer. ut supra, (Physic. Sacr. vol. 2.) p.
281. (p) Hist. Animal. l. 1. c. 1.

[Leviticus 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 11:6</span></span>

And the hare, because he cheweth the cud,.... Or, "though he chews" it:

but divideth not the hoof, he is unclean to you; and so not to be eaten;
so Plutarch (q) says, that the Jews are said to abstain from the hare,
disdaining it as a filthy and unclean animal, and yet was in the
greatest esteem with the Romans of any four footed beast, as Martial
says (r): Moses, as Bochart (s) and other learned men observe, is the
only writer that speaks of the hare as chewing the cud; though they also
observe, that Aristotle (t) makes mention of that in common with those
that do chew the cud, namely a "coagulum" or "runnet" in its stomach;
his words are,"all that have many bellies have what is called a coagulum
or runnet, and of them that have but one belly, the hare;''only that:
this creature being prone to lust, may be an emblem of lustful persons,
who give up themselves to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness, [Eph 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019). (The "hare" is
this verse may be an animal that is now is extinct but was alive at the
time of Moses. It is only other mentioned in [Deu
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#007). Editor.)

\(q\) Sympos. l. 9. c. 5. (r) L. 13. Epigr. 87. (s) Ut supra, (Hierozoic
par. 1. l. 3.) c. 31. col. 977. (t) De Part. Animal. l. 3. c. 15. &
Hist. Animal. l. 3. c. 21.

[Leviticus 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 11:7</span></span>

And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be cloven footed,.... Not
only its hoofs are parted, but cloven quite through, and so in this
respect answers Moses's first descriptive character of clean creatures;
though Aristotle (u) and Pliny (w) speak of some kind of swine in
Illyricum, Paeonia, and other places, which have solid hoofs; but
perhaps these were not properly swine, though so called:

yet he cheweth not the cud; and a learned physician observes (x), that
such creatures that chew not the cud, so perfect a chyle cannot be
elaborated by them as is by those that chew the cud, and therefore their
flesh must be less wholesome; and of the swine, he says (y), they have
but one belly, and so there is no rumination or chewing the cud by them;
wherefore they are to be placed, and are in a lower degree than the
camel, the coney, and the hare; and as they cannot digest the chyle so
well as those that chew the cud, and also live upon most sordid and
filthy food, the eating of swine's flesh, he observes, must produce many
inconveniences to the body, as especially scorbutic, arthritic,
scabious, and leprous disorders: so Manetho the Egyptian says (z), that
he that eats swine's milk is liable to be filled with the leprosy; and
Maimonides (a) gives it as the principal reason of its being forbid the
Jews, because it is such a filthy creature, and eats such filthy things:

he is unclean to you: and so it has always been accounted by the Jews,
and nothing is more abominable to them, as is even testified by Heathen
(b) writers; and in this they have been imitated by many nations,
particularly the Egyptians, who, as Herodotus says (c), reckon swine a
very filthy creature; so that if anyone does but touch it passing by, he
is obliged to plunge himself into a river with his clothes on; and
keepers of them may not go into any of their temples, nor do the rest of
the Egyptians intermarry with them, but they marry among themselves; the
reason of this their abhorrence of swine, Aelianus says (d), is because
they are so gluttonous that they will not spare their own young, nor
abstain from human flesh; and this, says he, is the reason why the
Egyptians hate it as an impure and voracious animal: likewise the
Arabians entirely abstain from swine's flesh, as Solinus says (e), who
adds, that if any of this sort of creatures is carried into Arabia, it
immediately dies; and the same Pliny (f) attests: and so the
Phoenicians, the near neighbours of the Jews, would not eat the flesh of
them; hence Antoninus is said to abstain from it after the manner of the
Phoenicians (g), unless the historian should mean the Jews; also the
Gallo-Grecians or Galatians (h); nay, even the Indians have such an
abhorrence of it, that they would as soon taste of human flesh as taste
of that (i), and it is well known that the Mahometans abstain from it;
and they have such an aversion to it, that if any chance to kill a wild
pig, for tame they have none, they look on the merit of it to be almost
equivalent to the killing a Christian in fight (k): now these creatures
may be an emblem of filthy and impure sinners, especially apostates, who
return to their former impurities and wallow in them, [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022).

\(u\) Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 1. (w) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 46. (x)
Scheuchzer. ut supra, (Physic. Sacr. vol. 2.) p. 282. (y) Ib. p. 284.
(z) Apud Aelian. de Animal. l. 10. c. 16. (a) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c.
48. (b) "Et vetus indulget", &c. Juvenal. Satyr. 6. "nec distare
putant", &c. Ib. Satyr. 14. Vid. Porphyr. de Abstinentia, l. 4. sect.
11, 12. (c) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 47. (d) Ut supra. (Apud Aelian. de
Animal. l. 10. c. 16.) (e) Polyhistor. c. 46. (f) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c.
52. (g) Herodian. Hist. l. 5. c. 16. (h) Pausan. Achaica, sive, l. 7. p.
430. (i) Ctesias apud Aelian. de Animal. l. 16. c. 37. (k) Pitts's
Account of the Mahometans, p. 163.

[Leviticus 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 11:8</span></span>

Of their flesh shall ye not eat,.... Meaning, not of swine only, but of
the camel, coney, and hare:

and their carcass shall ye not touch; which must not be understood of
touching them in any sense; for then it would have been unlawful for a
Jew to have rode upon a camel, or to take out and make use of hog's lard
in medicine; but of touching them in order to kill them, and prepare
them for food, and eat them; and indeed all unnecessary touching of them
is forbidden, lest it should bring them to the eating of them; though
perhaps it may chiefly respect the touching of them dead:

they are unclean to you: one and all of them; for as this was said of
each of them in particular, so now of all of them together; and which
holds good of all wild creatures not named, to whom the description
above belongs, and which used to be eaten by other nations; some of
which were called Pamphagi, from eating all sorts, and others
Agriophagi, from eating wild creatures, as lions, panthers, elephants
(l), &c.

\(l\) Plin. l. 6. c. 30. Solinus, c. 43.

[Leviticus 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 11:9</span></span>

These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters,.... In the waters of
the sea, or in rivers, pools, and ponds; meaning fishes; for though some
persons abstain from eating them entirely, as the Egyptian priests, as
Herodotus (m) relates; and it was a part of religion and holiness, not
with the Egyptians only, but with the Syrians and Greeks, to forbear
eating them (n); and Julian (o) gives two reasons why men should abstain
from fishes; the one because what is not sacrificed to the gods ought
not to be used for food; and the other is, because these being immersed
in the deep waters, look not up to heaven; but God gave the people of
Israel liberty of eating them, under certain limitations:

whatsoever hath fins and scales, in the waters, in the seas, and in the
rivers, them shall ye eat; some render it disjunctively, "fins or
scales" (p); but as Maimonides (q) observes, whatsoever has scales has
fins; and who also says, if a fish has but one fin and one scale, it was
lawful to eat: fins to fishes are like wings to birds, and oars to
boats, with which they swim and move swiftly from place to place; and
scales are a covering and a protection of them; and such fishes being
much in motion, and so well covered, are less humid and more solid and
substantial, and more wholesome: in a spiritual sense, fins may denote
the exercise of grace, in which there is a motion of the soul, Godward,
Christward, and heavenward; and scales may signify good works, which
adorn believers, and protect them from the reproaches and calumnies of
men.

\(m\) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 37. (n) Plutarch. Sympos. p. 730. (o)
Orat. 5. p. 330. (p) So Bootius. (q) Hilchot Maacolot Asurot, l. 1.
sect. 24.

[Leviticus 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 11:10</span></span>

And all that have not fins nor scales in the seas, and in the
rivers,.... Such as eels, lampreys, &c.

of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is in the
waters; the former of these are interpreted by Aben Ezra and Ben Gersom
of little fishes that have but a small body, and such as are created out
of the waters; and the latter, of such as are produced of a male and
female; or, as Maimonides (r) explains it, the one signifies the lesser
creatures, such as worms and horse leeches; the other greater ones, sea
beasts, as sea dogs, &c.

they shall be an abomination to you; not only unclean, and so unfit to
eat, but to be had in abhorrence and detestation, as being exceeding
disagreeable and unwholesome; and, as a learned man observes (s), to
these prohibited in general belong all those animals in lakes, rivers,
or seas, which are of a slow motion, and which, because of the slow
motion of their bodies, do not so well digest their food; and for that
may be compared with four footed beasts that have but one belly, and so
unwholesome as they.

\(r\) Hilchot Maacolot Asuret, l. 1. c. 2. sect. 12. (s) Scheuchzer. ut
supra, (Physic. Sacr. vol. 2.) p. 287.

[Leviticus 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 11:11</span></span>

They shall be even an abomination to you,.... This is repeated again and
again, to deter from the eating of such fishes, lest there should be any
desire after them:

ye shall not eat of their flesh, here mention is made of the flesh of
fishes, as is by the apostle, [Co1
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039). Aben Ezra observes, that their
wise men say, this is according to the usage of words in those ages:

but you shall have their carcasses in abomination; not only abstain from
eating them and touching them, but to express the utmost aversion to
them.

[Leviticus 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 11:12</span></span>

Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters,.... Which is repeated
that they might take particular notice of this law, and be careful to
observe it, this being the only sign given:

that shall be an abomination unto you; the Targum of Jonathan says, that
not only the flesh of such fish, but the broth, and pickles made of
them, were to be an abomination; which contradicts what Pliny (t)
relates, that the Jews made a pickle of fishes that lacked scales; so
Grotius understands him: this law of the Jews is taken notice of by
Porphyry (u), who says, it is forbidden all the Jews to eat horse flesh,
or fishes that lack scales, or any animal that has but one hoof: and
Pliny (w), from an ancient author, Cassius Hemina, makes mention of a
law of Numa, forbidding the use of fish that had not scales, in feasts
made for the gods.

\(t\) Nat. Hist. l. 31. c. 8. (u) De Abstinentia, l. 4. c. 14. (w) Nat.
Hist. l. 32. c. 2.

[Leviticus 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 11:13</span></span>

And these are they which ye shall have in abomination among the
fowls,.... No description or sign is given of fowls, as of beasts and
fishes, only the names of those not to be eaten; which, according to
Maimonides, are twenty four; so that all the rest but these are clean
fowls, and might be eaten; wherefore the same writer observes (x),
that,"whoever was expert in these kinds, and in their names, might eat
of every fowl which was not of them, and there was no need of an
inquiry:''but what creatures are intended by these is not now easy to
know; very different are the sentiments both of the Jews and Christians
concerning them; and indeed it does not much concern us Christians to
know what are meant by them, but as curiosity may lead us to such an
inquiry, not thinking ourselves bound by these laws; but it is of moment
with the Jews to know them, who think they are; wherefore, to supply
this deficiency, they venture to give some signs by which clean and
unclean fowls may be known, and they are three; such are clean who have
a superfluous claw, and also a craw, and a crop that is uncovered by the
hand (y); and on the contrary they are unclean, and not to be eaten, as
says the Targum of Jonathan, which have no superfluous talon, or no
craw, or a crop not uncovered:

they shall not be eaten, they are an abomination; and they are those
that follow:

the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray; about the first of these
there is no difficulty, all agree the eagle is intended; which has its
name either from the nature of its sight, or from the casting of its
feathers, or from its tearing with its bill: it is a bird of prey, a
very rapacious creature, and sometimes called the bird of Jupiter, and
sacred to the gods; and these may be the reasons why forbid to be eaten,
as well as because its flesh is hard, and not fit for food, and
unwholesome; "the ossifrage" or "bone breaker" has its name from its
tearing its prey and breaking its bones for the marrow, as the word
"peres" here used signifies, [Mic 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#003)
it is said to dig up bodies in burying places to eat what it finds in
the bones (z): this is thought to be of the eagle kind, as it is
reckoned by Pliny (a), though Aristotle (b) speaks of it as very
different from the eagle, as larger than that, and of an ash colour; and
is so kind to the eagle's young, that when they are cast out by that, it
takes them and brings them up: the "ospray" is the "halioeetus", or sea
eagle, as the Septuagint version and several others render it; which
Aristotle (c) describes as having a large and thick neck, crooked wings,
and a broad tail, and resides about the sea and shores: Pliny (d) speaks
of it as having a very clear sight, and, poising itself on high, having
sight of a fish in the sea, will rush down at once and fetch it out of
the water; and he also reports that she will take her young before they
are fledged, and oblige them to look directly against the rays of the
sun, and if any of them wink, or their eyes water, she casts them out of
her nest as a spurious brood. Aristotle (e), who relates the same, says
she kills them. The name of this creature, in the Hebrew text, seems to
be taken from its strength; wherefore Bochart (f) is of opinion, that
the "melanoeetos", or black eagle, which, though the least of eagles as
to its size, exceeds all others in strength, as both Aristotle (g) and
Pliny (h) say; and therefore, as the latter observes, is called by the
Romans "valeria", from its strength. Maimonides (i) says of these two
last fowls, which we render the ossifrage and the ospray, that they are
not to be found on the continent, but in the desert places of the isles
of the sea very far off, even those which are at the end of the
habitable world.

\(x\) Maacolot Asurot, c. 1. sect. 14, 15. (y) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 75.
1. Maimon. ib. sect. 15. (z) Calmet's Dictionary in the word
"Ossifraga". (a) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 3. (b) Hist. Animal. l. 6. c. 6.
l. 8. c. 3. & l. 9. c. 34. (c) Ib. l. 9. c. 32. (d) Ut supra. (Nat.
Hist. l. 10. c. 3.) (e) Ib. c. 34. (f) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2. c. 6.
col. 188. (g) Ut supra, (Hist. Animal. l. 9.) c. 32. (h) Ut supra. (Nat.
Hist. l. 10. c. 3.) (i) Maacolot Asurot, c. 1. sect. 17.

[Leviticus 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 11:14</span></span>

And the vulture, and the kite after his kind. Perhaps it might be better
if the version was inverted, and the words be read, "and the kite, and
the vulture, after his kind"; and the last word is by us rendered the
vulture in [Job 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#007) and very rightly,
since the kite is not remarkable for its sight, any other than all
rapacious creatures are, whereas the vulture is to a proverb; and
besides, of the vulture there are two sorts, as Aristotle says (k), the
one lesser and whiter, the other larger and more of an ash colour; and
there are some that are of the eagle kind (l), whereas there is but one
sort of kites; though Ainsworth makes mention of two, the greater of a
ruddy colour, common in England, and the lesser of a blacker colour,
known in Germany, but produces no authority for it; however, these are
both ravenous creatures: of the kite, Aelianus says (m), it is very
rapacious, and will take meat out of the meat market, but not touch any
sacrificed to Jupiter; the truth of which may well be questioned; and of
vultures he reports (n), that they will watch a dying man, and follow
armies going to battle, expecting prey; See Gill on [Mat
24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028).

\(k\) Hist. Animal. l. 8. c. 3. (l) Aristot. ib. l. 9. c. 32. Plin. Nat.
Hist. l. 10. c. 3. Aelian. de Animal. l. 2. c. 46. (m) De Animal. l. 2.
c. 42. (n) Ib. c. 46.

[Leviticus 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 11:15</span></span>

Every raven after his kind. The red raven, night raven, the water raven,
river raven, wood raven, &c. this also includes crows, rooks, pies,
jays, and jackdaws, &c. The raven was with the Heathens sacred to Apollo
(o), is a voracious creature, and so reckoned among unclean ones, and
unfit for food; nor does the care that God takes of these creatures, or
the use he has made of them, contradict this; see [Job
38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041).

\(o\) Aelian. De Animal. l. 1. c. 48. & l. 7. c. 18.

[Leviticus 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 11:16</span></span>

And the owl,.... The great and little owls being after mentioned, it
seems best, by the word here used, to understand the "ostrich" with the
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, the Oriental versions, and the Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan: the account which Pliny (p) gives of the African
and Ethiopic ostriches is this; that they are the largest of birds, and
almost of the kind of beasts; that they exceed the height of a horseman
on horseback, and are swifter than the horses; that their wings are
given them to help them in their running, otherwise they are not flying
fowls, nor are they lifted up from the earth. Their hoofs are like to
those of harts, with which they fight, and are cloven, and serve to
gather up stones, which in their flight they throw with their feet
against them that follow them; they have a wonderful concoction,
digesting whatever is swallowed down; and, according to Galen (q), all
the parts of them, their flesh and their eggs, are hard and difficult of
digestion, and excermentitious: Aben Ezra says (r), their flesh is as
dry as a stick, and it is not usual to eat it, for there is no moisture
in it; and therefore nothing can be eaten of the whole species, but the
daughter or young one, for that being a female and little, there is some
moisture in it; but not so the male when little; wherefore as the flesh
of this creature is always reckoned by the Jews as unlawful to be eaten,
it may the rather be supposed to be intended here, since if not here, it
cannot be thought to be any where observed; and yet we find that both
the eggs and the flesh of this creature have been eaten by some people:
their eggs with the Indians were reckoned delicate eating, as Aelianus
(s) reports; and near the Arabians and Ethiopians were a people, as both
Diodorus Siculus (t) and Strabo (u) relate, who were called
Struthophagi, from their living on ostriches; and they eat them in Peru,
where they are common (w); and in several parts of Africa, as Nubia,
Numidia, and Lybia, as Leo Africanus (x) relates:

and the night hawk; which, according to Pliny (y), is sometimes called
"cymindis", and is seldom to be found in woods, sees not so well in the
day time, and wages a deadly war with the eagle, and they are often
found joined together: Bochart (z) who thinks that the female ostrich is
meant by the preceding bird, is of opinion that the male ostrich is
meant here, there being no general name in the Hebrew language to
comprehend both sexes:

and the cuckoo; a bird well known by its voice at least: some have
thought it to be the same with the hawk, changing its figure and voice;
but this has been refuted by naturalists (a): but though it is here
forbidden to be eaten, yet its young, when fat, are said to be of a
grateful savour by Aristotle: and Pliny (b) says, no bird is to be
compared to it for the sweetness of its flesh, though perhaps it may not
be here intended: the word is by the Septuagint rendered a "sea gull",
and so it is by Ainsworth, and which is approved of by Bochart (c):

and the hawk after his kind; a well known bird, of which, according to
Aristotle (d), there are not less than ten sorts: Pliny (e) says
sixteen; it has its name in Hebrew from flying, it being a bird that
flies very swiftly; see [Job 39:26](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#026) the
hawk was a symbol of deity with the Egyptians, and was reverenced and
worshipped by them (f).

\(p\) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 1. Vid. Aristot. de Part. Animal. l. 4. c.
14. (q) Apud Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2. c. 14. col. 226. (r)
Pirush in Exod. xxiii. 19. (s) De Animal. l. 14. c. 13. (t) Bibliothec.
l. 3. p. 162. (u) Geograph. l. 16. p. 531. (w) Calmet's Dictionary in
the word "Ostrich". (x) Descriptio Africae, l. 6. p. 601, 605, 613. l.
9. p. 766. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 8. (z) Ut supra, (Apud Bochart.
Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2.) c. 15. col. 235. (a) Aristot. Hist. Animal. l.
6. c. 7. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 9. (b) Ibid. (c) Ut supra, (Apud
Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2. c. 15.) col. 26. (d) Hist. Animal. l.
9. c. 36. (e) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 8. (f) Plutarch. de Iside & Osyr.
Strabo. Geograph. l. 17. p. 559, 562. Diodor. Sicul. l. 1. p. 78.
Clement. Alex. Stromat. l. 5. p. 566.

[Leviticus 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 11:17</span></span>

And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl. Ainsworth
translates the words just the reverse, and takes the first word to
signify the great owl, and the last the little one; the great owl may
intend the great horn owl, called sometimes the eagle owl, which is thus
described; it is of the size of a goose, and has large wings, capable of
extending to a surprising breadth: its head is much of the size and
figure of that of a cat, and has clusters of black feathers over the
ears, rising to three fingers' height; its eyes are very large, and the
feathers of its rump long, and extremely soft; its eyes have yellow
irises, and its beak black and crooked: it is all over mottled with
white, reddish, and black spots; its legs are very strong, and are hairy
down to the very ends of the toes, their covering being of a whitish
brown (g): and as this is called the great horn owl, others, in
comparison of it, may be called the little owl. Some reckon several
species of owls--there are of three sizes; the large ones are as big as
a capon, the middle sized are as big as a wood pigeon, the smaller sort
about the size of an ordinary pigeon--the horned owl is of two kinds, a
larger and a smaller--the great owl is also of two sorts, that is, of a
larger and a smaller kind (h); it is a bird sacred to Minerva: but
though it is pretty plain that the last of the words used signifies a
bird that flies in the twilight of the evening, from whence it seems to
have its name, as Aben Ezra, Ben Gersom, and other Jewish writers
observe, and fitly agrees with the owl which is not seen in the day, but
appears about that time; yet the first is thought by Bochart (i) to be
the "onocrotalus" or "pelican", which has under its bill a bag or sack,
which will hold a large quantity of anything; and the word here used has
the signification of a cup or vessel, see [Psa
102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006). The word we render "cormorant",
the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan paraphrase it, a drawer of fish out
of the sea, so Baal Hatturim; and thus it is interpreted in the Talmud
(k); and the gloss upon it says, this is the water raven, which is the
same with the cormorant; for the cormorant is no other than "corvus
aquaticus", or water raven; See Gill on [Zep
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014). The Septuagint render it by
"catarrhactes", which, according to the description of it (l), resides
by rocks and shores that hang over water; and when it sees fishes
swimming in it, it will fly on high, and contract its feathers, and
flounce into the water, and fetch out the fish; and so is of the same
nature, though not the same creature with the cormorant. Aben Ezra
observes, that some say this is a bird which casts its young as soon as
born; and this is said of the "catarrhactes", that it lets down its
young into the sea, and draws them out again, and hereby inures them to
this exercise (m).

\(g\) Ray's Ornithol. p. 63. apud Supplement to Chambers's Dictionary in
the word "Bubo". (h) Calmet's Dictionary in the word "Owl". (i) Ut
supra, (Apud Bochard. Heirozoic. par. 2. l. 2.) c. 20. col. 275. (k)
Bab. Cholin, fol. 63. 1. (l) Gesner. apud Bochart. ut supra, (i)) c. 21.
col. 278. (m) Ibid.

[Leviticus 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 11:18</span></span>

And the swan,.... This is a bird well known to us, but it is a question
whether it is intended by the word here used; for though it is so
rendered in the Vulgate Latin, it is differently rendered by many
others: the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem call it "otia", which
seems to be the same with the "otus" of Aristotle (n), who says it is
like an owl, having a tuft of feathers about its ears (from whence it
has its name); and some call it "nycticorax", or the owl; and here, by
Bochart (o), and others, the owl called "noctua" is thought to be meant;
and with which agrees the account some Jewish writers give of it, as
Aben Ezra and Baal Hatturim, who say it is a bird, which every one that
sees is astonished at it, as other birds are at the owl, are frightened
at the sight of it, and stupefied. But as the same word is used [Lev
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#030) among the creeping things, for a
mole, what Jarchi observes is worthy of consideration, that this is
"calve (chauve) souris" (the French word for a bat), and is like unto a
mouse, and flies in the night; and that which is spoken of among the
creeping things is like unto it, which hath no eyes, and they call it
"talpa", a mole. The Septuagint version renders it by "porphyrion", the
redshank; and so Ainsworth; and is thought to be called by the Hebrew
name in the text, from the blowing of its breath in drinking; for it
drinks biting, as Aristotle says (p):

and the pelican; which has its name in Hebrew from vomiting; being said
by Aben Ezra and Baal Hatturim to be a bird that vomits its food; and it
is observed by several naturalists (q), of the pelican, that it swallows
down shellfish, and after they have lain some time in its stomach, it
vomits them up again; where having been heated, the shells open, and it
picks out the meat:

and the gier eagle; or vulture eagle, the "gypoeetos" of Aristotle (r),
and who says it is called also "oripelargos", or the mountain stork; and
which Pliny (s) also makes to be an eagle of the vulture kind. Dr. Shaw
says (t), that near Cairo there are several flocks of the "ach bobba"
(white father, differing little from the stork but in its colour), the
"percnopterus" or "oripelargos", which like the ravens about London feed
upon carrion, and nastiness that is thrown without the city; this the
Arabs call "rachama", the same with [Lev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018) and in [Deu
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#017) and whatever bird is here meant,
it must be one that is tender toward its young, as its name signifies,
as Aben Ezra and Baal Hatturim observe; and though both the eagle and
the vulture are rapacious birds, yet have a great regard to their young;
of the eagle see [Deu 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011) and the
vulture, with the Egyptians, was an "hieroglyphic" of a tender mother,
or any merciful person; it being reported of it, that during the one
hundred twenty days its young are under its care, it very rarely flies
from them, being so solicitous of nourishing them; and that by making
incisions in its thigh, it lets out a bloody flow of milk, when it has
nothing else to support them (u). The Talmudists (w) say, that the bird
"racham", as it is here called, is the same with "serakrak", and is by
the Targum of Jonathan, and in the Syriac version, here rendered
"serakraka", so called from which signifies to "squall"; and, according
to Munster (x), is thought by some to be the "pica", magpie, or rather
the jay; and Dr. Shaw (y) observes, that by a small transmutation of
letters, that and the "shagarag" of the Arabs are the same; which he
says is of the size and shape of a jay, though with a smaller bill, and
shorter legs; the back is brownish; the head, neck, and belly, of a
light green; and upon the wings and tail there are several spots or
ringlets of a deep blue; it makes a "squalling" noise; and, he adds, it
has no small affinity both in voice and plumage with the jay. The
Septuagint version renders the word by the "swan"; which if not intended
by the first word in this text, may by this, being kind to its young,
though otherwise reckoned a cruel and unmerciful bird, as Bochart (z)
observes; some think the woodpecker is meant, so called from its love to
its parents (a).

\(n\) Hist. Animal. l. 8. c. 12. Vid. Plin. l. 10. c. 23. (o) Ut supra,
(Apud Bochard Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2.) c. 23. (p) Ut supra, (Hist.
Animal. l. 8.) c. 6. so Plin. l. 10. c. 46. (q) Aristot. Hist. Animal.
l. 9. c. 10. Aelian. de Animal. l. 3. c. 20, Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c.
40. (r) Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 32. (s) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 3. (t)
Travels, p. 449. Ed. 2. (u) Horns Apollo & Pisidas apud Bochart. ut
supra, (o)) c. 27. col. 388. (w) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 63. 1. (x)
Dictionar. Chald. p. 4. 18. (y) Travels, p. 183. (z) Ut supra (o)), c.
25. col. 300. (a) Plin. l. 10. c. 33.

[Leviticus 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 11:19</span></span>

And the stork,..... A bird of passage, [Jer
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007) it has its name from kindness,
which it exercises both to its dam, and to its young. Various writers
(b) speak of the kindness of these birds to their dams, which when they
are old they take care of and feed them, to which the apostle is thought
to allude, [Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004) and its tenderness
to its young is no less manifest: when the city of Delf in Holland was
on fire, the storks were seen very busy to save their young from the
flames, and which when they could not do, threw themselves into the
midst of them, and perished with them, as Drusius from the Dutch
historians relates. It is said to feed upon serpents; and hence by
Virgil (c) to be "invisa colubris"; and Juvenal (d) says, it nourishes
its young with them; and which may be a reason of its being forbid to be
eaten, and is the reason given by the Mahometans (e) for the prohibition
of it; though on this account it was in great honour in Thessaly, that
country being freed from serpents by it, and therefore they made it a
capital crime to kill them, as Pliny (f) relates; formerly people would
not eat the stork, but at present it is much esteemed for the
deliciousness of its flesh (g).

the heron after her kind; this bird has its name in Hebrew from its
being soon angry, as Aben Ezra observes; and Jarchi calls it the angry
vulture or kite, as it is in the Talmud (h); and adds, and it appears to
me to be what they call the "heron", one sort of which named "asterias",
as there is one sort so called by Pliny (i); it becomes tame in Egypt,
and so well understands the voice of a man, as Aelianus (k) reports,
that if anyone by way of reproach calls it a servant or slothful, it is
immediately exceeding angry. There are three kinds of herons, as both
Aristotle (l) and Pliny (m); and by a learned man of ours (n), their
names are thus given, the criel or dwarf heron, the blue heron, and the
bittour; some reckon nineteen:

and the lapwing; the upupa or hoopoe; it has its name in Hebrew,
according to Jarchi, from its having a double crest; and so Pliny (o)
ascribes to it a double or folded crest, and speaks of it as a filthy
bird; and, according to Aristotle (p) and Aelian (q), its nest is
chiefly made of human dung, that by the ill smell of it men may be kept
from taking its young; and therefore may well be reckoned among impure
fowl. Calmet (r) says, there is no such thing as a lapwing to be seen in
any part of England; but there are such as we call so, whether the same
bird with this I cannot say:

and the bat; a little bird which flies in the night, Aben Ezra says;
Kimchi (s) describes it a mouse with wings, which flies in the night,
and we sometimes call it the "flitter mouse"; it is a creature between a
fowl and a beast; and, as Aristotle says (t), it partakes of both, and
is of neither; and it is the only fowl, as Pliny (u) observes, that has
teeth and teats, that brings forth animals, and nourishes them with
milk. It is a creature so very disagreeable, that one would think almost
there was no need of a law to forbid the eating of it; and yet it is
said by some to be eatable, and to be eaten, as Strabo (w) affirms, yea,
to be delicious food. It is asserted (x), that there is a sort of them
in the east, larger than ordinary, and is salted and eaten--that there
are bats in China as large as pullets, and are as delicate eating. Of
these several fowls before mentioned, some are of the ravenous kind, and
are an emblem of persecutors and covetous persons, and such as live by
rapine and violence; others are of a lustful nature, and are an emblem
of those who serve various lusts and pleasures, and give up themselves
to uncleanness; others are night birds, and are a proper emblem of them
whose works are works of darkness, and love darkness rather than the
light; and others never rise higher than the earth, and so may denote
earthly minded persons; and others live on impure things, and so fitly
represent such who live an impure life; with all such the people of God
are to have no fellowship.

\(b\) Aristot. Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 13. Aelian. de Animal. l. 3. c.
23. & l. 10. c. 16. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 23. (c) Georgic. l. 2.
(d) Satyr. 14. (e) Apud Bochart. ut supra, (Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2.) c.
29. col. 329. (f) Ut supra. (Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 23.) (g) Calmet
in the word "Stork". (h) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 63. 1. (i) Ut supra, (f))
c. 60. so Aristot. l. 9. c. 1. (k) De Animal. l. 5. c. 36. (l) Hist.
Animal. l. 9. c. 1. (m) Ut supra. (Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 23.) (n)
Ainsworth's Dictionary, in voce "Ardea". (o) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 29.
(p) Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 15. (q) De Animal. l. 3. c. 26. (r)
Dictionary, in the word "Lapwing". (s) Sepher Shorash. in voc. (t) De
Part. Animal. l. 4. c. 13. (u) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 61. l. 11. c. 37.
(w) Geograph. l. 16. (x) Calmet's Dictionary in the word "Bat".

[Leviticus 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 11:20</span></span>

All fowls that creep,.... Or rather "every creeping thing that flies";
for what are designed are not properly fowls, but, as the Jewish writers
interpret them, flies, fleas, bees, wasps, hornets, locusts, &c. so the
Targum of Jonathan, Jarchi, Ben Gersom, and Maimonides (y):

going upon all four; that is, upon their four feet, when they walk or
creep:

these shall be an abomination to you; not used as food, but detested as
such.

\(y\) Maacolot Asurot, c. 2. l. 5.

[Leviticus 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 11:21</span></span>

Yet these may ye eat,.... Which are after described and named:

of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon all four; even though it
is a creeping thing that flies and goes upon four feet, provided they be
such:

which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth; there
is a double reading of this clause; the textual reading is, "which have
not legs", and is followed by several interpreters and translators; and
the marginal reading, which we follow, is, "which have legs"; and both
are to be regarded as true, and written by Moses, as Ainsworth observes;
for locusts are born without legs, and yet creep low, as Pliny asserts
(z), and they have them afterwards; and it is a canon of the Jews, that
what have not legs or wings now, or have not wings to cover the greatest
part of them, but shall have after a time when grown up, these are as
free (to eat) now, as when grown up (a). Dr. Shaw thinks (b) the words
may bear this construction, "which have knees upon" or "above their
hinder legs, to leap withal upon the earth"; and applying this to the
locust afterwards, and only instanced in, he observes, that this has the
two hindermost of its legs and feet much stronger, larger, and longer
than any of the foremost. In them the knee, or the articulation of the
leg and thigh, is distinguished by a remarkable bending or curvature,
whereby it is able, whenever prepared, to jump, to spring, or raise
itself up with great force and activity. And these Aristotle (c) calls
the leaping parts; and though he attributes to the locust six feet, as
does also Pliny (d), yet he takes the two leaping parts into the
account; whereas Moses distinguishes those two from the four feet; and
so Austin (e) observes, that Moses does not reckon among the feet the
two hinder thighs with which locusts leap, which he calls clean, and
thereby distinguishes them from such unclean flying creatures which do
not leap with their thighs, such as beetles; and so the Jewish writers
always describe a clean locust as having four feet, and two legs,
thighs, or knees. Maimonides (f) gives three signs of them, which are
these, whatsoever has four feet and four wings, which cover the greatest
part of its body in length, and the greatest part of the compass of it,
and has two thighs or knees to leap with, they are of the clean kind;
and although its head is long, and it hath a tail, if its name is
"chagob" (a locust) it is clean.

\(z\) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 29. (a) Maimon. ib. c. 1. sect. 23. (b)
Travels, p. 420. (c) De Part. Animal. l. 4. c. 6. (d) Nat. Hist. l. 11.
c. 48. (e) Retract. l. 2. c. 15. (f) Maacolot Asurot, c. 1. sect. 22.

[Leviticus 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 11:22</span></span>

Even these of them ye may eat, &c. The four following ones, which seem
to be no other than four sorts of locusts:

the locust after his kind; this is the common locust, called by the name
of Arbeh, from the great multiplication and vast multitudes of them; the
phrase, "after his kind", and which also is used in all the following
instances, signifies the whole entire species of them, which might be
eaten:

and the bald locust after his kind; which in the Hebrew text is Soleam,
and has its name, as Aben Ezra suggests, from its ascending rocks: but
since locusts do not climb rocks, or have any peculiar regard for them,
rather this kind of locust may be so called, from their devouring and
consuming all that come in their way (g), from the Chaldee word which
signifies to swallow, devour, and consume; but why we should call it the
bald locust is not so clear, though it seems there were such, since the
Jews describe some that have no baldness, which the gloss explains,
whose head is not bald (h), which shows that some are bald; and so, this
is described by Kimchi (i), it has an eminence, a rising, or bunch upon
it; some render it baldness, and it hath no tail, and its head is long;
and so Ben Melech:

and the beetle after his kind; which is another sort of locust called
Chargol, and should not be rendered a beetle, for no sort of beetles are
eatable, nor have legs to leap withal, and so come not under the general
description given of such flying, creeping things, fit to eat: Kimchi
says it is one kind of a locust (k), and Hiscuni derives its name from
and because it strives to leap with its feet, which answers to the above
descriptive character: the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions, and
some others, render it by Ophiomachus, a fighter with serpents, to which
the locust is an enemy, and kills them, taking fast hold of their jaws,
as Pliny says (l), and so Aristotle (m):

and the grasshopper after his kind; this is another, and the fourth kind
of the locust that might be eaten; its name is Chagab, from the Arabic
word Chaguba, "to vail", locusts vailing the light of the sun: and
according to the Jewish doctors, it is a name which every locust fit to
eat should have;"among the locusts (fit for food) are these, who have
four feet, and four wings and thighs, and wings covering the greatest
part of them, and whose name is Chagab (n);''and commentators say (o),
it must be called by this name, as well as have those signs: the
difference between these several sorts is with them this; the Chagab has
a tail, but no bunch; Arbeh neither bunch nor tail; and Soleam has a
bunch, but not a tail; and Chargol has both bunch and tail (p):
Maimonides (q) reckons up eight sorts of them fit to eat; and these
creatures were not only eaten by the Jews, but by several other nations:
with the Parthians they were very agreeable and grateful food, as Pliny
(r) relates; who also says (s), that some part of the Ethiopians live
only upon them all the year, hardened in smoke, and with salt: Diodorus
Siculus (t) makes mention of the same, and calls them Acridophagi,
locust eaters, and gives a particular account of their hunting and
taking them, and preserving them for food; and so does Strabo (u); and
the same Solinus (w) relates of those that border on Mauritania; and
they are still eaten in Barbary, where they dry them in ovens to
preserve them, and then either eat them alone, or pounded and mixed with
milk: their taste is said to be like shrimps (x); and Bochart (y) has
shown, from various writers, that they were a delicious food with the
Greeks, especially among the common people; and so they are with the
Indians (z).

\(g\) So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 88. 1. (h) T. Bab. Cholin, fol.
65. 2. (i) Sepher Shorash. in voc. (k) Ib. in voc. (l) Ut supra. (Nat.
Hist. l. 11. c. 29.) (m) Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 6. (n) Misn. Cholin, c.
3. sect. 7. (o) Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (p) Vid. T. Bab. Cholin, fol.
65. 2. (q) Maacolot Asurot, c. 1. sect. 21. (r) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 29.
(s) Ib. l. 6. c. 30. (t) Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 162, 163. (u) Geograph. l.
16. p. 531. (w) Polyhistor. c. 43. (x) Sir Hans Sloane's Natural History
of Jamaica, vol. 1. p. 29. (y) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 4. c. 7. col. 490,
491. (z) Agreement of Customs of the East Indians and Jews, art. 12. p.
60.

[Leviticus 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 11:23</span></span>

But all other flying creeping things,.... Excepting the four sorts
before mentioned, wherefore we rightly supply the word "other":

which have four feet; or more; the Vulgate Latin version adds, "only",
but wrongly; for those that have more are unclean, and forbidden to be
eaten, excepting those in the preceding verse; and most creeping things
that fly have six feet, as the locusts themselves, reckoning their
leaping legs into the number; though it may be observed, that those
creatures that have six feet have but four equal ones, on which they
walk or creep; and the two foremost, which are longer, are as hands to
them to wipe their eyes with, and protect them from anything that may
fall into them and hurt them; they not being able to see clearly because
of the hardness of their eyes, as Aristotle (a) observes, and
particularly it may be remarked of the fly, as it is by Lucian (b), that
though it has six feet it only goes on four, using the other two
foremost as hands; and therefore you may see it walking on four feet,
with something eatable in its hands, lifting them up on high, just after
the manner of men: now all such creatures that have four feet or more,
excepting the above:

shall be an abomination unto you; abhorred as food, and abstained from.

\(a\) Ut supra. (Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 6.) (b) De Musca.

[Leviticus 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 11:24</span></span>

And for these ye shalt be unclean,.... That is, for eating them; or
should they eat them they would be unclean:

whosoever toucheth the carcass of them shall be unclean until the even;
not only he was unclean that ate them, but he that even touched their
dead bodies was reckoned unclean; might not go into the tabernacle, nor
have conversation with men, nor eat of the holy things, which were
forbid men in any uncleanness; and though there is no mention of his
washing himself, it may be understood, this being a short or concise way
of speaking, as Aben Ezra observes; who adds, that it was necessary that
he should wash himself in water; which was typical of washing and
cleansing by the grace and blood of Christ, without which a man cannot
be cleansed from the least sin, and pollution by it; and may signify
that during the legal dispensation there was no proper cleansing from
sin, until the evening of the world, when Christ came and shed his blood
for the cleansing of it.

[Leviticus 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 11:25</span></span>

And whosoever beareth ought of the carcass of them,.... That carries
them from one place to another, out of the camp, city, village, or house
or field where they may lie; and though this is done with a good design,
as being offensive or infectious, yet such an one

shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; from whence both
Jarchi and Aben Ezra infer, that the pollution by hearing or carrying is
greater than that by touching; since such a man, so defiled, was obliged
to wash his clothes as well as his body; so saints, that have contracted
pollution by any manner of sin, are to wash their garments and make them
white in the blood of the Lamb, [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014).

[Leviticus 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 11:26</span></span>

The carcasses of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not cloven
footed,.... As the camel:

nor cheweth the cud; though it may divide the hoof, as the swine; and on
the other hand, such as may chew the cud, and yet not dividing the hoof,
as the coney and hare; for the Scripture here, as Aben Ezra observes
again, uses a short and concise way of speaking: these

are unclean unto you; to be reckoned by them such, and neither to be
eaten nor touched:

everyone that toucheth them shall be unclean; until the evening; and
obliged to washing, though not expressed: this is not to be understood
of touching them while alive, as some Sadducees or Karaites understand
it, according to Aben Ezra; for camels, horses, mules, &c. might be, and
were rode upon, and so touched; but of them when dead, or their
carcases, as is rightly supplied in the beginning of the verse; and the
Jewish writers (c) understand this of the flesh of the carcass only, not
of the bones, horns, and hoofs, which, they say, do not defile, only the
flesh: this is repeated from [Lev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#008).

\(c\) Misn. Edaiot, c. 6. sect. 3. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Leviticus 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 11:27</span></span>

Whatsoever goeth upon his paws,.... Or "the palms" (d) of his hands;
meaning such creatures, whose feet are not divided into two parts, but
into many, like the fingers of an hand, as apes, lions, bears, wolves,
foxes, dogs, cats, &c.

among all manner of beasts that go on all four; this is added, to
distinguish them from fowl, such as are clean; who walk but on two feet,
though their feet are divided into fingers or talons, and may be called
hands on which they walk:

these are unclean unto you: and as they might not be eaten, so neither
touched, as follows:

whoso toucheth their carcass shall be unclean until the even; See Gill
on [Lev 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024).

\(d\) "super volas suas", Pagninus, Montanus, "super manus suas",
Munster, Tigurine version, Drusius.

[Leviticus 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 11:28</span></span>

And he that beareth the carcass of them,.... Carries it upon any
account, from place to place:

shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; as he that bore
the carcasses of any of the flying creeping things, [Lev
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#025).

they are unclean to you; even the carcasses of the one and of the other;
and to all the Israelites, men, women, and children, as Aben Ezra
observes.

[Leviticus 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 11:29</span></span>

These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things that
creep upon the earth,.... As distinguished from those creeping things
that fly, these having no wings as they; and which were equally unclean,
neither to be eaten nor touched, neither their blood, their skin, nor
their flesh, as the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it: and the Misnic
doctors say (d) that the blood of a creeping thing and its flesh are
joined together: and Maimonides (e) observes, that this is a fundamental
thing with them, that the blood of a creeping thing is like its flesh;
which in Siphre (an ancient book of theirs) is gathered from what is
said in [Lev 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029) "these shall be
unclean", &c. hence the wise men say, the blood of a creeping thing
pollutes as its flesh: the creeping things intended are as follow:

the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind; the first of
these, "the weasel", a creature well known; there are two sorts of it,
as Pliny (f) says, the field weasel, and the house weasel; the former
are called by the Jewish writers the weasel of the bushes (g), and the
latter the weasel that dwells in the foundations of houses (h); and of
the former there was a doubt among some of them whether it was a species
of the eight reptiles in [Lev 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029) or
whether it was a species of animals (i); and which, Maimonides says, is
a species of foxes like to weasels: Bochart (k) thinks the mole is
intended; but the generality of interpreters understand it of the
weasel; and so Jarchi and Kimchi, and Philip Aquinas (l), interpret it
by "mustela", the weasel: however, all agree the second is rightly
interpreted "the mouse"; which has its name in Hebrew from its being a
waster and destroyer of fields; an instance of which we have in [Sa1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005); see Gill on [Sa1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005); so that this sort may be chiefly
intended, though it includes all others, who are distinguished by their
colours, the black, the red, and the white, which are all mentioned by
Jonathan in his paraphrase of the text: this animal, as a learned
physician (m) expresses it, eats almost everything, gnaws whatever it
meets with, and, among other things, is a great lover of swine's flesh,
which was an abomination to the Jews; nor does it abstain from dung, and
therefore it is no wonder it should be reckoned among impure creatures;
and yet we find they were eaten by some people, see [Isa
66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017) especially the dormouse; for
which the old Romans made conveniences to keep them in, and feed them,
and breed them for the table (n): so rats in the West Indies are brought
to market and sold for food, as a learned author (o) of undoubted credit
assures us, who was an eyewitness of it: the last in this text, "the
tortoise", means the land tortoise; it has its name from the shell with
which it is covered, this word being sometimes used for a covered wagon,
[Num 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#003) there are various kinds of
them, as Pliny (p) and other writers observe, and who, as Strabo (q) and
Mela (r) also, speak of a people they call Chelonophagi, or tortoise
eaters: a tortoise of the land kind is esteemed a very delicate dish:
Dr. Shaw (s), speaking of the land and water tortoises in Barbary, says,
the former, which hides itself during the winter months, is very
palatable food, but the latter is very unwholesome: the Septuagint
version renders it, the "land crocodile", which, is approved of by
Bochart (t): and Leo Africanus says (u), that many in Egypt eat the
flesh of the crocodile, and affirm it to be of good savour; and so
Benzon (w) says, its flesh is white and tender, and tastes like veal;
though some among them, as Strabo (x) asserts, have a great antipathy
and hatred to them; and others worship them as gods, and neither can be
supposed to eat them; the land crocodiles are eaten by the Syrians, as
Jerom (y) affirms, for those feeding on the sweetest flowers, as is
said, their entrails are highly valued for their agreeable odour: Jarchi
says, it is a creature like a frog; he means a toad; so Philip Aquinas
and many render the word: Dr. Shaw takes the creature designed to be the
sharp-scaled tailed lizard (z).

\(d\) Misn. Meilah, c. 4. sect. 3. (e) Pirush. in ib. (f) Nat. Hist. l.
29. c. 4. (g) Misn. Celaim, c. 8. sect. 5. (h) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 20.
2. (i) Maimon. in Misn. ib. (k) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 3. c. 95. col.
1022. (l) Sepher Shorash. & Aquinas in rad. (m) Scheuchzer. Physic.
Sacr. vol. 2. p. 307. (n) Varro de re Rustic. l. 3. c. 14. apud Sir Hans
Sloane's History of Jamaica, vol. 1. Introduct. p. 24. (o) Sir Hans
Sloane, ib. p. 25. (p) Nat. Hist. l. 9. c. 10. & l. 32. c. 4. (q)
Geograph. l. 16. p. 532. (r) De Situ Orbis, l. 3. c. 8. (s) Travels, p.
178. (t) Ut supra, (Hierozoic. par. 1.) l. 4. c. 1. (u) Descriptio
Africae, l. 9. p. 762. (w) Nov. Orb. Hist. c. 3. (x) Geograph. l. 17. p.
558, 560, 561, 563. (y) Adv. Jovin. l. 2. (z) Ut supra. Travels, p. 178

[Leviticus 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 11:30</span></span>

And the ferret,.... Whatever creature is here meant, it has its name in
Hebrew from the cry it makes; and so the ferret has but one note in its
voice, which is a shrill, but small, whining cry: it is used to drive
rabbits out of their holes: the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions
render the word by "mygale", the weasel mouse, or "mus areneus" of the
Latins, the shrew or shrew mouse: it has something of the mouse and
weasel, from whence it has its name in Greek, being of the size of the
one, and the colour of the other: but Bochart (b) is of opinion, that a
sort of lizard called "stellio", an evet or newt, is meant; one sort of
which, according to Pliny (c), makes a bitter noise and screaking:

and the chameleon; this is a little creature like a lizard, but with a
larger and longer head; it has four feet, and on each foot three claws;
its tail is long; with this, as well as with its feet, it fastens itself
to the branches of trees; its tail is flat, its nose long, and made in
an obtuse point; its back is sharp, its skin plaited and jagged like a
saw, from the neck to the last joint of the tail, and upon its head it
hath something like a comb; in other respects it is made like a fish;
that is to say, it has no neck (d); what is said of its living on air,
and changing colour according to what it is applied, are now reckoned
vulgar mistakes: but whatever creature is here meant, it seems to have
its name in Hebrew from its strength, wherefore Bochart (e) takes the
"guaril" or "alwarlo" of the Arabs to be meant; which is the stoutest
and strongest sort of lizard, and is superior in strength to serpents,
and the land tortoise, with which it often contends:

and the lizard; so Jarchi interprets the word by a "lizard"; it has a
larger letter than usual in it, that this creature might be taken notice
of, and guarded against as very pernicious, and yet with some people it
is eaten: Calmet says (f), there are several sorts of lizards, which are
well known: there are some in Arabia of a cubit long, but in the Indies
there are some, they say, of twenty four feet in length: in America,
where they are very good, they eat them: one lizard is enough to satisfy
four men: and so in the West Indies, says Sir Hans Sloane (g), I was
somewhat surprised to see serpents, rats, and lizards sold for food, and
that to understanding people, and of a very good and nice palate; and
elsewhere (h), he says, all nations inhabiting these parts of the world
(the West Indies) do the same: "Guanes" or "lizards" are very common in
Jamaica, and eaten there, and were of great use when the English first
took this island, being, as I was assured, says he, commonly sold by the
first planters for half a crown apiece: Dr. Shaw (i) says, that he was
informed that more than 40,000 persons in Cairo, and in the
neighbourhood, live upon no other food than lizards and serpents, though
he thinks (k), because the chameleon is called by the Arabs "taitah",
which differs little in name from "letaah", here; that therefore that,
which is indeed a species of the lizard, might, with more propriety, be
substituted for it:

and the snail; so the word is rendered by Jarchi, on the place, and by
Kimchi, and Philip Aquinas, and David de Pomis, in their lexicons; and
these creatures, though forbid to the Jews, yet are not only used for
medicine, but also for food by many: snails of several kinds, we are
told, are eaten with much satisfaction in Italy and France: in Silesia
they make places for the breeding of them at this day, where they are
fed with turnip tops, &c. and carefully preserved for the market; and
the Romans took care of them in the same manner (l): Bochart (m) thinks
a kind of lizard is meant, which lies in sand, called by the Arabs
"chulaca", or "luchaca", because the word here used signifies, in the
Talmudic (n) language, sandy ground:

and the mole; and so it is interpreted by Onkelos and Jarchi here, and
by David de Pomis, and Philip Aquinas, in their lexicons: the same word
is used for a certain sort of fowl, which we translate the "swan"; [Lev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018) but here of a creeping thing:
whatever is intended by it, it seems to have its name from its breath;
either in a contrary signification, if understood of the mole, which
either holds its breath, or breathes not while under ground; or from its
breathing more freely, wherefore Bochart (o) takes it to be the
"chameleon"; which, as Pliny (p) says, is always gaping with its mouth
for air; and it has been a vulgar notion, though a wrong one, that it
lives upon it: the Targum of Jonathan interprets it by the "salamander";
now whoever ate any of the above eight creeping things, according to the
Jewish canons, was to be beaten (q). (b) Ut supra, (Hierozoic. par. 1.)
l. 4. c. 2. (c) Nat. Hist. l. 29. c. 4. (d) Calmet, in the word
"Chameleon". (e) Ut supra, (Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 4.) c. 3. (f)
Dictionary, in the word "Lizard", Vid. Hieron. adv. Jovinian. l. 2. (g)
Natural History of Jamaica, vol. 1. Introduct. p. 25. (h) Ibid. vol. 2.
p. 333. (i) Travels, p. 412. (k) Ibid. p. 178. (l) Sir Hans Sloane's
Nat. Hist. ib. p. 23, 24. (m) Ut supra, (e)) c. 5. (n) T. Bab. Sabbat,
fol. 31. 1. Gloss. in fol. 54. 1. (o) Ut supra, (Hierozoic. par. 1. l.
4.) c. 6. (p) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 33. (q) Maimon. Maacolot Asurot, c. 2.
sect. 7.

[Leviticus 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 11:31</span></span>

These are unclean to you of all that creep,.... Unfit for food, and not
to be touched, at least when dead, as in the next clause, that is, these
eight sorts of creeping things before mentioned, as the Targum of
Jonathan expresses it, and these only, as Maimonides says (r):

whosoever doth touch them when they are dead shall be unclean until the
even; for touching them while alive did not defile, only when dead; and
this the Jews interpret, while they are in the case in which they died,
that is, while they are moist; for, as Ben Gersom says, if they are so
dry, as that they cannot return to their moisture, they do not defile;
for which reason, neither the bones, nor nails, nor nerves, nor skin of
these creeping things, defile; but, they say (s), while the back bone is
whole, and the bones cleave to it, then a creeping thing is reckoned
moist, and while it is so it defiles. (r) Hilchot, Abot Hatumaot, c. 4.
sect. 14. (s) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Niddah, c. 7. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 11:32</span></span>

And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall
be unclean,.... Any of the above eight creeping things, that is, of
their flesh, for as for their bones, nails, nerves, and skin, as before
observed, being separated from them and dry, they do not defile:

whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack; every
wooden vessel, as the Targum of Jonathan; and all sorts of clothes, of
woollen, linen, or silk, and all sorts of skins, excepting skins of sea
beasts; for these, according to the Jews (t), received no pollution; and
also sacks or sackcloth, made of goats' hair, and the like:

whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done; any tool or
instrument made use of by any artificer in his trade, or any vessel
wrought by him:

it must be put into water; dipped into it, even into forty seahs of
water, according to the Targum of Jonathan; and which is to be
understood, not of any working tool, or finished vessel only, but of any
vessel of wood, raiment, skin, or sack, before mentioned:

it shall be unclean until the even; even though put into water and
washed:

so it shall be cleansed; in the above manner, by being put or dipped
into water; or "afterwards", as the Septuagint, when it has been dipped
and the even is come, and not before. (t) Bartenora in Misn. Celaim, c.
17. sect. 13.

[Leviticus 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 11:33</span></span>

And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth,.... Any of the
above eight reptiles, should they by chance fall into the midst an
earthen vessel:

whatsoever is in it shall be unclean; if it only by falling touched the
outside of it, it was not unclean; but if it fell into it, then whatever
was contained in it was unclean; for, as Jarchi says, an earthen vessel
does not pollute or receive pollution, but from the air of it (u), from
its inside:

and ye shall break it; other vessels might be put into water and rinsed,
and so be cleansed, but earthen vessels, being of no great value, were
to be broken in pieces: an emblem this, as Ainsworth suggests, of the
dissolution of our bodies, which are as earthen vessels, and of the
destruction of sin thereby, and of the entire removal of it by death.
(u) Vid. Misn. Celaim, c. 2. sect. 1. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Leviticus 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 11:34</span></span>

Of all meat which may be eaten,.... Which otherwise is lawful to eat and
fit for food, whether herbs, or whether the flesh of clean creatures:

that on which such water cometh shall be unclean; that is, such water as
is put into an unclean vessel, become so by the fall of any unclean
reptile into it; wherefore such water poured out upon any sort of food,
clean and fit to eat, or that is put into such water, to be dressed, it
becomes unclean and unfit to eat; for the vessel, being unclean, defiles
the water, and the water defiles the food: Jarchi interprets this of
water in general, which coming upon anything eatable, prepares it for
uncleanness; "we learn (says he) that no food is fit and prepared to
receive defilement until water comes upon it once; and after it is come
upon it once, it receives defilement for ever, even though it becomes
dry;'' but the former seems to be the true sense:

and all drink that may be drank in every such vessel shall be unclean;
whatever otherwise might be lawfully drank, yet being put into such a
vessel, into which any unclean reptile was fallen, or being in it when
it fell into it, became unclean and not fit to be drank; and those
liquors which receive uncleanness, and make meats unclean by coming on
them, according to the Misnic doctors (w), are these seven, dew, water,
wine, oil, blood, milk, and honey. (w) Misn. Machshirin, c. 6. sect. 4.

[Leviticus 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 11:35</span></span>

And everything whereupon any part of their carcass falleth shall be
unclean,.... Before the Scripture seems to speak of anyone of the
reptiles perfect, that falling upon anything should pollute it; but here
of any part of them, though ever so small, which should, through any
accident, fall and light upon anything, even that would render it
unclean and unfit for use:

whether it be oven, or ranges of pots; the one to bake bread in, and the
other to boil flesh in, as Aben Ezra observes:

they shall be broken down; and no more made use of for baking and
boiling:

for they are unclean, and shall be unclean to you; were made hereby
unfit for use, and should not be used: the Jewish writers (x) explain
the phrase, "to you", to your necessity, that which they had need of,
but now should not use nor receive advantage from; even "to you"; all
men, women, and children, as Hiskuni interprets it: all this was ordered
to create in them an abhorrence of these creatures, and to make them
cautious of eating and touching them, and careful that they come not
nigh, or touched, or fell upon anything, since it would give them so
much trouble, as well as occasion loss. (x) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn.
Edaiot, c. 7. sect. 8.

[Leviticus 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 11:36</span></span>

Nevertheless, a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of water,....
Or, "a fountain or pit, a collection of waters", the copulative being
wanting, as some observe, Aben Ezra takes notice of; or it may be by way
of apposition, and so may explain what fountain or pit is meant, even
such an one where there is a large continence of water, into which, if
any carcass of a creeping thing fell, or any part of it, yet it

shall be clean: and fit for use, either because of the abundance of
water in it, which could not be affected with the fall of such a
creature into it as where there is but a small quantity; or rather this
exception was made, because pools of water were of considerable value in
these countries, and frequently in use for bathings, &c. and therefore
for the good of men, and that they might not suffer so great a loss by
such an accident, they are declared notwithstanding to be clean and free
for use: hence you may learn, says Jarchi, that he that dips in them is
pure from his uncleanness; that a man might lawfully make use of them
for a bath on account of any uncleanness, notwithstanding the carcass of
a creeping thing had fallen into it; as a mouse, or rat, or any such
creature:

but that which toucheth their carcass shall be unclean; not the waters
which touch the carcass, as Aben Ezra interprets it, for then the whole
would be defiled, and unfit for use; but either the man that touched the
carcass, laid hold upon it to pluck it out of the fountain or pit, or
that which he made use of to get it out, or both these, were unclean in
a ceremonial sense: the Targum of Jonathan is, "but he that toucheth
their carcasses in the midst of these waters shall be unclean.''

[Leviticus 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 11:37</span></span>

And if any part of their carcass fall upon any sowing seed that is to be
sown,.... That which is selected from the other seed in order to be
sown, and which is laid by and laid up for that purpose; should the
carcass, or any part of the carcass of a creeping thing fall upon an
heap of it, into a vessel in which it was put, as a dead mouse or the
like:

yet it shall be clean; be fit for use and sown in the earth; because
being cast into the earth, and dying and quickening there, and then
springing up again in stalk and ear, it would go through various changes
before it became the food of man: the Targum of Jonathan describes it,
such as is sown in its dryness, or being dry; for if it was wetted it
was unfit for use, as follows.

[Leviticus 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">lev 11:38</span></span>

But if any water be put upon the seed,.... Either accidentally or on
purpose; whether on sowing seed, and with water with which they water
the field, as Aben Ezra interprets it; or on seed used for food, by
steeping it in water, as sometimes wheat is, and boiled; and whether it
is water or the rest of the liquors, and whether they are put on the
seed, or the seed falls into them, it matters not, as Jarchi says:

and any part of their carcass fall thereon; that is, on the seed, though
Aben Ezra observes, some say upon the water: the Targum of Jonathan
adds, in its moisture, or while it is wet; and so may be thought to be
more susceptible of impurity from the touch of a dead reptile, or any
part of it, and which would render it unfit for sowing or eating, until
it was dried and cleansed; yea, Jarchi says, if it falls thereon, even
after it is dried:

it shall be unclean unto you; unfit for use.

[Leviticus 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 11:39</span></span>

And if any beast of which ye may eat die,.... Any clean beast, as the
ox, sheep, goat, deer, &c. what, if rightly killed, is very lawful to
eat of; but if it died of itself through any distemper, or was torn by
the wild beasts, so the Targum of Jonathan:

he that toucheth the carcass thereof shall be unclean until the even;
not the bones, nerves, horns, hoofs, or skin, as Jarchi observes; these
might be handled, because some of them, at least, were wrought up into
one instrument or another, by artificers, for use and service, but the
flesh of them might not be touched; whoever did touch it was
ceremonially unclean, and might not go into the sanctuary, or have
conversation with men, until the evening of the day in which this was
done.

[Leviticus 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lev 11:40</span></span>

And he that eateth of the carcass of it,.... For though it might be
eaten, if rightly killed, yet not if it died of itself, or was
strangled, or torn to pieces by wild beasts:

shall wash his clothes; besides his body, which even he that touched it
was obliged to:

and be unclean until the even; though he and his clothes were washed,
and he might not go into the court of the tabernacle, or have any
concern with holy things, or conversation with men:

he also that beareth the carcass of it; removes it from one place to
another, carries it to the dunghill, or a ditch, and there lays it, or
buries it in the earth:

shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even; from whence, as
before observed by the Jewish writers, uncleanness by bearing is greater
than uncleanness by touching, since the former obliged to washing of
clothes, not so the latter; so Jarchi here; and yet still was unclean
until the evening, though he had washed himself in water, as Aben Ezra
notes; and so says Jarchi, though he dips himself, he has need of the
evening of the sun.

[Leviticus 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">lev 11:41</span></span>

And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth,.... Nothing is
called a creeping thing, as Jarchi says, but what is low, has short
feet, and is not seen unless it creeps and moves: and "every creeping
thing" comprehends, as Aben Ezra and Ben Gersom observe, the eight
creeping things before mentioned, [Lev
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029) and mention is made of them
here, that they might not be eaten, which is not expressed before; and
being described as creeping things "on the earth", is, according to
Jarchi, an exception of worms in pease, beans, and lentiles; and, as
others observe, in figs and dates, and other fruit; for they do not
creep upon the earth, but are within the food; but if they go out into
the air, and creep, they are forbidden:

shall be an abomination; detested and abhorred as food:

it shall not be eaten; it shall not be lawful to eat such a creature.
This, as Jarchi, is binding upon him that causes another to eat, as well
as he that eats, the one is guilty as the other. And indeed such are not
fit to eat, and cannot be wholesome and nourishing; for, as a learned
physician observes (y), insects consist of particles exceeding small,
volatile, unfit for nourishment, most of them live on unclean food, and
delight in dung, and in the putrid flesh of other animals, and by laying
their little eggs or excrements, corrupt honey, syrups, &c. see [Ecc
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#001) and yet some sorts of them are
eaten by some people. Sir Hans Sloane, after having spoken of serpents,
rats, and lizards, sold for food to his great surprise at Jamaica, adds
(z), but what of all things most unusual, and to my great admiration,
was the great esteem set on a sort of "cossi" or timber worms, called
cotton tree worms by the negroes and the Indians, the one the original
inhabitants of Africa, and the other of America; these, he says (a), are
sought after by them, and boiled in their soups, pottages, olios, pepper
pots, and are accounted of admirable taste, like to, but much beyond
marrow; yea, he observes (b), that not they only, but the most polite
people in the world, the Romans, accounted them so great a dainty, as to
feed them with meal, and endeavour breeding them up. He speaks (c) also
of ants, so large as to be sold in the markets in New Granada, where
they are carefully looked after, and bought up for food; and says, the
negroes feed on the abdomen of these creatures: he observes (d), that
field crickets were found in baskets among other provisions of the
Indians. (y) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 302. (z) Nat. Hist. of
Jamaica, vol. 1. Introduct. p. 25. (a) Ib. vol. 2. p. 193. (b)
Introduct. ut supra. (a)) Vid. Plin. l. 17. c. 24. & Aelian. de Animal.
l. 14. c. 13. (c) Ib. vol. 2. p. 221, 223. (d) Ib. p. 204. Vid.
Aristotel. Hist. Animal. l. 5. c. 30.

[Leviticus 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 11:42</span></span>

Whatsoever goeth upon the belly,.... Jarchi's paraphrase is, "whatsoever
goeth", as worms and beetles, and the like to them, "upon the belly",
this is the serpent; and to go upon the belly is the curse denounced
upon it, [Gen 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014) this and every such
creature are forbidden to be eaten; as there are others who either have
no feet, or what they have so short, that they seem to go upon their
belly; and yet, as horrible and detestable as the serpent is, it has
been the food of some, and accounted very delicious, as by a people
mentioned by the Arabic geographer (e). Mela (f) speaks of a people,
who, from their eating serpents, were called Ophiophagi, serpent eaters;
and Pliny (g) says of the Troglodytes, that the flesh of serpents was
their food. The Spaniards, when they first found out the West Indies,
going ashore on the isle of Cuba, found certain spits of wood lying at
the fire, having fish on them, about one hundred pound weight, and two
serpents of eight feet long, differing nothing from the crocodiles in
Egypt, but not so big; there is nothing, says my author (h), among the
delicate dishes (of the natives of that place), they esteem so much as
these serpents, insomuch that it is no more lawful for the common people
to eat of them, than of peacocks and pheasants among us; the Spaniards
at first durst not venture to taste of them, because of their horrible
deformity and loathsomeness; but the brother of Columbus being allured
by a sister of one of the kings of the country to taste of them, found
them very delicious, on which he and his men fell to, and ate freely of
them, affirming them to be of more pleasant taste than either our
pheasants or partridges; and that there is no meat to be compared with
the eggs of these serpents (i). Diodorus Siculus (k) speaks of serpents
in the island of Taprobane of great size, harmless to men, and whose
flesh is eaten, and of a sweet savour:

and whatsoever goeth upon all four; that is, whatsoever creeping thing;
for otherwise there are beasts that go upon all four that are clean and
fit to eat; but this is observed to distinguish this sort of creeping
things from those that go upon their belly, and from those that have
more feet, as in the next clause; Jarchi particularly instances in the
scorpion:

or whatsoever hath mere feet among all creeping things that creep upon
the earth; such as caterpillars, and particularly the Scolopendra, which
the eastern people call Nedal; so Jarchi says, this is Nedal, a reptile
which hath feet from its head to its tail, called Centipeda; and the
Targum of Jonathan is, "from the serpent, to the Nedal or Scolopendra,
which has many feet.'' Some of then, have seventy two, thirty six on a
side, and others eighty four; some fewer, but all have many:

them ye shall not eat, for they are an abomination; abominable for food,
and to be had in the utmost aversion. (e) Clim. 1. par. 6. (f) De Situ
Orbis, l. 3. c. 8. (g) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 8. (h) Peter Martyr de
Angleria, Decad. 1. l. 3. (i) Ib. l. 5. (k) Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 141.

[Leviticus 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">lev 11:43</span></span>

Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that
creepeth,.... With any creeping thing that flies in the air, excepting
the four sorts of locusts, [Lev 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#022)
and with any creeping thing in the waters, [Lev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#010) or with anything that creeps on
the land, by eating any of them; which being abominable for food, would
make the eater of them so to God, he thereby breaking a command of his:

neither shall you make yourselves unclean with them; by touching and
bearing them, as with dead beasts, so with dead flies and the like:

that ye should be defiled thereby; in a ceremonial sense.

[Leviticus 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">lev 11:44</span></span>

For I am the Lord your God,.... Their Lord, and therefore had a right to
enjoin them what laws he pleased concerning their food; and their God,
their covenant God, and therefore would consult their good, and direct
them to what was most proper, convenient, and wholesome for them:

ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy, for I am
holy; that is, separate themselves from all other people, and be
distinct from them, by using a different diet from theirs, as their Lord
and God was different from all others, so called; and thus by observing
his commands, and living according to his will, and to his glory, they
would be holy in a moral sense, as they ought to be, who were under the
peculiar care and notice of a holy God, and so highly favoured by him;
and particularly by attending to the above laws concerning food, they
would be kept from mixing with, and having conversation with the
Gentiles, and so be preserved from falling into idolatry, and continue a
holy people, serving and worshipping the Lord their God, and him only;
and which seems to be a principal view as to religion, in delivering out
the above commands:

neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth; which is repeated to keep them at the
utmost distance from these things, and to fill them with an aversion to
them, that they might be careful to avoid them. There is no penalty
annexed to these laws, but the breach of them making them unclean,
thereby they were debarred the use of the sanctuary, and of holy things,
and of the conversation of men, for that day; but, according to the
Jewish writers, such transgressions were punishable with stripes. Jarchi
observes out of the Talmud (l), that he that eateth "putitha" (a small
water reptile) was to be beaten four times, and if an ant or pismire
five times, and if a wasp or hornet six times. (l) T. Bab. Erubin, fol.
28. 1. Pesachim, fol. 24. 1. Maccot, fol. 16. 2.

[Leviticus 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">lev 11:45</span></span>

For I am the Lord that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt,.... He
had brought them out of it, and was now bringing them on in the
wilderness towards Canaan's land, in order to settle them there; and
this is observed, to show what obligations they lay under to him to
observe his commands; for since he had done such great things for them,
it became them to be obedient to him in all things: and the more, since
his end herein was, as he observes to them,

to be your God; to make it appear that he was their God, and they were
his special people, whom he had chosen for himself above all people upon
the earth; that he was their King and their God, to protect and defend
them, to provide for them, and take care of them, and bestow all good
things on them proper for them:

ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy; separate from all others as
he was, living holy lives and conversations, agreeably to his will made
known to them, in imitation or him who had chosen and called them to be
his people; for, since holiness is his nature, it becomes them who are
his house and family, his subjects and people.

[Leviticus 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">lev 11:46</span></span>

This is the law of the beasts,.... Clean and unclean, what were to be
eaten, and what not,

and of the fowl; [Lev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002) the unclean
ones, which are particularly mentioned that they might be avoided, all
others excepting them being allowed:, [Lev
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013).

and of every living creature that moveth in the waters; all sorts of
fish in the sea, rivers, ponds, and pools, such as have fins and scales,
these were to be eaten, but, if they had neither, were forbidden:, [Lev
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009).

and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth; eight of which are
mentioned particularly, which, when dead, defiled by touching; and all
others are forbidden to be eaten, [Lev
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029) together with such creeping
things that fly, excepting those that had legs above their feet to leap
with, [Lev 11:20.](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020) This is a
recapitulation of the several laws respecting them, though not in the
exact order in which they are delivered in this chapter.

[Leviticus 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">lev 11:47</span></span>

To make a difference between the unclean and the clean,.... Whether of
beasts, fish, fowl, and flying creeping things:

and between the beast that may be eaten, and the beast that may not be
eaten; the former clause takes in all in general, this instances in a
particular sort of creatures; and the first mentioned of which, that
might be eaten, are, that part the hoof, are cloven footed, and chew the
cud; and that might not, that chew the cud, but divide not the hoof, or
divide the hoof, but chew not the cud; and now, by such like
descriptions and distinctions of the creatures treated of, the
Israelites would be able to make a difference between the one and the
other, and know what was to be eaten, and what not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 12](lev012)

</div>
