<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev007)  [Next](lev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 8

The order for the consecration of Aaron and his sons is renewed, [Lev
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001) which accordingly was set about
and performed by Moses, [Lev 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#004) who
having first washed and clothed them, first Aaron, and then his sons,
with the garments of the priesthood, anointing at the same time the
tabernacle of the altar, and what appertained to them and Aaron also,
[Lev 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006) and then he slew the bullock
for the sin offering, and the ram for the burnt offering, and the ram of
consecration; and did with the blood, fat, shoulder, and breast, and the
meat offering belonging thereunto, as he had been directed, [Lev
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014) and the chapter is concluded with
some instructions about boiling the flesh, and burning the remainder of
it, and keeping the charge of the Lord night and day for seven days,
[Lev 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031).

[Leviticus 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 8:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... The following section or paragraph,
relating to the consecration of Aaron and his sons, was delivered,
according to Jarchi, seven days before the setting up of the tabernacle;
but to me it seems to have been delivered after the setting it up, since
it was out of the tabernacle that the Lord said all those things
recorded in the preceding chapters; and after he had given out the laws
concerning sacrifices, then he renewed the order for the consecration of
Aaron and his sons, that they might offer them:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 8:2</span></span>

Take Aaron, and his sons with him,.... That is, order them to come, or
send a message to them, that they appear at such a time at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation, where the ceremony of consecration
was to be performed, and was performed, [Lev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#003) which is observed and recorded by
Moses, to show that he had a divine warrant for what he did, and that it
was not from favour and affection to his brother, and because of the
relation he and his family stood in to him, that he invested him and
them with the priestly office, but it was by a command from the Lord;
nor did Aaron take this honour to himself, but was called of God to it,
[Heb 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004),

and the garments; the garments for the priesthood, ordered and
described, and now made, see [Exo
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001).

and the anointing oil; which also was ordered to be made, and now was
made, [Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023).

and a bullock for the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of
unleavened bread; which were all to be used at the consecration with the
anointing oil Aaron was to be anointed, and also the tabernacle and the
altar; and the bullock was to be a sin offering, and one of the rams a
burnt offering for Aaron, and his sons, and the other ram was the ram of
consecration of them; and out of the basket of unleavened bread one cake
of each sort was to be taken, and waved with other things, and burnt,
which finished the consecration; but with it was no oath, as in the
consecration of the antitypical high priest Christ Jesus, which
difference is observed by the apostle, [Heb
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021) see [Exo
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001).

[Leviticus 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 8:3</span></span>

And gather thou all the congregation together,.... That is, the heads of
the tribes and the elders of the people, as Aben Ezra interprets it; for
the whole body of the people, and every individual of them, could not be
got together:

unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; taking this for the
whole court itself, as it sometimes is; though no doubt on this occasion
as great a number was convened as well could be admitted into the court,
or about it, to be spectators and witnesses of the solemn investiture of
Aaron and his sons with the priestly office.

[Leviticus 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 8:4</span></span>

And Moses did as the Lord commanded him,.... He convened Aaron and his
sons, and the heads of the people, at the door of the tabernacle, and
came himself, and brought with him the garments, the oil, and
sacrifices, even everything necessary for the consecration:

and the assembly was gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation; and this was, according to the Targum of Jonathan,
on the twenty third day of the month Adar or February; but it rather
seems to be later, some time in the beginning of Nisan or March, and
before the passover began, see [Num
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001).

[Leviticus 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 8:5</span></span>

And Moses said unto the congregation,.... Having convened them, he
opened to them the reason of their being called together, which was not
done of himself, but by divine direction:

this is the thing which the Lord commanded to be done; namely, what
follows, concerning the consecration of Aaron and his sons to be
priests, and the investiture of them with that office, attended with
various rites and ceremonies to be performed, of which they were to be
witnesses.

[Leviticus 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 8:6</span></span>

And Moses brought Aaron and his sons,.... To the laver which was in the
court of the tabernacle

and washed them with water; to show that they should be clean that bear
the vessels of the Lord, and offer the sacrifices of the people; all
that are in public office in the house of God ought to have both clean
hands and a pure heart, to hold the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience, and to be of a pure and holy conversation; and indeed all
that are made kings and priests to God, as all the saints are, they are
washed from their sins in the blood of Jesus, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005).

[Leviticus 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 8:7</span></span>

And he put upon him the coat,.... The embroidered coat of fine linen,
which was next to his flesh; [Exo
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039) and all the garments were put on
just in the order they are here declared; no mention is made indeed of
the linen breeches, since it is highly probable these were put on by
Aaron himself in some apartment in the tabernacle, or before came
thither; it not being so decent to put on, or have these put on, in the
sight of the whole congregation:

and girded him with the girdle; the girdle of needlework with which the
linen coat was girt to him, and was distinct from the curious girdle of
the ephod after mentioned, [Exo 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039).

and clothed him with the robe: the robe of the ephod, which had at the
hem of it golden bells and pomegranates, [Exo
28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031).

and put the ephod upon him; made of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and
fine twined linen, which had two shoulder pieces, and on them two onyx
stones, on which were engraved the names of the twelve tribes, [Exo
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006).

and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it
unto him therewith; which was made of the same with the ephod, and by
which it was girt close unto him; of the mystical meaning of these
garments. See Gill on [Exo 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039), [Exo
28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031), [Exo
28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032), [Exo
28:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#033), [Exo
28:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#034), [Exo
28:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#035), [Exo
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006), [Exo
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#007), [Exo
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#008), [Exo
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#009), [Exo
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#010), [Exo
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#011), [Exo
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#012).

[Leviticus 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 8:8</span></span>

And he put the breastplate upon him,.... Which was made of the same
materials with the ephod, and was put upon it, and fastened to it:

also he put in the breastplate the Urim and Thummim: that is, Moses did
it, as all the rest; for there is no reason to be given why this should
be appropriated to God as a divine work, distinct from the rest; and
these seem to be the twelve precious stones set in the breastplate,
whose names are given, [Exo 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#017) and
if they are not intended, no account is here given of them; but since in
[Exo 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#008) an account is given of the
stones, and of the setting of them in the breastplate, and no mention is
made of the Urim and Thummim, and here notice is taken of them, but
nothing said of the stones; it seems pretty plain they must be the same;
See Gill on [Exo 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030).

[Leviticus 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 8:9</span></span>

And he put the mitre upon his head,.... Which was made of fine linen,
and was a wrap of that of a considerable length about his head, [Exo
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039).

also upon the mitre, even upon his forefront, did he put the golden
plate; which was put upon the forehead of the high priest, reaching from
ear to ear, and was fastened to the mitre with a blue lace, and had on
it this inscription, "holiness to the Lord": [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036) and is here therefore called

the holy crown: denoting both the sanctity and the dignity of the high
priest, and typical of Christ, who is holiness itself, and to his
people, and is now crowned with glory and honour, being a priest upon
the throne: hence the Jews (u) speak of the crown of the law, and of the
crown of the kingdom, and of the crown of the priesthood: and this, as
all the rest, was done

as the Lord commanded Moses; all these were made according to the divine
order, and were put on in the manner and form he directed him; of the
mystery of the mitre and the crown; see Gill on [Exo
28:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039), [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036), [Exo
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#037).

\(u\) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 13.

[Leviticus 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 8:10</span></span>

And Moses took the anointing oil,.... Which Bezaleel had made, according
to the directions which Moses had given him, and he had received from
the Lord: this Moses brought with him to the door of the tabernacle, as
he was ordered, [Lev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002) and now he
took it and made use of it as follows:

and anointed the tabernacle and all that was therein; the altar of
incense, the candlestick, and table of shewbread:

and sanctified them; separated and devoted them to sacred use and
service.

[Leviticus 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 8:11</span></span>

And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times,.... The altar of
burnt offering; the order for anointing it is given in [Exo
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#028) but in that no directions are
given for the manner of doing it by sprinkling, nor the number of times
it was to be sprinkled: hence Jarchi confesses his ignorance, and
says,"I know not how it was ordered about these sprinklings;''but no
doubt Moses was instructed of God in what manner to anoint it, and how
often; and the number seven may denote the perfect unction of it, and
made it a fitter type of Christ, who received the unction of the Spirit
without measure:

and anointed the altar, and all its vessels; pans, shovels, basins,
flesh hooks, and fire pans:

both the laver and his foot; which was for the priests to wash at; and
very probably this was done before Moses brought Aaron and his sons
thither and washed them, [Lev 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006)
since it seems most proper that it should be consecrated before used, as
it follows:

to sanctify them; set them apart for sacred use.

[Leviticus 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 8:12</span></span>

And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head,.... Which ran down
to his beard, and to the collar of his coat, the robe of the ephod, but
not to the skirts of his garments, as we wrongly render it, [Psa
133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002). Jarchi says it was first poured
on his head, and after that he put it between his eyebrows, and drew it
with his finger here and there, or from one eyebrow to another:
Maimonides (w) gives a like account, with some addition; he says, the
oil was poured on his head, and he was anointed between the eyebrows, in
the form of the Greek letter "chi": a greater profusion of oil was used
in the anointing of Aaron than of the tabernacle, altar, and laver, and
their vessels, he being so eminent a type of Christ, our high priest,
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows:

and anointed him to sanctify him; to signify that he was set apart and
devoted to the sacred office of the priesthood. The Targum of Jonathan
observes, that this anointing was after he had clothed him; though some
have thought it was done before the mitre and holy crown were put on:
but if they were put on to complete the investiture, they might be taken
off while the ceremony of anointing was performed.

\(w\) In Misn. Ceritot, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 8:13</span></span>

And Moses brought Aaron's sons,.... His four sons, Nadab and Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation;
he ordered and directed them to come there, or sent proper persons to
fetch them, or from one part of the court, where they were, he might
accompany them thither:

and put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles: which were made
of fine linen, [Exo 39:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#027) and the
coats being made long to reach down to the ankles, needed girdles,
especially when in service, that they might perform it more
expeditiously:

and put bonnets on them; which were made of fine linen also, and
differed from the mitre of the high priest only in the manner of rolling
up the linen:

as the Lord commanded Moses; as all the above things were made, so they
were all put on, according to the directions Moses received of the Lord,
who was faithful in his house, with respect to everything he enjoined
him, [Heb 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002).

[Leviticus 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 8:14</span></span>

And he brought the bullock for the sin offering,.... To the tabernacle,
into the court of it, to the altar of burnt offering there; that is, he
caused it to be brought thither as he was ordered, [Exo
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010).

and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for
the sin offering; their right hands, according to the Targum of
Jonathan, which is not improbable, thereby as it were transferring their
sins to it, and confessing them over it; acknowledging their guilt, and
that they deserved to die, as that creature would, which was to be a
vicarious sacrifice for sin, and whose blood was to purify and sanctify
the altar, at which they, sinful men, were to serve.

[Leviticus 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 8:15</span></span>

And he slew it,.... Not Aaron, nor any of his sons, who as yet were not
fully consecrated and installed into their office, but Moses, as
follows:

and Moses took the blood; which was received into a basin when the
bullock was slain:

and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger; upon
the four horns of the altar, which were at the four corners of it, and
dipping his finger into the blood, he besmeared the horns with it, and
drew it about with his finger here and there; and so is said to be done
round about the altar, as these horns were:

and purified the altar; or cleansed it; not from moral guilt and
pollution, which it was incapable of, but from all ceremonial pollution
it might be supposed to have:

and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar; the rest of the blood
he did not use about the horns:

and sanctified it; separated it from common to sacred use:

to make reconciliation upon it; that it might be fit to have sacrifices
offered on it to make atonement and reconciliation for sins; for which
reason it was necessary it should itself be pure and holy, in such sense
it was capable of being so.

[Leviticus 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 8:16</span></span>

And he took all the fat that was upon the inwards,.... Called the
"omentum":

and the caul above the liver; the lobe upon the liver, as the
Septuagint; or "the caul" and "the liver", so says Jarchi; the liver
separately, for he took a little of the liver with it, the caul:

and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar:
the fat of these several parts, which has been often observed was done;
and in imitation of which, the same has been done by the Persians and
their Magi, as related by Strabo (x) and others (y); and by the Romans,
to which Persius (z) refers; and these several parts are generally
covered with fat in fat creatures, and especially sheep, as Aristotle
(a) observes.

\(x\) Geograph. l. 15. p. 504. (y) "Omentum in flamma pingue", &c.
Catullus. (z) "Tot tibi cum in flammis", &c. Satyr. 2. (a) Hist. Animal.
l. 3. c. 17.

[Leviticus 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 8:17</span></span>

But the bullock and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with
fire without the camp,.... Aben Ezra observes, that some say that he did
this himself; and others, that it was done by orders, that is, he
ordered others to do it, which seems probable enough:

as the Lord commanded Moses; [Exo
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#014).

[Leviticus 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 8:18</span></span>

And he brought the ram for the burnt offering,.... One of the two he was
ordered to take, [Lev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002).

and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram; as they
had done before on the head of the bullock, see [Lev
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014) their right hands, as the Targum
of Jonathan, and that at the same time; not first Aaron and then his
sons, as a famous grammarian, Aben Ezra makes mention of, thought; but,
as he himself says, they laid them on together.

[Leviticus 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 8:19</span></span>

And he killed it,.... That is, Moses killed the ram, as the Septuagint
version expresses it:

and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about; as he did the
blood of the bullock, [Lev 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#015).

[Leviticus 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 8:20</span></span>

And he cut the ram into pieces,.... Cut off its head and quartered it:

and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat; even all of it,
as the following verse shows.

[Leviticus 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 8:21</span></span>

And he washed the inwards and the legs in water,.... The one being taken
out, the other cut off:

and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice
for a sweet savour, and an offering made by fire unto the Lord; as the
Lord commanded Moses; see [Exo 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#018).

[Leviticus 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 8:22</span></span>

And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration,.... Or "filling"
(b), or "fulnesses"; because, as Jarchi says, these filled and perfected
the priests in their priesthood; this was the finishing and consummation
of their consecration: what is said in this and the three following
verses [Lev 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#023) is the same as is
ordered, [Exo 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#019) and needs no
further explanation; See Gill on [Exo
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#019), [Exo
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#020), [Exo
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#021), [Exo
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#022).

\(b\) "plenitudinum", Montanus; "impletionum, vel potius completionum",
Drusius; Heb. "impletionum", Piscator.

[Leviticus 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 8:26</span></span>

And out of the basket of unleavened bread,.... Moses was ordered to
take, [Lev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002),

that was before the Lord; being brought to the tabernacle, where now the
Lord had taken up his residence:

he took one unleavened cake; which had no oil in it or upon it:

and a cake of oiled bread; which was mixed and tempered with oil:

and one wafer; which was anointed with oil:

and put them upon the fat, and upon the right shoulder; of the ram of
consecration, which he took from it, and laid the cakes uppermost upon
them.

[Leviticus 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 8:27</span></span>

And he put all upon Aaron's hands, and upon his son's hands,.... The fat
and the right shoulder, with the cakes upon them:

and waved them for a wave offering before the Lord; See Gill on [Exo
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#024).

[Leviticus 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 8:28</span></span>

And Moses took them from off their hands,.... After they had been waved
before the Lord:

and burnt them upon the altar, upon the burnt offering; of the other
ram; or after that burnt offering, as Jarchi, who observes, that we do
not find that the shoulder of peace offerings was offered in any place
but this, it belonged to the priest; but this being at the consecration
of the priests, it was offered to the Lord by Moses, to whom it seems to
have belonged, as the breast also, but that was not burnt, but eaten:
and the same writer affirms, that Moses ministered all the seven days of
the consecration in a white shirt, or surplice; and that he might wear a
linen coat, as priests did, is not improbable, since he now officiated
as one:

they were consecrated for a sweet savour; acceptable to the Lord, and so
the priests, Aaron and his sons likewise, on whose account they were
made:

it is an offering made by fire unto the Lord; the fat, the shoulder, and
the cakes.

[Leviticus 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 8:29</span></span>

And Moses took the breast,.... Of the ram of consecration:

and waved it for a wave offering before the Lord; this Moses seems to
have waved with his own hands, and not upon the hands of Aaron and his
sons, putting his under them, as in the wave offering of the fat,
shoulder, and cakes, and for which the following words seem to give a
reason:

for of the ram of consecration it was Moses's part; the breast of it was
his:

as the Lord commanded Moses; see [Exo
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#026).

[Leviticus 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 8:30</span></span>

And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon the
altar,.... Which was sprinkled upon the altar round about, [Lev
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#024) and these two seem to be mixed
together, since it follows:

and sprinkled it upon Aaron, &c. See Gill on [Exo
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#021).

[Leviticus 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 8:31</span></span>

And Moses said unto Aaron, and to his sons,.... After he had offered the
bullock, the two rams, and cakes of unleavened bread for the
consecration of them:

boil the flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; the
remainder of the flesh of the ram of consecration, which was all but the
fat, the shoulder, and the breast:

and there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecration;
what was left of that, there being one cake of a sort taken out of it
and burnt:

as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it; see [Exo
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#032).

[Leviticus 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 8:32</span></span>

And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread,.... Until the
next morning, which could not be eaten by Aaron and his sons:

shall ye burn with fire; that it might not be corrupted, nor put to
common nor superstitious uses.

[Leviticus 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 8:33</span></span>

And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation in seven days,.... Which was the time of their
consecration, so long it lasted; and they had provision enough every day
from the ram of consecration, whose flesh they were to boil and eat. The
Jewish writers (c) are puzzled where they should ease nature, since the
place was holy; but the orders are not to be considered as so strict but
that they might go in and out, though they were not to stay long, or to
attend to any other business; and it was always necessary there should
be some upon the spot, keeping the Lord's charge in their turns; and it
was always requisite that they should also sleep alternately; for it
cannot be thought that they should be all this time without rest, any
more than without food:

until the days of your consecration be at an end; which were to continue
so long:

for seven days shall he consecrate you; that is, Moses, who here speaks
of himself in the third person, as appears from [Exo
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#035). Aben Ezra observes, that the
word "end" is wanting, and that the sense is, at the end of seven days
he shall consecrate you, finish their consecration; all the seven days
he was doing it, and at the end of the seventh concluded it.

\(c\) Aben Ezra, Hiscuni in loc.

[Leviticus 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 8:34</span></span>

As he hath done this day, so the Lord hath commanded to do,.... The same
were to be repeated every day until the seven days were ended; so Jarchi
and Aben Ezra; the former of these observes, that their Rabbins explain
the phrase "to do", in the preceding clause, of the business of the red
heifer, and that which follows:

to make an atonement for you, of the business of the day of atonement;
and say, that it may be learned from hence that the high priest was
obliged to be separate (from his own house and family) seven days before
that, and so the priest that burned the red heifer; and the same is
observed by other Jewish writers (d): but this refers to neither of
these cases, but to the present consecration of Aaron and his sons, and
the making atonement by sacrifice for them, and the sanctification of
them to minister in the priest's office.

\(d\) Maimon, & Bartenora in Misn. Yoma, c. 1. sect. 1. & in Parah, c.
3. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 8:35</span></span>

Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation,.... Or rather "within" it, as Noldius renders it, since
they were not to go out of the door of it, [Lev
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033) whereas our version seems to
leave it undetermined whether they abode without the door or within;
where they were to continue:

day and night, seven days; even the seven days of their consecration:

and keep the charge of the Lord, that ye die not; not the charge of the
tabernacle, and the service of it committed to them upon their
investiture with their office, hereafter to be observed by them; but
what was charged upon them to attend unto, during the seven days of
their consecration; and the penalty being death in case of failure, was
to make them more careful and cautious of transgressing; and which was
the more necessary, as they were to be pure and holy at their entrance
upon their work: and though this may seem somewhat severe, yet the
aggravation of their sin would be the greater, as it was to a sacred and
honourable work they were called, and to which they were now
consecrating; and as what was required of them was what might easily be
complied with: however Moses, to show that this was not of himself, but
by divine authority, adds:

for so I am commanded; that is, to declare unto them, that if they did
not punctually observe the above orders, they must expect to die.

[Leviticus 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 8:36</span></span>

So Aaron and his sons did all things which the Lord commanded by the
hand of Moses. They submitted to have them done to them, and for them,
what was done on the first day of their consecration, all the rest of
the days; and they kept within the tabernacle all that time as was
enjoined them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 9](lev009)

</div>
