<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev022)  [Next](lev024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 23:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 23

In this chapter an account is given of the several holy days, times, and
seasons, appointed by God, under the general names of feasts and holy
convocations; and first of the sabbath, [Lev
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001); then of the passover and feast
of unleavened bread, [Lev 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); to
which is annexed the sheaf of the firstfruits, [Lev
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#009); after that of the feast of weeks
or pentecost, [Lev 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015); and of the
feast of trumpets, [Lev 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#023); and of
the day of atonement, [Lev 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#026); and
of the feast of tabernacles, [Lev
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#033).

[Leviticus 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 23:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Much about the same time as before;
and having delivered to him various laws concerning the holiness of the
people of Israel, who were to serve him, and of the holiness of the
priests, that were to minister in holy things to him, and of the purity
and perfections of their sacrifices, he here appoints various times and
seasons, for the more special worship and service of him:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 23:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them,.... Speak to them
to gather together, and then say unto them what follows, they all being
obliged to keep the feasts, and observe the solemnities hereafter
directed to; though it may be the heads of the tribes and the elders of
the people were summoned together, and the following things were
delivered to them, and by them to the people:

concerning the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim to be holy
convocations, even these are my feasts; appointed and ordered by God,
and to be kept to the honour of his name; these are the general names
for the particular holy times and seasons after appointed; they are in
general called "feasts", though one of them, the day of atonement, was,
strictly speaking, a fast; yet being a cessation from all work, and
opposed to working days, days of labour and business, it is comprehended
in this general title: nor is it unusual with other nations to call a
fast a feast; so Aelianus (h) relates of the Tarentines, that having
been besieged by the Romans, and delivered from them, in memory of their
sufferings appointed a feast which was called a fast: the word used has
the signification of stated, fixed, appointed times and seasons, and of
convening or meeting together at such times, and that for the
performance of solemn worship and service, which is true of them all;
for there are certain times of the week and month fixed for them, and
when the people in bodies assembled together, and in a solemn manner
worshipped the Lord; and these are called "convocations", because the
people were called together at those times by the priests, and that with
the sound of a trumpet, [Num 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002); and
"holy", because separated from other days, and set apart for holy
services: the words may be rendered, as they are by many (i): "the
solemnities of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim holy convocations,
these are my solemnities"; times for holy, religious, and solemn
service, of his appointment and for his glory: Aben Ezra seems to
understand all this of the sabbath only, which is next mentioned,
expressed in the plural number, because, as he observes, there are many
sabbaths in a year; and indeed the general title of the rest of the
feasts is afterwards given, [Lev 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004).

\(h\) Var. Hist. l. 5. c. 20. (i) Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius.

[Leviticus 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 23:3</span></span>

Six days shall work be done,.... Or may be done by men, any sort of
lawful work and honest labour, for the sustenance of themselves and
families:

but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest; from all bodily labour and
work of any kind; typical of rest by Christ and in him:

an holy convocation; when the people were called to holy exercises, to
pray and praise, and hear the word, and offer sacrifice:

ye shall do no work therein; not any at all, see [Exo
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#015),

it is the sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings: other feasts were
kept in the sanctuary, in the tabernacle or temple, or where they were;
but this was not only observed there and in their synagogues, but in
their private houses, or wherever they were, whether, travelling by sea
or land; and so the Targum of Jonathan and Aben Ezra interpret it.

[Leviticus 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 23:4</span></span>

These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy convocations,.... What
follow besides the sabbath mentioned:

which ye shall proclaim in their seasons; the proper times of the year,
the day or days, and month in which they are to be observed; these were
to be proclaimed by the priests with the sound of trumpet, namely, what
follow, for they are put together, which had been before for the most
part singly delivered.

[Leviticus 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 23:5</span></span>

In the fourteenth day of the first month,.... The month Nisan, the same
with Abib, the month in which the children of Israel came out of Egypt,
for which reason it was made the first month in the year, answering to
part of our March and part of April; and for the same reason was the
passover kept at this time, as follows:

at even is the Lord's passover; that is, that was the time for the
keeping the passover, even "between the two evenings", as it may be
rendered; from the sixth hour and onward, as Jarchi, trial is, after
noon or twelve o'clock the middle of the day, as Gersom, when the sun
began to decline; See Gill on [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006).

[Leviticus 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 23:6</span></span>

And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened
bread unto the Lord,.... Which was the day the children of Israel went
out of Egypt with their dough and leaven, having not time to leaven it;
in remembrance of which this feast was appointed:

seven days ye must eat unleavened bread; see [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015).

[Leviticus 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 23:7</span></span>

In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation,.... That is, on the
first of the seven days of the feast of unleavened bread, even the
fifteenth day of the month Nisan; this was separated from the other days
of the festival, and more particularly devoted to religions exercises,
see [Exo 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016),

ye shall do no servile work therein; such as agriculture, or any
manufacture or mechanical business, which they and their servants were
at other times employed in; but they might bake bread, and boil or roast
their meat, and walk abroad, which they might not do on their sabbaths;
and therefore it is so expressed as to distinguish it from the work
forbidden on that day.

[Leviticus 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 23:8</span></span>

But ye shall offer an offering made by, fire unto the Lord seven
days,.... A burnt offering was to be offered unto the Lord on everyone
of the seven days, which were two young bullocks, one ram, and seven
lambs; besides a meat offering, and a goat for a sin offering, [Num
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#019),

in the seventh day is an holy convocation, ye shall do no servile work
therein; as on the first day, that was on account of the Israelites
going out of Egypt; and this is said, on account of Pharaoh and his host
being drowned on it; See Gill on [Exo
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016).

[Leviticus 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 23:9</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time, for what follow are
the other feasts and holy convocations before spoken of:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 23:10</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them,.... What is next
observed, it being incumbent on them to do what is enjoined:

when ye be come into the land which I give unto you: the land of Canaan,
which God had given by promise to their fathers and to them, and which
they were now going to inherit: as yet they were in a wilderness, where
there were no sowing nor reaping, nor any harvest; so that the following
law, though now given, could not take place till they came into the land
of Canaan:

and shall reap the harvest thereof; the barley harvest, which was about
this time, the month Nisan, and which had the name Abib, from the barley
being then in the ear, see [Exo 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031);
for the wheat harvest was not till seven weeks after:

then ye shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the
priest; to with it as after directed: this is called an omer in the
text, which was the tenth part of an ephah, [Exo
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036); and so Jarchi interprets it
here; according to the Jewish writers, when the sheaf was reaped, the
corn was beat out and winnowed, and dried by the fire, and then ground
in a mill, and an omer, or a tenth part of an ephah of the flour of it
was taken, and oil and frankincense put upon it, an handful of which
being put upon the altar, the rest was the priest's; and with this
pretty much agrees the account Josephus gives, who says, on the second
day of unleavened bread, which is the sixteenth (day of Nisan), of the
fruits they have reaped they take a part; for they do not touch them
before, accounting it just to honour God first, from whom they receive
the plenty of these things; and bring the firstfruits of the barley
after this manner, having dried the handful of ears, and bruised them,
and cleansed them from the bran, they bring to the altar a tenth part to
God, and casting one handful of it on the altar, they leave the rest for
the use of the priests; and from thence forward it is lawful to reap
publicly and privately (k): this has been in some part imitated by the
Heathens: the Egyptians, who ascribe the invention of the fruits of the
earth, particularly wheat and barley, to Isis and Osiris, in memory of
it, and as a testimony of their gratitude for it, at the time of
harvest, bring an handful of the first ears of corn, and beating
themselves near them, call upon Isis; and in some cities, at the feast
of Isis, vessels of wheat and barley were carried about in great pomp,
as Diodorus Siculus (l) relates.

\(k\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 10. sect. 5. (l) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 13.

[Leviticus 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 23:11</span></span>

And he shall wave the sheaf before the Lord,.... Or the omer of barley;
this was done by the priest in the tabernacle and temple, where was the
presence of God, and that before the handful of it was put upon the
altar; which agitation or waving was, as Gersom says, towards the cast;
it was moved to and fro, backwards and forwards, upwards and downwards,
to make an acknowledgment to the Lord of heaven and earth, that the
fruits of the earth and the plentiful harvest were of him, and to give
him the praise and glory of it:

to be accepted for you; of the Lord, as a thanksgiving to him, for the
harvest now ripe, and the appointed time of it, and the plenty thereof;
and that the remainder might be sanctified and blessed to them, and they
have leave to gather it in, which they had not till this was done:

on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it; not after the
seventh day, but after the first day of the feast of unleavened bread,
which was a sabbath, in which no servile work was to be done, [Lev
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007); and so the Targum of Jonathan
calls it the day after the first good day of the passover, which was the
sixteenth of Nisan, as Josephus expressly says, in the place above
referred to; and so it is generally understood by Jewish writers (m) the
account given of this affair is this; the messengers of the sanhedrim
went out (from Jerusalem over the brook Kidron to the fields near it) on
the evening of the feast, (i.e. at the going out of the fifteenth) and
at the beginning of the sixteenth of Nisan, and bound the standing corn
in bundles, that so it might be the more easily reaped; and all the
neighbouring cities gathered together there, that it might be reaped in
great pomp; and when it was dark, one said to them, is the sun set? they
said, yes. With this sickle (shall I reap?) they said, yes. In this
basket (shall I put it?) they said, yes. If on a sabbath day, he said to
them, On this sabbath day (shall I do it?) they said, yes (n). These
questions were put and answered three times; then they reaped it and put
it into the baskets, and brought it to the court, where they parched it
before the fire, to fulfil the commandment of parched corn; then they
put it in mills for grinding beans, and took out of it a tenth part (of
an ephah), which was sifted with eighteen sieves; then oil and
frankincense were poured upon it, being mixed; and it was waved, and
brought, and a handful taken and burnt, and the rest was eaten by the
priests; and when they had offered the omer, they went out and found the
streets of Jerusalem full of meal and parched corn (o), there being now
full liberty to reap what they would: now this sheaf of the firstfruits
was typical of Christ; it being of barley, may denote the mean estate of
Christ in his humiliation; and but one sheaf for all the people, may
signify that Christ is the one Mediator, Saviour, and Redeemer: yet as a
sheaf comprehends many stalks and grains, so Christ has a complication
of blessings in him; yea, he had all his people representatively in him,
when he was offered for the whole body of his mystical Israel, all the
children of God scattered abroad; the manner of reaping it, by persons
deputed by the sanhedrim on the eve of a festival of the passover, in
the sight of much people, without Jerusalem, near Kidron, exactly agrees
with the apprehending of Christ in the night near Kidron, by persons
sent from the Jewish sanhedrim, and his suffering publicly without the
gates of Jerusalem; it being brought to the priests in the court, and
threshed, winnowed, dried, and parched by the fire, and ground in mills,
may denote the various dolorous sufferings of Christ, by means of the
priests and elders of the people; and oil and frankincense being put on
it, may denote the acceptableness of his sacrifice to God; and the
waving of it, his resurrection from the dead, which was on the very day
this sheaf was waved; who is the firstfruits of them that sleep in him,
and which sanctifies the whole body of them, and ensures their
resurrection unto eternal life; see [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020).

\(m\) Jarchi & Ben Gersom in loc. Jarchi in Misn. Succah, c. 3. sect.
12. (n) Misn. Menachot, c. 10. sect. 3, 4. (o) Ib. sect. 4, 5.

[Leviticus 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 23:12</span></span>

And ye shall offer that day, when ye wave the sheaf,.... Besides the
daily sacrifice of the morning and evening, and the additional offerings
made on everyone of the seven days of the feast of unleavened bread:

an he lamb without blemish of the first year, for a burnt offering unto
the Lord; typical of the perfect and immaculate Lamb of God, whose
sufferings are fitly signified by a burnt offering; and which were
endured at the time he became the firstfruits of his people, and
sanctified them.

[Leviticus 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 23:13</span></span>

And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine flour
mingled with oil,.... The usual measure of flour to a meat offering was
one tenth deal, [Exo 29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040); but here
it is doubled: some Jewish writers say (p) one tenth was on account of
the lamb that was offered at this time, and the other as was suitable
for a meat offering; but the true reason seems to be, because it was on
account of the fruits of the earth and the plenty thereof; and therefore
a double measure of fine flour mixed with oil was required as a token of
gratitude; for thankfulness ought to be in proportion to mercies:

an offering made by fire unto the Lord for a sweet savour; an handful of
it was burnt upon the altar, and was received with acceptance by the
Lord, and the rest was eaten by the priests, [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002),

and the drink offering thereof shall be of wine, the fourth part of an
hin; which was the common quantity for a drink offering, [Exo
29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040); for, as Jarchi observes, though
the meat offering was doubled, the drink offering was not; the reason of
which seems to be, because these offerings were on account of the
harvest and not the vintage: the Targum of Jonathan calls it wine of
grapes, to distinguish it from wine that might be made of other things,
but not to be used in drink offerings, only the pure juice of the grape.

\(p\) Chaskuni.

[Leviticus 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 23:14</span></span>

And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears,....
That is, they were not allowed to make bread of the new corn, as Aben
Ezra and Gersom explain it; for they were obliged to eat unleavened
bread at this time: but it might not be made of the new corn, until the
above offering was made; nay, they were not allowed to parch any of the
grains of corn, and eat them; yea, even they might not pluck and eat the
green ears, though of ever so small a quantity. The Jews say (q), if it
was the quantity of an olive of either of these, a man was to be beaten
for it:

until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto your God;
which includes all the offerings on this account, the offering of the
firstfruits, the offering of the he lamb, and the meat offering and the
drink offering; until these were offered up, the new corn might not be
eaten in any form:

it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations; until the
Messiah came, who is the substance of these shadows:

in all your dwellings; not at Jerusalem only, but in the several parts
of the land of Canaan; yea, as Ben Gersom says, whether in the land, or
without the land; a later writer says, it is forbidden to eat of the new
corn at this time, whether bread, parched corn, or green ears, until the
beginning of the night of the eighteenth of Nisan, and in the land of
Israel, until the beginning of the night of the seventeenth of Nisan
(r).

\(q\) Maimon. Hilchot Maacolot Asurot, c. 10. sect. 2, 3. (r) Schulchan
Aruch, par. 1. c. 489. sect. 10. so Lebush, c. 489. sect. 10.

[Leviticus 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 23:15</span></span>

And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath,.... Not
the seventh day sabbath in the passover week, nor the whole feast of
unleavened bread, but the first day of it, which was an holy
convocation, a sabbath in which no servile work was to be done, [Lev
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007); and it was from the day after
this, even the sixteenth of Nisan, that the following count was to be
made; so the Targum of Jonathan, after the first feast day of the
passover: and Josephus (s) is very clear in it, that Pentecost, or the
feast of weeks, was the fiftieth day from the sixteenth of Nisan, when
the above offerings were made:

from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; which
plainly points out the express day from whence the count was to begin,
even on the day when the sheaf of the firstfruits of the barley harvest
was offered:

seven sabbaths shall be complete; or seven weeks, that is, forty nine
days; and hence, Jarchi says, we learn that the count began from the
evening, or otherwise the weeks would not be complete; and Gersom thinks
the day in which the sheaf was offered is included in the days counted;
for the count began from the day after the first of the passover, and
lo, seven days are seven weeks of days, which make forty nine days.

\(s\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 10. sect. 6.

[Leviticus 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 23:16</span></span>

Even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath,.... Or weeks, forty nine
days being counted, the following was the fiftieth day, or Pentecost:

shall ye number fifty days; from whence this feast had the name of
Pentecost, [Act 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001); all in Israel
were obliged to number those days, except women and servants (t): the
manner of doing it was this (u); on the night of the second (day of the
passover), after the evening prayer, they began to number; but if anyone
forgot to number at the beginning of the night, he went and numbered all
the night; for the commandment is for everyone to number by himself, and
he ought to number standing, and to bless first, and number the days and
weeks: How? on the first day he says, This is one day, until he comes to
seven days, and then he says, This is the seventh day, which is one
week; and on the eighth day he says, This is the eighth day, which is
one week and one day, and so till he comes to the fourteenth; then he
says, This is the fourteenth day, which make two weeks; and in this way
he numbers, and goes on until the forty ninth day: and ye shall offer a
new meat offering unto the Lord; that is, of new corn, as the Targum of
Jonathan and Jarchi explain it, and this was of wheat; for it was the
offering for the wheat harvest, which was offered on the fiftieth day
from the offering of the sheaf or omer of the barley harvest.

\(t\) Maimon. Hilchot Tamidin Umusaphim, c. 7. sect. 24. (u) Schulchan
Aruch, par. 1. c. 489. sect. 1. & Lebush, ut supra, (c. 489.) sect. 1.

[Leviticus 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 23:17</span></span>

And ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth
deals,.... Out of their habitations in the land of Canaan; and not out
of those without the land, as Jarchi observes; and not out of all of
them, as Ben Gersom remarks; though the Vulgate Latin version has it,
out of "all" of our habitations, but wrongly; and indeed out of no one
particular habitation, because it was at the public expense; but they
were brought from some part of the country or another, even the quantity
of two tenth parts of an ephah, or two omers of wheat flour made into
two loaves, which were to be, and were waved before the Lord, and hence
so called; and are the same with the new meat offering, or rather bread
offering, made of the new corn, in the preceding verse, so Jarchi:

they shall be of fine flour; of wheat flour, the finest of it, of which
all meat or bread offerings were made; and this was particularly on
account of the wheat harvest, and therefore it was proper that the
finest of the wheat should be used on this occasion; See Gill on [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001); each loaf or cake, according to
Maimonides (w), was seven hands' breadths long, four hands' breadths
broad, and four fingers high:

they shall be baked with leaven; the common meat offering was
unleavened, part of which was burnt on the altar, where no leaven might
be burnt, [Lev 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004); and from hence it
may be concluded that no part of these loaves was to be burnt, but the
whole of them fell to the share of the priests:

they are the firstfruits unto the Lord; which he claimed as his, and
gave unto his priests; and it was but right and just he should have
them, as an acknowledgment of all coming from his hands, and as
expressive of gratitude for them, and for the sanctification of the
rest; hence this is called the feast of the firstfruits of wheat
harvest, [Exo 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#022).

\(w\) Hilchot Tamidin, &c. c. 8. sect. 10.

[Leviticus 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 23:18</span></span>

And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish,

of the first year,.... That is, with the two wave loaves, the meat or
bread offering: and besides these:

and one young bullock, and two rams; in [Num
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#027) it is two young bullocks, and
one ram; and Aben Ezra suggests, that this was at the will and option of
the priest, whether one bullock and two rams, or two bullocks and one
ram; but according to Maimonides (x), these sacrifices were distinct
from them; they are sacrifices of the day, as being a feast day, and
these belonged to the loaves; so that according to him, and so he
expresses it, there were to be offered on this day, besides the daily
sacrifices, three bullocks, three rams, and fourteen lambs, twenty
beasts in all, for burnt offerings; and two goats for sin offerings to
be eaten, and two lambs for peace offerings to be eaten; and with this
account agrees Josephus (y), they sacrifice for burnt offerings, he
says, three bullocks, and two rams, (or, as Dr. Bernard thinks, it
should be read three rams,) and fourteen lambs, and two goats for sin
offerings:

they shall be for a burnt offering unto the Lord, with their meat
offering, and their drink offering; each of the said beasts were
offered, unto the Lord on the altar of burnt offering, and burnt
thereon; and to every beast they offered, there was a meat offering and
a drink offering: the meat offering consisted of three tenth deals, or
omers, of fine flour, to a bullock, two to a ram, and one to a lamb; and
the drink offering was half an hin of wine to a bullock, the third part
of one to a ram, and a fourth part to a lamb, as Jarchi observes, which
appears from [Num 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#012),

even an offering made by fire of a sweet savour unto the Lord; an
acceptable burnt offering to God.

\(x\) Ut supra, (Hilchot Tamidin, &c. c. 8.) sect. 1. (y) Antiqu. l. 3.
c. 10. sect. 6.

[Leviticus 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 23:19</span></span>

Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering,....
Which was for the sin of the whole congregation, typical of Christ,
whose soul was made an offering for sin; in virtue of which all other
sacrifices become acceptable to God, and believers enjoy the fruits and
blessings of divine grace:

and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings;
which Gersom says were the most holy things, and were only slain in the
north, and only eaten by males, as the rest of the holy things, and are
the only peace offerings of the congregation that were offered
throughout the whole year.

[Leviticus 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 23:20</span></span>

And the priests shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits,....
The two loaves called the two wave loaves, [Lev
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#017); with which were waved the two
lambs of the peace offerings; and these alive, as Jarchi and Ben Gersom
intimate. The Jewish doctors (z) dispute, whether, in waving, the lambs
were put above the bread, or the bread above the lambs; which some
reconcile by observing, that the bread was put by the side of the lambs:

for a wave offering before the Lord; being waved this way and that way,
upwards and downwards, and towards the several quarters of the world,
showing that the fruits of the earth were owing to the providential
goodness of God everywhere:

with the two lambs; not that all the above sacrifices were waved, or any
part of them, along with the lambs, but the wave loaves, and they were
waved together, as one wave offering to the Lord:

they shall be holy to the Lord for the priests; both the loaves and the
lambs, these were separated and devoted wholly to the Lord, and to be
eaten by his priests; the peace offerings of a single person were light
holy things, as Jarchi says; but the peace offerings of the
congregation, as these were, are the most holy things, and so to be
eaten only by the priests, and by the males only, in the court of the
tabernacle.

\(z\) In Torat Cohenim, apud Yalkut in loc.

[Leviticus 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 23:21</span></span>

And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an holy
convocation unto you,.... This proclamation was made by the priests with
the sound of a trumpet, that the people might observe that this fiftieth
day, or day of Pentecost, was devoted to sacred service, and that they
were called to holy exercises in it:

ye shall do no servile work therein; what was not necessary for food, as
Ben Gersom observes, but what was necessary on that account, as kindling
a fire, &c. might be done, see [Lev
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007); for this was to be kept in like
manner as the first and seventh days of the feast of unleavened bread;
the general design of which was to express thankfulness for the
appointed weeks of the harvest, and to honour the Lord with the
firstfruits of the increase of the earth: and the Jews say, as Ben
Gersom observes, that this fiftieth day, being reckoned from the
sixteenth of Nisan, fell upon the sixth of Sivan, on which day, they
say, the law was given, which is another reason for the observance of
it: and it is remarkable, that on this same day the Word of the Lord
went out of Zion, and the law or doctrine of the Lord, even the
everlasting Gospel, went out of Jerusalem, published by the apostles of
Christ to the people of all nations, [Act
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014); when they were favoured with the
firstfruits of the Spirit, after our Lord's ascension to heaven, and
receiving gifts for men, which he now in an extraordinary manner
bestowed on his disciples, [Act 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001);
and which were the firstfruits of all others, after to be given forth in
the course of time, and of the effusion of the Spirit in the latter day;
and when there was a number of souls converted, as the firstfruits of
after conversions among Jews and Gentiles, [Act
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041); and particularly of the
conversion of the Jews in the latter day, and of the harvest of souls in
the end of the world, [Mat 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030),

it shall be a statute for ever all your dwellings throughout your
generations; so long as they dwelt in the land of Canaan, and had their
harvest in it, even until the Messiah came, in whom all those types and
figures had their accomplishment.

[Leviticus 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 23:22</span></span>

And when ye reap the harvest of your land,.... This law is repeated from
[Lev 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009); and as Aben Ezra observes,
the feast of weeks being the feast of the firstfruits of the wheat
harvest, it is repeated, that they might not forget what God had
commanded them to do at that time, namely, to leave somewhat for the
poor; and the Jewish writers (a) observe, that this law, being put among
the solemn feasts of the passover, pentecost, and tabernacles, and the
beginning of the year, and the day of atonement, teaches, that he that
observes it, and leaves the corner of the field and the gleanings to the
poor, it is as if he built the sanctuary, and offered his sacrifices in
the midst of it; but a much better reason may be given for it, which
was, to teach them that when they expressed their thankfulness to God,
they should exercise charity and liberality to the poor:

thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou
reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: See Gill
on [Lev 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009),

thou shalt leave them unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am the Lord
your God; See Gill on [Lev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010).

\(a\) In Torat Cohenim, apud Yalkut in loc. & Jarchi.

[Leviticus 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 23:23</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time, in a continued
discourse, concerning some other days, which were to be observed in a
sacred manner:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 23:24</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel,.... For all the people of Israel were
concerned in the following precept, and obliged to observe it, even
priests, Levites, Israelites, proselytes, and freed servants; though
other servants, and women, and children, were not obliged to hear the
sound of the trumpets (b), and which were blown not in Jerusalem only,
but in all cities and towns where the sanhedrim was (c); and it was the
hearing of them the people were bound unto, and not less than nine
distinct soundings were they obliged to hear (d); to which perhaps
respect is had in [Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015),

in the seventh month; the month Tisri, as the Targum of Jonathan, which
was the seventh from the month Nisan or Abib; which was appointed the
first month of the year, on account of the Israelites coming out of
Egypt in it; otherwise, before, this month Tisri was the first, and so
it still continued, for the fixing the years, and settling the
sabbatical and jubilee years, and for the planting of trees and herbs
(e):

in the first day of the month shall ye have a sabbath; not entirely as
the weekly sabbath, in which no manner of work at all was to be done,
but in which no servile work was to be done; and was observed in like
manner as the first and seventh days of unleavened bread, and the day of
pentecost, [Lev 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007),

a memorial of blowing of trumpets; which, according to the Jewish
writers, was continued from sun rising to sun setting (f); but what this
blowing of trumpets was a memorial of is not easy to say; some think it
was in memory of the wars the people of Israel had with their enemies
the Amalekites and Canaanites, and the victories they obtained over
them, and particularly in remembrance of the walls of Jericho falling
down at the sound of rams' horns; but then it must be by anticipation:
it is more commonly received with the Jews (g) that it was on the
account of the binding of Isaac on this day, being delivered through a
ram being sacrificed in his stead; and on this account it is said, that
the trumpets blown on this day were made of rams horns, and no other
might be used (h); yea, that ram's head was used to be eaten on this
day, in remembrance of the ram of Isaac, and also to intimate that the
Jews would be the head and not the tail (i): the Jews also say, that
this day, every year, was a sort of day of judgment, in which God sat
and judged men, and also determined all events of the following year
(k); and this was attended with blowing of trumpets, to strike a terror
into them, and put them in mind of the judgment of God, and to induce
them to repent of their sins (l): and it may be observed, that the
resurrection of the dead, in order to the last general judgment, will be
attended with the voice of the archangel and the trumpet of God, [Co1
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052); whether this is so represented
in reference to this notion, let it be considered: but as this was New
Year's Day, as before observed, this ceremony seems to have been
appointed to express joy for all the mercies and blessings of the last
year; and the rather, at this time of the year all the fruits of the
earth were gathered in, not only the barley and the wheat, but the oil
and wine, and under such grateful acknowledgment, to expect the divine
blessing to attend them the following year; and besides, at this time of
the year, it was generally thought by the Jews (m), and by others, that
the world was created, and this blowing of trumpets might be in memory
of that, and as an emblem of the shoutings of the sons of God, the
angels, the morning stars, who sang for joy when the foundations of the
earth were laid, [Job 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#006); to which
it may be added, this seventh month was very memorable for holy
solemnities, as the day of atonement on the tenth, and the feast of
tabernacles, which began on the fifteenth, and therefore was ushered in
with blowing of trumpets to make it the more significant, and
particularly to put the people in mind to prepare for the day of
atonement near at hand; and so Gersom observes, that as the sound of a
trumpet strikes men with fear, the design of this precept was, to fill
the mind with fear, and to excite to repentance and brokenness of heart,
and humiliation for sin, and to search their works and actions, and
correct what was amiss, and so be ready for the day of atonement: hence
Ainsworth thinks, that this was a figure of the ministry of John the
Baptist preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;
but rather it seems to be an emblem of the Gospel, and the ministry of
it, in the acceptable year of the Lord, or the Gospel dispensation,
which is sometimes signified by the blowing of the great trumpet, and by
the ministers of it lifting up their voice like a trumpet, [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013); by which sinners are roused and
awakened to a sense of their sin and danger, and to hear a joyful sound
of love, grace, mercy, peace, pardon, righteousness, and salvation
through Christ: the Jews say (n), this blowing of trumpets was to
disturb Satan, when he came to accuse the Israelites; it is certain
there is nothing gives him more disturbance than the pure and powerful
preaching of the Gospel, which he endeavours to obstruct as much as
possible, and there is nothing like what that brings to silence his
accusations, see [Co2 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#003),

an holy convocation; on which the people were called together to holy
exercises; and so the Jews observe it to this day; for after they return
home from attendance to the blowing of the trumpets in their synagogues,
they sit down to meat, and spend the rest of the day in hearing sermons,
and in other religious exercises (o).

\(b\) Maimon. Hilchot Shophar ve Succah, c. 2. sect. 1. (c) Ibid. sect.
8. (d) Ib. ch. 3. sect. 1. Schulchan Aruch, par. 1. No. 590. sect. 1.
(e) Misn. Roshhashanah, c. 1. sect. 1. (f) Schulchan Aruch, par. 1. c.
588. sect. 1. Lebush, par. 2. c. 588. sect. 1. (g) R. Alphes, par. 1.
fol. 346. 2. & Jarchi in loc. (h) Maimon. ut supra, (b)) c. 1. sect. 1.
Schulchan Aruch, ib. c. 526. sect. 1. (i) Schulchan Aruch, ib. c. 583.
sect. 2. Lebush, ib. 583. sect. 2. (k) Misn. Roshhashanah, c. 1. sect.
2. T. Bab. Roshhashanah, fol. 16. 2. (l) Leo Modena's History of Rites
of the present Jews, par. 3. c. 5. sect. 7. (m) T. Bab. Roshhashanah,
fol. 10. 2. (n) Targum Jon. in Numb. xxix. 1. R. Alphes, par. 1, fol.
346. 2. T. Bab. Roshhashanah, fol. 16. 2. (o) Leo Modena, ut supra. (l))

[Leviticus 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 23:25</span></span>

Ye shall do no servile work therein,.... Only such as was necessary for
dressing food, but not any manual work, such as servants were employed
in on other days, as agriculture or any mechanic business:

but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord; a burnt
offering, and what that was may be seen in [Num
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#001).

[Leviticus 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 23:26</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... This phrase, which is a kind of
preface to each precept, seems to be used to distinguish one from
another, as the preceding one from the feast of Pentecost; and here, the
day of atonement from that of the blowing of the trumpets; and
afterwards, the feast of tabernacles from the day of atonement; the
reason why it is not used before the feast of Pentecost seems to be,
because, as Aben Ezra observes, that depended upon the wave sheaf, and
was reckoned from it:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 23:27</span></span>

Also on the tenth day of this seventh month,.... Tisri, the same as
before, answering to part of our September, and part of October:

there shall be a day of atonement; for all the sins of the year past;
see [Lev 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029),

it shall be an holy convocation unto you: when they should be called
together for the exercise of holy duties:

and ye shall afflict your souls; their souls, by repentance, contrition,
and humiliation for sin, and their bodies by fasting; and, as the Targum
of Jonathan paraphrases it,"by abstaining from eating and drinking, and
the advantage of bathing and wiping, and the use of the bed and
sandals;''hence called the fast, [Act
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#009); See Gill on [Lev
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029),

and offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord; a burnt offering, of
which see [Num 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#008).

[Leviticus 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 23:28</span></span>

Ye shall do no work in that same day,.... No more than on the weekly
sabbath:

for it is a day of atonement, to make atonement for you before the Lord
your God: See Gill on [Lev 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#030); Aben
Ezra's note is,"for you only,''that is, for the Israelites, and not the
Gentiles; but the atonement of Christ, the antitype of this, was not for
the sins of the Jews only, but for the sins of the whole world, of all
his people in it, [Jo1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002).

[Leviticus 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 23:29</span></span>

For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same
day,.... That is, as the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem explain it,
which can fast and does not fast; for a sick person, and a child under
nine years of age, were not obliged to fast on this day (p):

he shall be cut off from among his people; by an untimely death, by the
hand of God; the Targum of Jonathan says, by the pestilence.

\(p\) Maimon. Hilchot Shebitat Ashur, c. 2. sect. 8, 10.

[Leviticus 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 23:30</span></span>

And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day,.... Any
sort of work whatever; for, as before observed, it was to be kept as
strictly as the weekly sabbath:

the same soul will I destroy from among his people; with the pestilence,
as the above Targum; it seems to be but another phrase for cutting them
off, and to signify the same thing.

[Leviticus 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 23:31</span></span>

Ye shall do no manner of work,.... Which is repeated, that it might be
observed, and to show how strictly God required this day should be kept,
and how careful men should be of breaking the command in this respect,
and how much he should resent it if they did:

it shall be a statute for ever, throughout your generations, in all your
dwellings; unto the coming of the Messiah, who, by the atoning sacrifice
of himself, would answer to this law, and put an end to it.

[Leviticus 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 23:32</span></span>

It shall be unto you a sabbath of rest,.... See Gill on [Lev
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#031); and this is thought by some (q)
to be the sabbath spoken of in [Isa
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013),

and ye shall afflict your souls; in the ninth day of the month at even;
the fast was to begin at the close of the ninth day, and to continue to
the end of the tenth; so Maimonides (r): he begins to fast and afflict
himself at the evening of the ninth next to the tenth; and so at the
going out of it he continues in his affliction a little while of the
night of the eleventh, next to the tenth, which is confirmed by what
follows:

from even unto even shall ye celebrate your sabbath; which some
understand of the sabbath in general; but it seems to have a particular
respect to the sabbath of the day of atonement, which was to last from
the evening of the ninth to the evening of the tenth day.

\(q\) R. Alphes, par. 1. Yom Hacippurim, c. 1. fol. 357. 2. (r) Ut
supra, (Maimon. Hilchot Shebitat Asher) c. 1. sect. 6.

[Leviticus 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 23:33</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Concerning the feast of tabernacles
here repeated and enlarged upon:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 23:34</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, saying,.... Giving them directions
about keeping a feast, in which the whole body of them had a very
special and particular concern:

the fifteenth day of this seventh month; the month Tisri or September:

shall be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the Lord; the
design of which was, partly to give thanks for the fruits of the earth,
now all gathered in, [Lev 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039); but
chiefly to commemorate the dwelling of the children of Israel in tents
and booths, during their forty years' abode in the wilderness, [Lev
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#043); whereby their posterity in
later times would be led to observe the difference between them and
their forefathers, who lived in tents or booths, pitched sometimes in
one place, and sometimes in another, in the open fields, in wastes, and
deserts; whereas they dwelt in spacious cities, fortified towns, and
magnificent houses; and were possessed of various kingdoms and nations,
as was the land of Canaan: the reason, the Jews say (s), why this feast
was kept at this time of the year and not at the season when they went
out of Egypt and first dwelt in booths, as at Succoth which had its name
from thence, [Exo 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037), was this;
because then the summer season began when men commonly used to build
tabernacles to shelter them from the heat of the sun, wherefore, if the
feast had been kept at that time, it would not have been known that it
was kept at the command of God, and in remembrance of the above
circumstance; but the month Tisri or September being usually a cold and
rainy season in those parts, men were wont to leave their tabernacles
and go into their houses; and so it was a plain case that the feast was
observed not for convenience or through custom, but that it was at the
command of God they went out of their houses into tabernacles at this
season of the year, in commemoration of the miraculous benefit of
dwelling in tents under the clouds of glory: and they also say, that for
this reason it was ordered to begin on the fifteenth day, because it was
on the fifteenth day of the month (though of another month) they went
out of Egypt, and the clouds began to protect and accompany them; and
this was enjoined them seven days, to teach them that the miraculous
benefits of God are always and every day to be remembered: the Jews have
a whole treatise in their Misnah, called "Succah", the "booth" or
"tabernacle"; in which they give an account of the form and fabric and
measure of their tabernacles, and of their dwelling and dining in them;
and of the branches they carry in their hands, and of the manner of
carrying and shaking them; and of the pouring out of water at this time,
and of their piping and singing and other rites and ceremonies attending
this feast; See Gill on [Joh 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002);
besides, the uses of this feast before mentioned, it was typical of
spiritual and evangelical things, and especially of the incarnation of
Christ, whose human nature is the true tabernacle, in distinction from
those typical ones, and in which he is expressly said to "tabernacle"
among us, [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); and it is highly
probable that his incarnation or birth was at the time of this feast; at
which time the temple of Solomon, a type of Christ's body, was also
dedicated; and this season of the year suits better than that in which
it is usually placed; and his baptism and the time of his death show it;
see [Luk 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001); and as Christ, our
passover, was sacrificed for us at the exact time of the passover, and
the firstfruits of the Spirit were given on the very day of Pentecost,
or feast of firstfruits; so it is most likely, that Christ was born, or
first began to tabernacle in human nature at the feast of tabernacles,
which we, in Gospel times, are to keep, by believing in the incarnate
Saviour, and by attending to the Gospel ordinances he has appointed, to
commemorate the benefits of his incarnation, sufferings, and death, [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016); moreover, the dwelling of the
children of Israel in booths in the wilderness, and so at this feast in
commemoration of it, may be an emblem of the tabernacles of the saints
in their present wilderness state: this world, through which they are
passing, is like a wilderness to them; their bodies are called
tabernacles, which are pitched for a while; and their state and
condition here is that of sojourners, pilgrims, and travellers; yea,
these tents and tabernacles may be figures of the several particular
churches of Christ, in the present state of things, which are set up for
a while for the convenience, comfort, refreshment, and joy of the
spiritual Israel of God; see [Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004).

\(s\) Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. c. 21. p. 447.

[Leviticus 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 23:35</span></span>

On the first day shall be an holy convocation,.... When they should be
called together to holy exercises, to prayer, praising, and reading the
law; and at this present time they observe this day, by rising early in
the morning and going to the synagogue, where they sing and pray much;
and everyone takes a bundle of branches of palm tree, olive, &c. in the
right hand, and a pome citron in the left, and says, blessed be thou, O
Lord our God, the Lord of the world, who has sanctified us by thy
precepts, and hath commanded us to carry the palm tree bundle; then they
shake it, and give a great shout, according to [Psa
96:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#012); all which they frequently
repeat on this day, as well as bring out the book of the law, attended
with various ceremonies, and read some passages in it (t):

ye shall do no servile work therein; as on the first and seventh days of
unleavened bread, the day of Pentecost, and of the blowing of trumpets;
but what was necessary for preparing and dressing food might be done.

\(t\) Buxtorf. ut supra. (Synagog. Jud. c. 21. p. 447.)

[Leviticus 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 23:36</span></span>

Seven days ye shall offer an offering made, by fire unto the Lord,.... A
burnt offering; what this was, and how many were offered on each day,
see at large in [Num 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#013),

on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; as on the first
day; See Gill on [Lev 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#035),

and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord; which was
different from that on all the other days, being one bullock only, &c.
[Num 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#035),

it is a solemn assembly; of all the people, when they were gathered
together before the Lord. Some render the word used a "restraint" or
"detention", and interpret it of restraining or detaining them from
servile work, as in the next clause; so Aben Ezra and Gersom; but this
sense seems to make that clause unnecessary and is never used elsewhere
where that is:

ye shall do no servile work therein; as on the first day; See Gill on
[Lev 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#035).

[Leviticus 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 23:37</span></span>

These are the feasts of the Lord,.... Besides the sabbath, as Gersom
observes; even the passover, the seven days of unleavened bread the day
of Pentecost, the day of blowing the trumpets, the day of atonement, and
the seven days of the feast of tabernacles:

which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations: as they had been
directed, [Lev 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002),

to offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord; which is explained by

a burnt offering, and a meat offering, which went along with it:

a sacrifice, which the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan call the
sacrifice of holy things; according to Gersom it was the sacrifice of
the peace offerings; but rather it seems to be the sacrifice of the sin
offering, which was ordered along with the rest in all those feasts:

and drink offerings; which also accompanied the meat offerings:

everything upon his day; there being different sacrifices on one day
than on another, everyone was to be offered peculiar to the day as was
ordered; of which see [Num 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#029).

[Leviticus 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">lev 23:38</span></span>

Beside the sabbaths of the Lord,.... The seventh day sabbaths, which
were of his appointing, and sacred to his service and worship; on which,
when any of the feasts fell, it did not hinder the observance of them,
or the offering of the several sacrifices on them; nor were those of the
sabbath to be omitted on the account of them:

and beside your gifts; either of the whole congregation, or of a private
person, which they thought well to give of their own good will on these
festivals, over and above the sacrifices enjoined:

and beside all your vows, and beside all your freewill offerings, which
ye give unto the Lord; which seem to explain what is meant before by
gifts.

[Leviticus 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lev 23:39</span></span>

Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month,.... The month Tisri or
September, the same month, and the same day of the month before
observed; only another end and use of this feast is remarked, which was
to give thanks for the fruits of the earth gathered in, as follows:

when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land; the barley, wheat, oil
and wine, and all others, this being now autumn, when the several fruits
were ripe and gathered: ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord seven days;
not different from that before mentioned, but the same, one design of
which is here suggested, to give thanks for the fruits of the earth:
hence this feast is sometimes called the feast of ingathering, [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016); as another use of it is after
mentioned, to commemorate the children of Israel dwelling in booths in
the wilderness:

on the first day shall be a sabbath, and on the eighth day shall be a
sabbath; because on both there was a cessation from servile work, [Lev
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#035).

[Leviticus 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lev 23:40</span></span>

And ye shall take you the boughs of goodly trees,.... Which the three
Targums interpret, of citrons; and so Jarchi and Aben Ezra; and the Jews
are so tenacious of observing this, that in those countries where this
fruit grows not, they will send for it from Spain, where there is plenty
of it: the Targum of Jonathan, paraphrases it, "ye shall take of yours";
suggesting these boughs must be their own, or the bundle of them, with
others they call the "lulab", must be their own property, and not
another's; though it is said (u), if it is a gift it will do, even
though it is given on condition to be returned again:

branches of palm trees: which were very common in the land of Judea, and
especially about Jericho; see [Joh
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013); the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem call them "lulabs", which is the name the Jews give to the
whole bundle they carried in their hands on this day:

and the boughs of thick trees; which the Targums and Jewish writers in
general understand of myrtles, being full of branches and leaves:

and willows of the brook; a sort of trees which delight to grow by
brooks and rills of water: these, according to the Jewish writers, were
not taken to make their booths of, though that seems to be the use of
them, from [Neh 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015); but to tie up in
bundles, and carry in hands; the citron in their left hand, and a bundle
made of the other three sorts of boughs of trees in the right hand,
which they called the "lulab":

and ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God seven days; because of the
blessings of his goodness bestowed upon them in the plentiful harvest
and vintage they had been favoured with, and in remembrance of past
mercies, showed to their fathers in the wilderness, giving them food and
drink, and guiding and protecting them with the pillar of cloud and
fire; and at the same time, also, thankful for the different
circumstances they were in, having cities, towns, and houses to dwell
its, and fields and vineyards to possess, when their fathers lived in a
wilderness for forty years together; and especially such of them
expressed their joy before the Lord, who had any knowledge of this being
a type of the Messiah tabernacling in human nature, they had the promise
of, to be their spiritual Redeemer and Saviour: these seven days are
kept by the Jews now, chiefly in carnal mirth, and so for ages past, as
by carrying the above boughs in their hands, and going round about the
altar with them, and, shaking them, and crying Hosanna, and by making
use of all sorts of music, vocal and instrumental, piping, dancing,
leaping, skipping, and various gestures, even by persons of the highest
rank, and of the greatest character for sobriety (w); and particularly
by fetching water from Siloah, when in their own land, and pouring it
with wine upon the altar, which was attended with such expressions of
joy, that it is said, that he who never saw the rejoicing of drawing of
water, never saw any rejoicing in his life (x): the Jews give this
reason of the ceremony, because at this feast was the time of the rains,
see Targum of Jonathan on [Lev 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036);
and therefore the holy blessed God said, pour water before me, that the
rains of the year may be blessed unto you (y); but others have thought
there was something more mysterious in it, and that it had respect to
the pouring out of the Holy Ghost; for, they say (z), the place of
drawing water was so called, because they drew the Holy Ghost, as it is
said, "ye shall draw water with joy out of the wells of salvation", [Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003); to this our Lord is thought to
allude; see Gill on [Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037), [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038), some of the ceremonies used at
this feast have been imitated by the Heathens: Strabo (a) says, the
carrying branches of trees, dances, and sacrifices, were common to the
gods, and particularly to Bacchus; and there was such a likeness between
these and the rites of Bacchus, that Plutarch (b) thought the Jews at
this time kept two feasts to the honour of him; whereas, as Bishop
Patrick observes, the profane Bacchanalia of the Gentiles were only a
corruption of this festival.

\(u\) Misn. Succah, c. 3. sect. 13. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. R.
Alphes, par. 1. Succah, c. 2. fol. 376. 1. (w) Maimon. Hilchot Lulab. c.
7. sect. 10. c. 13, & c. 8. sect. 12, 13, 14, 15. (x) Misn. Succah, c.
5. sect. 1. 4. (y) R. Alphes, par. 1. Roshhashanah, c. 1. fol. 346. 2.
(z) T. Hieros. Succah, fol. 55. 1. (a) Geograph. l. 10. p. 322. (b)
Sympos. l. 1. prob. 3.

[Leviticus 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">lev 23:41</span></span>

And ye shall keep it a feast unto the Lord seven days in the year,....
Every year it was to be kept for the space of seven days, beginning on
the fifteenth and ending on the twenty second of the month Tisri or
September:

it shall be a statute for ever in your generations; until the Messiah
should come and tabernacle among men, the substance of this shadow, on
whose coming it was to flee away:

ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month; which is repeated for the
confirmation of it, and that no mistake might be made.

[Leviticus 23:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 23:42</span></span>

Ye shall dwell in booths seven days,.... So that it seems they were not
obliged to dwell in them on the eighth day, which was an holy
convocation, a sabbath in which no servile work was to be done as the
first, [Lev 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036). The eighth day was
a day by itself, a sort of an appendage to the feast of tabernacles,
when they went into their houses again, and kept it as an holy day; and
perhaps principally in giving thanks for the ingathering of the fruits
of the earth, to which this seems to be appropriated from [Lev
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039). According to the Jewish
writers, they did not go out of their booths until they had dined in
them on this day; and as they went out used to say,"may it be the will
of God that we may be worthy the next year to dwell in the booth of
Leviathan (c);''that is, to feast with the Messiah in the world to come.
And to those days the Jews have added a ninth, which they call "the joy
of the law", and which they keep for joy of having finished the reading
of the law; which being divided into as many sections or lessons as
weeks in the year, were so ordered to be read as to be finished at this
time (d):

all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths; the Targum of
Jonathan is,"all the males in Israel, and even the little ones, that do
not need their mothers, sit in the shades blessing their Creator, when
they enter there.''And, according to the Misnah (e), women, servants,
and little ones, are free from the booths (i.e. are not obliged to dwelt
in one), but a little one, who hath no need of its mother, is obliged to
dwell in the booths: and elsewhere it is said, that sick persons, and
such as wait upon them, are not obliged, nor messengers upon any
business, nor travellers and watchmen in cities, and keepers of gardens
and orchards; if such travel, or keep watch in the day, they are obliged
to be in them at night, and if in the night, then they are to dwell in
them in the day (f). Jarchi says, that everyone born in Israel
comprehends proselytes, who were bound by this law.

\(c\) Lebush, par. 2. c. 668. sect. 5. (d) Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. c. 27.
Leo Moden's History of the Rites of the Jews, par. 3. c. 7. sect. 6. (e)
Misn. Succah, c. 2. sect. 6. (f) R. Alphes, par. 1. Succah, c. 2. fol.
374. 2. 375. 1.

[Leviticus 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">lev 23:43</span></span>

That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to
dwell in booths,.... Which by the providence of God the Israelites were
obliged to make for themselves to dwell in:

when I brought them out of the land of Egypt; for the very first place
they came to, when they departed from thence, was called Succoth, from
the booths they there built:

I am the Lord your God; who brought them out of Egypt, made them to
dwell in booths in the wilderness, and enjoined them the observance of
the feast of tabernacles in memory of it, in which he expected to be
obeyed.

[Leviticus 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">lev 23:44</span></span>

And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the Lord.
The several feasts before recited, the order of them, the manner of
observing them, and the time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 24](lev024)

</div>
