<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev017)  [Next](lev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 18:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 18

In this chapter the Israelites are directed in general not to imitate
the customs and practices of the Egyptians and Canaanites, but to keep
the ordinances, statutes, and judgments of the Lord, [Lev
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001); and they are instructed
particularly to avoid incestuous marriages, [Lev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006); carnal copulation with a
menstruous woman, [Lev 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019);
adultery, [Lev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#020); letting any of
their seed pass through the fire to Molech, [Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021); sodomy, [Lev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022); and bestiality, [Lev
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023); and they are deterred from
these things by observing to them the pollution and destruction which
they brought on the inhabitants of Canaan, and would bring the same on
them should they commit them, [Lev
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024).

[Leviticus 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 18:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... He continued speaking to him, after
he had delivered to him the laws respecting the day of atonement, and
the bringing of the sacrifices to the door of the tabernacle, and
particularly concerning the Israelites not worshipping devils, as they
had done in Egypt: the Lord proceeds to deliver out others, the more
effectually to guard against both the immoral and idolatrous practice,
of the Egyptians and Canaanites:

saying, as follows.

[Leviticus 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 18:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel,.... To the heads of their tribes,
that they might deliver to them the following laws; or Moses is bid to
publish them among them, either by word of mouth, or by writing, or
both:

and say unto them, I am the Lord your God; with which they were to be
introduced; showing the right he had to enact and enjoin such laws,
since he was Jehovah, the Being of beings, and from whom they received
their beings; their sovereign Lord and King, who had a right to rule
over them, and command what he pleased; and also the obligation they lay
under to him to regard them, and yield a cheerful obedience to them,
since he was their God, not only that had made them, but had redeemed
them out of Egypt; and who had made a covenant with them, and had taken
special care of them, and had bestowed many wonderful favours on them;
and for this purpose is this phrase often used in this chapter, and very
frequently in the next. See [Lev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#002).

[Leviticus 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 18:3</span></span>

After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not
do,.... Where they had dwelt many years, and were just come out from
thence, and where they had learned many of their evil practices; not
only their idolatrous ones referred to in the preceding chapter, which
it is certain they followed, [Eze
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007); but also their immoral
practices, particularly respecting incestuous marriages, after insisted
on, some of which were established by a law among them; so Diodorus
Siculus relates (q), that it passed into a law with the Egyptians,
contrary to the common custom of all others, that men might marry their
own sisters; which is one of the incestuous marriages taken notice of in
this chapter, and forbid:

and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall
ye not do: which land had been promised to their ancestors and to them
long ago, and whither they were now going under divine direction and
guidance, to inherit it, and are here particularly warned of the evil
practices among them, that they might avoid them: Maimonides (r) says,
these are what our Rabbins call "the ways of the Amorites" (the
principal people of the nations of the land of Canaan), and which, he
adds, are as branches of the magic art; namely, such which do not follow
from natural reason, but from magical operation, and depend upon the
dispositions and orders of the stars, and so were necessarily led to
worship them: hence, they say, in whatsoever is anything of medicine, in
it is nothing of the way of the Amorites; by which they mean nothing
else than this, that everything is lawful in which there appears a
natural reason for it; and on the contrary, all others are unlawful: but
here respect is had not to magical operations but to incestuous
marriages, which prevailed among that people, and which they might have
received from their ancestor Canaan, who learned them from his father
Ham, of whom Berosus (s) writes, that even before the flood he corrupted
mankind; asserting and putting it in practice, that men might lie with
their mothers, sisters, daughters, and with males and brutes, or any
other, for which he was cast out by Noah:

neither shall ye walk in their ordinances: which they ordained,
appointed, and settled, for they were such a people the Psalmist speaks
of, which framed mischief or wickedness by a law, [Psa
94:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#002); so Diodorus Siculus says of the
incestuous marriage before referred to, and which the above writer,
Berosus, derives from Ham their ancestor, that they are said "to pass
into a law"; but Aben Ezra puts another sense on these words, let no man
use himself to walk in this way until it becomes an ordinance or statute
unto him; custom is second nature, and in course of time has the force
of a law, wherefore bad customs should be strictly guarded against.

\(q\) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 23. (r) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 37. (s)
Antiqu. l. 3. fol. 25.

[Leviticus 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 18:4</span></span>

Ye shall do my judgments,.... Which are just and right, and according to
the rules of justice and equity; these are things, as Jarchi observes,
which are said in the law with judgment, or are laws framed with the
highest reason, even by the judgment of God himself, whose judgment is
always according to truth: Aben Ezra thinks, these are the judicial laws
in [Exo 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#001); but though they may
include them, they have more particular respect to the following laws:

and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: which he had ordained and
appointed of his own will and pleasure, which Jarchi calls the decree of
the king, or which he decreed and determined as a king, having absolute
power over his subjects to enact and enjoin what he pleased; wherefore
some think these refer to ceremonial laws, which depended upon the will
of the lawgiver, and were not founded in any natural sense or reason,
wherefore it follows:

I am the Lord your God: who had a right to make what laws he pleased,
being their Sovereign, and which they in gratitude as well as in justice
ought to obey, he being their God, their covenant God, who had done
great and good things for them.

[Leviticus 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 18:5</span></span>

Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments,.... The same as
before; these they were to keep in their minds and memories, and to
observe them and do them:

which if a man do he shall live in them; live a long life in the land of
Canaan, in great happiness and prosperity, see [Deu
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#020); for as for eternal life, that
was never intended to be had, nor was it possible it could be had and
enjoyed by obedience to the law, which fallen man is unable to keep; but
is what was graciously promised and provided the covenant of grace,
before the world was, to come through Christ, as a free gift to all that
believe in him, see [Gal 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011); though
some Jewish writers interpret this of eternal life, as Jarchi, Aben
Ezra, and Ben Gersom:

I am the Lord; that has enjoined these statutes and judgments, and
promised life to the doers of them, able and faithful to perform what is
promised.

[Leviticus 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 18:6</span></span>

None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him,.... Or to
all "the rest of his flesh" (t), which together with his make one flesh,
who are of the same flesh and blood with him, and are united together in
the bonds of consanguinity; and such, with respect to a man, are his
mother, sister, and daughter; his mother, of whom he was born, his
sister, who lay in and sprung from the same "venter" he did, and his
daughter, who is his own flesh; and with respect to a woman, her father
brother, and son, who are in the same degree of relation, and both sexes
are included in this prohibition; for though in the original text it is
"a man, a man" (u), yet as it takes in every man, so every woman: hence,
as Jarchi observes, it is expressed in the plural number, "do not ye
approach", to caution both male and female; and it is also understood by
the Talmudists (w) of Gentiles as well as Israelites, for they ask, what
is the meaning of the phrase "a man, a man?" the design of it is, they
say, to comprehend the Gentiles, who are equally cautioned against
incests as the Israelites; and indeed the inhabitants of the land of
Canaan are said to defile the land with the incests and other
abominations hereafter mentioned, and for which they were driven out of
it: now when man and woman are forbidden to "approach" to those of the
same flesh and blood with them, the sense is not that they may not come
into each other's company, or make use of any civil or friendly
salutations, or have a free and familiar conversation with each other,
provided that modesty and chastity be preserved; but they are not so to
draw near as to lie with, or have carnal knowledge of one another, in
which sense the phrase is used, [Gen
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004); or to tempt to it or solicit it,
and as it follows, which explains the meaning of it:

to uncover their nakedness; that is, those parts, which, by a contrary
way of speaking, are so called, which should never be naked or exposed
to view; but should be always covered, as nature teaches to do, and as
our first parents did, when they perceived themselves naked, and were
ashamed, [Gen 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007), this phrase
signifies the same as to lie with another, or have carnal knowledge of
them, wherefore the following laws are generally understood of
incestuous marriages; for if such an action is not to be done between
persons standing in such a relation, as here in general, and afterwards
more particularly described, then there ought to be no intermarriages
between them; and if such marriages are forbidden, and such actions
unlawful in a married state, then much more in an unmarried one;
wherefore the several following instances are so many breaches of the
seventh command, [Exo 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014), and so
many explications and illustrations of it, and consequently of a moral
nature, and binding upon all men, Jews and Gentiles:

I am the Lord; that gave this caution, and enjoined this prohibition,
and would greatly resent and severely revenge the neglect of it: the
particulars follow.

\(t\) "ad omnes reliquias carnis suae", Montanus; "ad quascunque
reliquias carnis suae", Tigurine version. (u) "vir, vir", Montanus,
Vatablus, Drusius. (w) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 57. 2. T. Hieros.
Kiddushin, fol. 58. 2, 3.

[Leviticus 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 18:7</span></span>

The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother,

shall thou not uncover,.... By uncovering a father's nakedness is not
meant anything similar to what befell Noah, which Ham beheld with
pleasure, and the other two sons of Noah studiously and with reverence
to their father covered; nor any sodomitical practice of a son with his
father; as Gersom interprets it; but the same is meant by both phrases,
and the words are by many interpreters thus rendered, "the nakedness of
thy father, that is (x), the nakedness of thy mother thou shalt not
uncover": for what is the mother's is the father's, and uncovering the
one is uncovering the other; wherefore the mother only is made mention
of in the next clause, where the reason of this prohibition is given:

she is thy mother, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness; that is, not
lie with her, nor marry her, because she is his mother that bore him, of
whom he was born, and therefore ought not to become his wife, or be
taken into his bed; such a marriage must be incestuous and shocking;
such were the marriages of Oedipus with his mother Jocasta, and of Nero
with Agrippina; though the words will bear another sense, that a woman
may not marry her father, which may be meant by the first clause, nor a
man his mother, intended in the next; and where indeed it is not
expressed, females in the same degree of relation are included with the
males, and under the same prohibition; and so the Targum of Jonathan
explains this, a woman shall not have to do with her father, nor a man
with his mother; as Lot's two daughters had with him, and the Persians
with their mothers; among whom such incestuous marriages and copulations
were frequent, and especially among their Magi (y) who might not perform
their office unless they had lain with their mothers, sisters, and
daughters (z), or were begotten in such incest (a): a man guilty of such
incestuous copulations was cursed by the law of Moses, [Deu
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#020); this is contrary to nature,
what the brute creation abhors; a camel will not cover its dam:
Aristotle (b) reports of one who was betrayed into it by his keeper,
who, after he had discovered it, fixed his teeth in him and slew him;
and he also relates of a horse after that he had ignorantly done the
same, ran away in great haste and cast himself down from a precipice
headlong.

\(x\) "id est, nuditatem vel pudenda", Vatablus, Fagius, Piscator. (y)
Sex. Empir. Pyrrh. l. 3. c. 24. (z) Patricides apud Selden. de jure
natur. Gent. l. 5. c. 11. p. 624. (a) "Nam magus ex matre et gnato
nascatur oportet." Catull. Epigr. 91. (b) Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 47.

[Leviticus 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 18:8</span></span>

The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover,.... That is,
who is indeed a man's father's wife, but not his own mother, but a
stepmother or mother-in-law; or otherwise this law would coincide with
the former; a man lying with such an one is accursed by the law, [Deu
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#023); such an incestuous copulation
was that of Reuben with Bilhah, and Absalom with his father's concubines
or secondary wives, and such an incestuous marriage was that of the
Corinthians, [Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001); and of
Antiochus Soter, king of Syria, with Stratonice his mother-in-law (c):
and even it was criminal to do this after a father's death, as Jarchi
interprets it; and though she was only betrothed, and not married, and
the father dead after such betrothing; as Gersom; nay, though she was
divorced by the father, yet was not lawful for the son to have, no, not
after his death:

it is thy father's nakedness; being espoused to him, and so one flesh
with him; and the son and father being one flesh, such a mixture must be
unlawful; and since then the nakedness of a mother-in-law is the
father's, then surely that of an own mother's must be so likewise, which
confirms a sense given of it in [Lev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007), Cicero (d) exclaims against such
marriages as incredible and unheard of, as instances of unbridled lust
and singular impudence.

\(c\) Vid. Julian. in Misopogon, p. 72, &c. (d) Orat. 14. pro A.
Cluentio Avito.

[Leviticus 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 18:9</span></span>

The nakedness of thy sister,.... To lie with one in so near a relation
is exceeding criminal, and for which the law curses a man, [Deu
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#022); and to marry her is not lawful;
for though it was necessary for the propagation of mankind that a man
should marry his sister, for who else could Cain and Abel marry? yet
afterwards, when there was an increase of mankind, and there were people
enough remote from each other, it became unlawful for persons in such
near ties of consanguinity to marry with each other; though the
Egyptians did, in imitation of Isis and Osiris (e), and so the Persians,
following the example of Cambyses (f):

the daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother; whether she
is a sister both by father and mother's side, or whether only by the
fathers side and not the mother's, as Sarah was to Abraham, [Gen
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012); or only by the mother's side
and not the father's:

whether she be born at home or born abroad; not whether born and brought
up in his and her father's house, or born and brought up in another
place and province; though there were some, as Aben Ezra observes, that
so interpreted it, according to the sense of the word in [Gen
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#023); but rather the sense is, as
that writer gives it, whether born according to the law of the house of
Israel, after espousals and marriage, or without it; that is, whether
begotten in lawful marriage or not, whether a legitimate offspring or
spurious, born in adultery and whoredom, whether on the father or
mother's side; so the Targum of Jonathan, whom thy father begat of
another woman, or of thy mother, or whom thy mother bore or brought
forth, of thy father, or of another man; and to the same purpose
Onkelos:

even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover; neither lie with, or have
carnal knowledge of, nor marry one or the other.

\(e\) Diodor. Sicul. l. 1. p. 23. (f) Herodot. Thalia, sive, l. 3. c.
31.

[Leviticus 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 18:10</span></span>

The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter,....
A man might not marry his granddaughter, whether a descendant of his son
or of his daughter, nor any further off descending from him in a right
line, not his great-granddaughter, and so on; and if he might not marry
his granddaughter, much less his own daughter, as Jarchi observes, for
the relation is still nearer; therefore that being prohibited, this in
course must, though not mentioned:

even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover; neither debauch nor marry
such an one:

for theirs is thine own nakedness; which sprung from his, being the
descendants either of his son or daughter; the Targum of Jonathan
is,"for they are as thy nakedness,''his own flesh and blood.

[Leviticus 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 18:11</span></span>

The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter,.... Either the daughter
of his father by another wife, which seems to be countenanced by what
follows:

begotten of thy father, she is thy sister; but then this coincides with
what is prohibited, [Lev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009), "the
daughter of thy father"; that is, by another woman than a man's mother,
only with this difference, that there is added, or "daughter of thy
mother", that is, by another man than a man's own father; so that there
is a prohibition of a sister whether by father or mother's side; here
only as by the father's side, and so is only a part of that law; and, as
some think, is for the confirmation of it, as Aben Ezra observes; or
else the sense, as he thinks, is, that if a man marries a woman, and she
has a little daughter by a former husband, that daughter may not be
given in marriage to his son; and so the Septuagint version finishes
this clause first, before it gives the other, which it considers as
distinct from it, thus, "the shame of thy father's, wife's daughter thou
shalt not uncover"; and then makes a distinct law of the latter; "she
that is begotten of thy father is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her
shame"; but then this last falls in with [Lev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009), the Sadducees, as Aben Ezra also
observes, by whom he means the Karaites, interpret it not of a mother's
daughter, but of one brought up and educated by a man's father, and so
is his adopted daughter, whom his son might not marry; and thus with the
Romans it is said (g), that adoptive kindred hindered marriage between
parents and children altogether; and among brethren so far forth as the
loss of freedom did not intervene: some understand this law in this
light, as De Dieu, that in [Lev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009);
the son of a second marriage is forbidden to marry with an half sister
of the first marriage, whether she is the father's daughter, that is,
which the father had by his deceased wife, or the mother's daughter,
that is, which his mother had by a deceased husband; but here the son of
a first marriage is forbidden with a half sister of a second marriage,
which his mother-in-law has bore to his father, and is therefore called
"the daughter of thy father's wife"; that is, of thy stepmother, but so
the same may be said to be "begotten of thy father"; and therefore one
begotten in a former marriage may not be understood; but then as this
forbids the marriage of a brother with a sister, that is, of the same
father, though not of the same mother, it falls in within the former
law; wherefore some (h) have been of opinion, that this law forbids a
man to marry the daughter of a woman whom his father has taken to wife,
who was his deceased brother's wife, upon the law in [Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005); by which marriage she became the
father's daughter, and the son's sister; wherefore they take the phrase,
"begotten of thy father", to signify "being akin" to thy father; which,
if it can be established, makes a distinct law: Jarchi observes, on this
phrase, "the daughter of thy father's wife","this teaches that a man is
not guilty concerning his sister that is by an handmaid or stranger;
therefore it is said, the daughter of thy father's wife, namely, one
that was fit for marriage."

thou shalt not uncover her nakedness; See Gill on [Lev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009).

\(g\) Paulus in Mosaic. & Roman. Leg. Collat. tit. 6. a Pithaeo. (h)
Bertram. Lucubrat. Franktal. c. 6. Pool in loc.

[Leviticus 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 18:12</span></span>

Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister,.... His
aunt by his father's side, an instance of which we have in Amram, [Exo
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#020); and Maimonides says (i), an aunt
was forbidden whether she was a father's sister in lawful wedlock or in
fornication:

she is thy father's near kinswoman; or, the rest of thy father (k); the
residue of his flesh, one of the same flesh and blood with him;
wherefore, as he could not marry her himself, so his son likewise was
too near akin to enter into such a relation with her.

\(i\) Hilchot Issure Biah, c. 2. sect. 5. (k) "reliquiarum patris tui",
Tigurine version.

[Leviticus 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 18:13</span></span>

Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister,.... Which
is the same relation as before, an aunt by the mother's side; wherefore,
if such a marriage was unlawful, this must also, and for the same
reason:

for she is thy mother's near kinswoman; the same phraseology is used
here as in the preceding verse; See Gill on [Lev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#012); and by the same rule a woman
might not marry her uncle, whether by father or mother's side, the
relation being the same, and this reaches to great-uncle and great-aunt;
instances of women marrying their uncles, and men their aunts, among the
Heathens, have been given, as among the Persians and Lacedaemonians by
Herodotus (l), and among the Romans by Tacitus (m), but were, in his
time, new things with the latter.

\(l\) Erato, sive, l. 6. c. 71. Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 224, 239. (m)
Annal. l. 12. c. 5, 6, 7.

[Leviticus 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 18:14</span></span>

Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother,.... Which
Gersom understands of committing sodomy with him, on which account he
was doubly guilty, partly because of lying with a male, and partly
because of uncovering the nakedness of his father's brother; but it
rather seems at first sight as if the sense was, that a woman should not
marry her father's brother, that is, her uncle, as a man might not marry
his aunt, whether by father or mother's side, as in [Lev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#012); but Jarchi directs to a better
sense than either, when he asks, what is his nakedness? in answer to
which he recites the following clause as explanative of it:

thou shall not approach to his wife; in the use of the bed, as the
Targum of Jonathan adds, that is, to lie with her, her husband being
living, or to marry her, he being dead:

she is thine aunt: even as a father's or mother's sister, only they are
aunts by blood, this by marriage or affinity: in the Targums of Onkelos
and Jonathan it is, she is the wife of thy father's brother; and as Aben
Ezra, she is accounted as thine aunt, and so marriage with her
prohibited; and the same holds good of a father's brother's wife, which
being not mentioned, the same writer says, we have need of the tradition
which expresses that and also of a father's sister's husband; for if
marriage with a father's brother's wife is unlawful, then marriage with
a father's sister's husband must be so too; for a father's sister's
husband stands in the same degree or line of affinity as a father's
brother's wife; and it is a sure rule, that in whatsoever degree or line
of affinity males are forbid to marry females, in the same females are
forbid to marry males.

[Leviticus 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 18:15</span></span>

Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law,.... Shall
not he with her in his son's lifetime, or marry her after his death:

she is that son's wife; and so one flesh with him, and who is of the
same flesh and blood with his father, and therefore the nearness of the
relation forbids such incestuous copulation or marriage:

thou shall not uncover her nakedness; or have carnal knowledge of her,
whether in the life or after the death of his son, even then marriage
with her is not lawful.

[Leviticus 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 18:16</span></span>

Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife,.... Neither
debauch her nor after the death of the brother marry her, that is,
unless he dies without issue; and then, by another law, he was obliged
to marry her, [Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005); hence the
Targum of Jonathan adds; by way of explanation."in the life of thy
brother, or after his death, if he has children,''but then that law was
but an exception from this general rule, and so did not make it void in
other respects, but bound it the more strongly; and besides, it was a
special and peculiar law to the Jews, until the Messiah came to make it
manifest of what tribe and family he came; and the reason of it ceasing,
the law itself is ceased, and so neither binding on Jews nor Gentiles:
hence John the Baptist boldly told Herod to his face, that it was not
lawful for him to have his brother's wife [Mat
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003); and even such marriages were
condemned by the very Heathens: Dionysius Halicarnassensis (n) relates,
that Lucius Tarquinius, Superbus, his brother being removed by poison,
took Tullia to wife, whom his brother Aruntus had before married; but
the historian calls it , "an unholy marriage", and abominable both among
Greeks and Barbarians: Plutarch also reports (o), that Marcus Crassus
married the wife of his deceased brother; but such marriages are
condemned by the same writer, as they are by the ancient Christians in
their councils and canons (p); now by this same law, if it is not lawful
for a man to have his brother's wife, then it is not lawful for her to
have her sister's husband; or, in other words, if it is not lawful for a
woman to marry two brothers, then it is not lawful for a man to marry
two sisters: the case of Jacob will not countenance such a marriage,
since he was imposed upon and deceived; and such marriages have also
been disapproved of by the Heathens and Christians: Honorius the emperor
married two daughters of Stilico, one after another, but the unhappy
exit of both sisters showed that those marriages were not approved of by
God, for they both died premature deaths, leaving no children (q):

it is thy brother's nakedness; that is, his wife is, being by marriage
one flesh with him, and his brother being so to him, the relation is too
near to intermarry, and more especially when there is issue by the
first, which connects them strongly.

\(n\) Hist. l. 4. (o) In Vita M. Crassi. (p) Canon Apostol. can. 19.
Concil. Neocaesar. can. 2. (q) Zonaras, l. 3. apud Zanchium de
Sponsalibus, l. 4. c. 1. p. 786.

[Leviticus 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 18:17</span></span>

Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter,....
That is, if a man marries a woman, and she has a daughter, which is the
man's daughter-in-law, after the death of his wife he may not marry this
daughter; for this daughter is of the same flesh with her mother, who
became one flesh with the man she married, and therefore his relation to
her daughter is too near to marry her: Jarchi says, if he does not marry
the woman, but only deflower her, it is free for him to marry her
daughter; but Aben Ezra says, if he has lain with the mother, the
daughter is forbidden; however, if he married either of them, the other
was forbidden; he could not marry them both, neither in the lifetime of
them both, nor after the death of either of them:

neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter,
to uncover her nakedness; not any of her granddaughters, either in the
line of her son or daughter; that is, might not lie with either of them,
or marry them, and much less then marry her own daughter, these being a
further remove from her:

for they are her near kinswomen; one or other of them, even every one of
them, "the rest" and residue "of her" (r), of her flesh, who together
made one flesh with her; and therefore not to be married to her husband,
either in her life, or after her death:

it is wickedness: a very great wickedness, abominable in the sight of
God, and to be detested by man as vile and impious; it is whoredom, as
the Targum of Jonathan renders it.

\(r\) "reliquiae sunt ipsae", Tigurine version.

[Leviticus 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 18:18</span></span>

Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister,.... Both of them together,
as Jarchi; two sisters at one and the same time; so the Targum of
Jonathan,"a woman in the life of her sister thou shall not take;''that
is, in marriage, that sister being his wife; for the sense of the
Targumist can never be that a man might not take a woman for his wife,
she having a sister living, but not to take one sister to another, or
marry his first wife's sister, whether, as Maimonides (s) says, she was
sister by father or mother's side, in marriage or in fornication:

to vex her, to uncover her nakedness; two reasons are given, why, though
polygamy, or having more wives than one, was connived at, yet it was not
allowed that a man should have two sisters; partly, because they would
be more apt to quarrel, and be more jealous and impatient of one
another, if more favour was shown or thought to be shown to one more
than another; and partly, because it was a filthy and unbecoming action
to uncover the nakedness of one, or lie with one so nearly related to
his wife:

besides her in her life time; from whence some have concluded, and so
many of the Jewish writers (t), that a man might marry his wife's sister
after her death, but not while she was living; but the phrase, "in her
lifetime", is not to be joined to the phrase "thou shall not take a
wife"; but to the phrases more near, "to vex her in her lifetime", or as
long as she lived, and "to uncover her nakedness by her" (u), on the
side of her, as long as she lived; for that a wife's sister may be
married to her husband, even after her death, cannot be lawful, as
appears from the general prohibition, [Lev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#006); "none of you shall approach to
him that is near of kin to him"; and yet it is certain that a wife's
sister is near akin to a man; and from the prohibition of marriage with
an uncle's wife, with the daughter of a son-in-law, or of a
daughter-in-law, [Lev 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#014); now a
wife's sister is nearer of kin than either of these; and from the
confusion that must follow in case of issue by both, not only of degrees
but appellation of kindred; one and the same man, who as a father of
children, and the husband of their mother's sister, stands in the
relation both of a father and an uncle to his own children; the woman to
the children of the deceased sister stands in the relation both of a
stepmother, and of a mother's sister or aunt, and to the children that
were born of her, she stands in the relation both of a mother and an
uncle's wife; and the two sorts of children are both brethren and own
cousins by the mother's side, but of this See Gill on [Lev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#016) for more; some understand this
of a prohibition of polygamy, rendering the words, "thou shall not take
one wife to another"; but the former sense is best; polygamy being not
expressly forbidden by the law of Moses, but supposed in it, and winked
at by it; and words of relation being always used in all these laws of
marriage, in a proper and not in an improper sense: there is a pretty
good deal of agreement between these laws of Moses and the Roman laws;
by an edict of Dioclesian and Maximian (w), it was made unlawful to
contract matrimony with a daughter, with a niece, with a niece's
daughter, with a grandmother, with a great-grandmother, with an aunt by
the father's side, with an aunt by the mother's side, with a sister's
daughter, and a niece from her, with a daughter-in-law to a second
husband, with a mother-in-law, with a wife or husband's mother, and with
a son's wife; and several of these laws are recommended by Phocylydes,
an Heathen poet, at least in a poem that hears his name; and the
marriage of a wife's sister after her death has been condemned by
several Christian councils (x).

\(s\) Hilchot Issure Biah, c. 2. sect. 9. (t) Misn. Yebamot, c. 4. sect.
13. Vajikra Rabba, sect. 22. fol. 164. 1. Peaicta, Ben Gersom in loc.
(u) "apud vel prope eam"; so is sometimes used; see Nold. part. Concord.
Ebr. p. 691. (w) Apud Mosaic. & Roman. Leg. Collat. ut supra. (tit. 6. a
Pithaeo) (x) Concil. Illiber. can. 61. Aurat. can. 17. Auxer. can. 30.

[Leviticus 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 18:19</span></span>

Also thou shall not approach unto a woman,.... Not even a man to his own
wife, and much less to another woman:

to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her
uncleanness; in her monthly courses; and the time of her separation from
her husband on that account was seven days, [Lev
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019); if a man lay with a woman when
in such circumstances, they were both to be cut off from their people,
[Lev 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018); and such an action is
reckoned among sins, and uncleanness of the worst sort, [Eze
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#010).

[Leviticus 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 18:20</span></span>

Moreover, thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour's wife,....
Which is adultery, and a breach of the seventh command, [Exo
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014),

to defile thyself with her; not only adultery is a defiling a man's
wife, as it is sometimes called, but the adulterer defiles himself: all
sin is of a defiling nature, but especially this, which defiles a man
both in soul and body, and brings a blot and stain upon his character,
which shall not be wiped off, [Pro
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032).

[Leviticus 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 18:21</span></span>

And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
Molech,.... The name of an image or idol, according to Aben Ezra, who
observes, that their wise men interpret it as a general name for
everyone whom they made to reign over them; and it is right, he says,
that it is the abomination of the children of Ammon, and so the same
with Milcom, [Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005); and with Baal,
as appears from [Jer 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035); and they
are both of much the same signification, the one signifies a king, the
other a lord; and perhaps is the same with the Melicarthus of
Sanchoniatho (y), who is also Hercules; to whom Pliny says (z) that the
Phoenicians offered human sacrifices every year: of Molech; see Gill on
[Jer 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031), [Amo
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013); by "seed" is meant children and
offspring; and because the word "fire" is not in the original text,
some, as Aben Ezra observes, explain the phrase, "let to pass through",
of their causing them to pass from the law of God to the religion of
Molech, or of devoting them to his service and worship; but the word
"fire" is rightly supplied, as it may be from [Deu
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010); and the same writer says, the
phrase to pass through is the same as to burn; but though this they
sometimes did, even burn their infants, and sacrificed them to idols,
[Ch2 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003); yet this seems to be
something short of that, and to be done in the manner, as Jarchi and
other Jewish writers (a) relate; who say, the father delivered his son
to the priests (of Molech) and they made two great fires, and caused the
son to pass on foot between the two fires, which was a kind of a
lustration, and so of a dedication of them to the idol; though it must
be owned that both were done; yea, that both the phrases of passing
through the fire, and of burning, are used promiscuously of the same,
see [Kg2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003); compared with [Ch2
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003) and also [Eze
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020); and they might be both done at
different times, or the one previous and in order to the other; and
perhaps they might cause the child so often and so long to pass through
the fire, as that at last it was burnt and destroyed:

neither shall thou profane the name of thy God; who had given them
children, and to whom they ought to have devoted them, and in whose
service they should have trained them up to the honour of his name; but
instead of that profaned it, by the above idolatrous and cruel usages:

I am the Lord; who would avenge such a profanation of his name.

\(y\) Apud, Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. p. 38. (z) Nat. Hist. l. 36.
c. 5. (a) Ben Melech in loc. Kimchii Sepher Shorash. rad.

[Leviticus 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 18:22</span></span>

Thou shall not lie with mankind as with womankind,.... By carnal
knowledge of them, and carnal copulation with them, and mixing bodies in
like manner: this is the sin commonly called sodomy, from the
inhabitants of Sodom, greatly addicted to it, for which their city was
destroyed by fire: those that are guilty of this sin, are, by the
apostle, called "abusers of themselves with mankind", [Co1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009),

it is abomination; it is so to God, as the above instance of his
vengeance shows, and ought to be abominable to men, as being not only
contrary to the law of God, but even contrary to nature itself, and what
is never to be observed among brute creatures.

[Leviticus 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 18:23</span></span>

Neither shall thou lie with any beast, to defile thyself therewith,....
A female one, as Aben Ezra notes, as a mare, cow, or ewe, or any other
beast, small or great, as Ben Gersom, or whether tame or wild, as
Maimonides (b); and even fowls are comprehended, as the same writers
observe:

neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: that
is, stand before a beast, and by a lascivious and obscene behaviour
solicit the beast to a congress with her, and then lie down after the
manner of four-footed beasts, as the word signifies, that it may have
carnal copulation with her: for a man to lie with a beast is most
shocking and detestable, but for a woman to solicit such an unnatural
mixture is most horrible and astonishing: perhaps reference may be had
to a most shocking practice among the Egyptians, from among whom the
Israelites were lately come, and whose doings they were not to imitate,
[Lev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#003); and which may account for
this law, as Bishop Patrick observes: at Mendes, in Egypt, a goat was
worshipped, as has been remarked [Lev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007); and where the women used to lie
with such creatures, as Strabo (c) and Aelianus (d) from Pindar have
related; yea, Herodotus (e) reports, of his own knowledge, that a goat
had carnal copulation with a woman openly, in the view of all, in his
time; and though that creature is a most lascivious and lustful one,
yet, as Bochart (f) from Plutarch has observed, when it is provoked by
many and beautiful women, is not inclined and ready to come into their
embraces, but shows some abhorrence of it: nature in brutes, as that
learned man observes, is often more prevalent in them than in mankind:

it is confusion; a mixing of the seed of man and beast together, a
blending of different kinds of creatures, a perverting the order of
nature, and introducing the utmost confusion of beings, from whence
monsters in nature may arise.

\(b\) Hilchot Issure Biah, c. 1. sect. 16. (c) Geograph. l. 17. p. 551.
(d) De Animal. l. 7. c. 19. (e) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 46. (f)
Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 53. col. 642.

[Leviticus 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 18:24</span></span>

Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things,.... In incestuous
copulations and marriages, in adultery, corporeal and spiritual, and
bestiality:

for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you;
that is, the seven nations of the land of Canaan, which God was about to
eject out of their land to make room for the Israelites, and that on
account of the above shocking vices which abounded among them; so that
in some sense the land they dwelt upon was defiled by them, and called
for vengeance on them, as even loathing its inhabitants, as afterwards
suggested.

[Leviticus 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 18:25</span></span>

And the land is defiled,.... The inhabitants of it, with the
immoralities and idolatries before mentioned:

therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it; or punish the
inhabitants that are on it for their sins:

and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants; as a stomach loaded
with corrupt and bad food it has taken in, nauseates it, and cannot bear
and retain it, but casts it up, and never receives it again; so the land
of Canaan is represented as loathing its inhabitants, and as having an
aversion to them, and indignation against them, and as not being able to
bear them, but entirely willing to be rid of them and throw them out of
their places in it, never to be admitted more, being as nauseous and as
useless as the cast of a man's stomach; see [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016).

[Leviticus 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 18:26</span></span>

Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments,.... Before
observed to them, whether of a ceremonial nature, and enjoined them
according to his sovereign will and pleasure; or of a moral nature, and
founded in justice and equity, and so worthy of their regard, and
obligatory upon them; as well as in their own nature they recommended
themselves to their regard, as being the reverse of those loathsome and
abominable things before dehorted from:

and shall not commit any of these abominations; such as incest,
adultery, idolatry, and bestiality, which are in themselves abominable
things, execrable to God, and to be detested by men:

neither any of your own nation; that belonged to any of their own
tribes, or should be born to them in the land of Canaan when they came
thither, and were properly natives of it:

nor any stranger that sojourneth among you; any proselyte, and
especially a proselyte of righteousness, who conformed to the Jewish
religion, and had laid himself under obligation to do everything that
was binding upon an Israelite.

[Leviticus 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 18:27</span></span>

For all these abominations have the men of the land done,.... The then
present inhabitants of Canaan, who dwelt in it before the Israelites
came into it; these were guilty of unclean copulations, of incestuous,
marriages, of fornication and adultery, and of bestiality and idolatry:

which were before you; lived in the land before them, had long dwelt
there, but now about to be cast out for their sins; and therefore they
who were going to succeed them should take warning by them, lest,
committing the same sins, they should be cast out likewise:

and the land is defiled; See Gill on [Lev
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025).

[Leviticus 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 18:28</span></span>

That the land spew not you out also, when ye defile it,.... By sinning
on it, and so rendering it obnoxious to the curse of God, as the whole
earth originally was for the sin of man; and so be cast out of it, as
Adam was out of paradise, and as the Israelites might expect to be cast
out of Canaan, as the old inhabitants of it had been:

as it spewed out the nations that were before you; which for the
certainty of it is spoken of as done, though it was as yet future; and
what the Lord did is ascribed to the land, the more to aggravate their
crying sins and abominations, for which the land mourned, and which it
could not bear.

[Leviticus 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 18:29</span></span>

For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations,.... Before
particularly forbid, any of them, be it which it will, they all being
very heinous and vile, and especially these last mentioned:

even the souls that commit them; whether male or female, as Jarchi
observes; for the above things concern them both for the most part,
however some one, and some another; and though most, if not all the said
crimes are committed by the members of the body, yet since under the
influence and direction of the soul, the commission of them is
attributed to that, and the punishment threatened respects both:

shall be cut off from among the people; be removed from their church
state, and deprived of ecclesiastical privileges, and from their civil
state, and reckoned no more of the commonwealth of Israel; and if known
and convicted, to be punished by the civil magistrate, and if not, by
the immediate hand of God.

[Leviticus 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 18:30</span></span>

Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance,.... Whatever the Lord appointed
them and commanded, whether contained in this chapter, or elsewhere:

that ye commit not anyone of these abominable customs; for attending to
the ordinances of God, and a close in them, they would be preserved from
the commission of such abominable things, and giving in to such
detestable customs as before warned against:

which were committed before you; by the inhabitants of Canaan; and by
the punishment on them for them they might be deterred from doing the
same:

and that ye defile not yourselves therein; for though the land is so
often said to be defiled, yet, properly speaking, and chiefly, it was
the inhabitants that were defiled by their abominable customs; and so
would the Israelites also, should they observe the same, and thereby
become abominable in the sight of God, and incur his displeasure, and be
liable to his vengeance:

I am the Lord your God; who had a sovereign authority over them, and a
right to give out what commands he pleased, both negative and
affirmative; and to whom they were under obligations to obey, as the God
of nature and providence, from whom they had their beings, and were
supported in them, and as their covenant God, who had bestowed special
and spiritual favours on them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 19](lev019)

</div>
