<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev019)  [Next](lev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 20

In this chapter several laws are, repeated, enforced with a penalty
annexed to them, and the breach them made capital, to deter from it, as
giving seed to Molech, [Lev 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#001);
going after such that have familiar spirits, or are wizards, [Lev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#006); by shunning which, and other
sins, a regard would be shown to holiness, [Lev
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#007); such as cursing parents, [Lev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009); committing adultery, [Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010); incestuous copulations, and
marriages, and beastly actions, [Lev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#011); all which it became the
Israelites to avoid, lest, when come into the land of Canaan, they
should be cast out of it, as the old inhabitants were for the same
things, [Lev 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#022); and therefore,
that they might appear to be a distinct people from others, they were to
put a difference between clean and unclean creatures, [Lev
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#025); and the chapter is closed with
a law, making it death for any person to have a familiar spirit, or to
be a wizard, [Lev 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027).

[Leviticus 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 20:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After he had delivered the above laws
to him in the preceding chapter, he added penalties, to many of them, or
declared what punishment should be inflicted on the transgressors of
them:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 20:2</span></span>

Again thou shalt say to the children of Israel,.... The body of the
people by their elders, and the heads of their tribes; for the following
laws were binding on them all:

whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that
sojourn in Israel; everyone of the people of Israel, of whatsoever age,
sex, or condition of life: and not they only, but the strangers and
proselytes; and not the proselytes of righteousness only, but the
proselytes of the gate, who, as well as the others, were to shun
idolatry, and other impieties and immoralities after mentioned:

that giveth any of his seed unto Molech; which Aben Ezra interprets of
lying with an idolatrous woman, or a worshipper of Molech, the
abomination or idol of the Ammonites, [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007); of which see [Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021); but more than that is here
intended, or even than causing their seed or offspring to pass through
the fire to Molech, as in the place referred to; more is meant by it
than a lustration of them, or a dedicating them to Molech, by delivering
them to his priests to lead them between two fires for that purpose, but
even the sacrificing of them to him; and so the Targum of Jonathan seems
to understand it, which is,"that makes (or sacrifices) of his seed
Molech to be burnt in the fire:''for that the Phoenicians or Canaanites,
whose customs the Israelites were in danger of imitating, and therefore
cautioned against, did sacrifice human creatures, and these the dearest
to them, even their beloved and only begotten children, to Saturn, is
certain, as Porphyry (y) and Eusebius (z) affirm, or to Hercules, as
Pliny (a), and both the same with Molech, or the sun:

he shall surely be put to death; by the hand of the civil magistrate,
which death was to be by stoning, as follows:

the people of the land shall stone him with stones: that is, the people
of the house of Israel, as both the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan;
such as lived in that part of the country where the idolater lived, and
where he committed the sin, or was condemned for it; of the manner of
stoning; see Gill on [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058).

\(y\) De Abstinent. l. 2. c. 56. (z) De laudibus Constantin. c. 13. p.
646. Vid. Suidam in voce (a) Nat. Hist. l. 36. c. 5.

[Leviticus 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 20:3</span></span>

And I will set my face against that man,.... Express resentment, anger,
wrath, and indignation at him, see [Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016),

and will cut him off from among his people: that is, supposing him to
have been guilty of the above horrid crime, and there being not
sufficient evidence given of it by witnesses, or the magistrates
negligent in doing their duty; and the matter being known to God the
omniscient, he, according this declaration, would deal with him himself,
and cut him off out of the land of the living, from among his relations,
friends, and neighbours, by his own immediate hand; otherwise the law
before provided a penalty, which is death by stoning, whereby he would
be effectually cut off from his people, and deprived of all natural,
civil, and religious privileges in this life, and sent into everlasting
punishment in another, unless forgiving grace should be vouchsafed:

because he hath given of his seed to Molech; an iniquity to be punished
by the judge, and deserving of everlasting wrath and destruction:

to defile my sanctuary; not by doing this horrid action in it, but by
coming into it, having done it; or by offering sacrifice in another
place than where God had commanded, as well as such a sacrifice as was
abominable to him, sacrifice being to be offered nowhere but on the
altar of the Lord in the sanctuary. Jarchi interprets this of the
congregation of Israel, which was sanctified to the Lord, in the midst
of which this wickedness was committed, and with which they were
polluted:

and to profane my holy name: by sacrificing to an idol, when sacrifice
should be offered to God; and such a sacrifice as would cause the name
of God, and his holy laws, and true religion, to be blasphemed and evil,
spoken of among the Gentiles, [Rom
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023).

[Leviticus 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 20:4</span></span>

And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the
man,.... That is, the people of the house of Israel, as the Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan; if the friends, relations, and neighbours of such
a man, though they know what he is about to do, or has done, yet they
shut their eyes wilfully, or look another way; or, however, wink and
connive at his wickedness, and will not discover him, and bear witness
against him; or if a court of judicature, before whom he comes, does not
take the evidence of his crime, nor condemn for it, or are negligent in
punishing him as the law directs, a gift having blinded their eyes, or
they careless and remiss in their duty:

when he giveth his seed unto Molech; a crime so heinous and abominable:

and kill him not; do not bring witness against him, so as that he may be
put to death, or do not upon the evidence given condemn him to death, or
do not take care to have sentence executed, by stoning him to death.

[Leviticus 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 20:5</span></span>

Then I will set my face against that man,.... That man that sees him do
the fact, and winks at it, or the judge that connives at him, and will
not condemn him, as well as the man that has committed the iniquity:

and against his family; either the family of the witness, who could and
should have testified against him, or of the judge negligent of his
office, or of the man himself, whose family must be privy to so shocking
an action, and were abettors of it, and aiders and assisters in it; and
so Onkelos renders it, "and his helpers":

and will cut him off: the head of the family, whether judge, witness, or
the criminal himself:

and all that go a whoring after him: that commit the like idolatry after
his example, and encouraged to it by the connivance of others at it:

to commit whoredom with Molech; that is, idolatry, which is spiritual
whoredom, and often so called in Scripture, and with great propriety;
for since God had espoused these people to himself, and was their
husband, as he was from the time of his bringing them out of Egypt, and
making a covenant with them, [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032); and their sacrificing to and
serving other gods being a breach of their matrimonial covenant with
him, it was no other than whoredom in a spiritual sense, for which he
threatens to cut them off:

from among their people; by an immature death, even all that were guilty
of such abominable actions, or made themselves accessory to them, by any
ways conniving at them, either as judges or witnesses.

[Leviticus 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 20:6</span></span>

The soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits,.... The man
or woman that has respect unto them, seeks after them, and inquires of
them, in order to get knowledge of things:

and after wizards who pretend to tell fortunes, and discover lost and
stolen goods; see Gill on [Lev 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031),

to go a whoring after them; for to consult them is to forsake the Lord,
and have recourse to Satan and his instruments; to relinquish their
trust in God, and put confidence in them, and attribute such things to
them as only belong to God, even the knowledge of things future; and
this is to commit idolatry, which is spiritual adultery:

I will even set my face against that soul; show like resentment and
indignation as at him that gives his seed to Molech:

and will cut him off from among his people; in case his people do not
bear witness against him, but hide their eyes, and wink at his crimes,
or the civil magistrate does not condemn and punish him; the Targum of
Jonathan is,"I will destroy him by the pestilence.''

[Leviticus 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 20:7</span></span>

Sanctify yourselves therefore,.... By abstaining from such impious and
idolatrous practices, and separating themselves from all that gave into
them, as well as by observing the holy commandments of the Lord;
otherwise internal sanctification is not the work of man, but of the
Lord himself, as in [Lev 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#008),

and be ye holy; or a separate people from all others in worship and
conversation:

for I am the Lord your God; who is a holy God, and therefore it became
them to be holy, in imitation of him, [Lev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002).

[Leviticus 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 20:8</span></span>

And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them,.... Not only those
respecting the above things, but all others, which would be a means of
preserving them from sin, and of promoting holiness in their lives and
conversations:

I am the Lord which sanctify you: who had separated and distinguished
them from all other people on earth, and who had given them holy laws,
as the means of holiness; and who only could and did sanctify
internally, by his Spirit and grace, such or them as were sanctified in
heart, as well as outwardly.

[Leviticus 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 20:9</span></span>

For everyone that curseth his father or his mother,.... Here begins the
account of the penalties annexed to the several laws in the preceding
chapter; and that respecting the fear and honour of parents being the
first, [Lev 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#003), is here begun with:

shall surely be put to death; the Targum of Jonathan adds,"by casting of
stones,''stoning being the punishment of such transgressors:

he hath cursed his father or his mother: to do either is his sin, and a
capital crime it is:

his blood shall be upon him: he shall be guilty of death, be condemned
unto it, and punished with it, namely, by stoning; for, as Jarchi
observes, wherever it is, "his blood shall be on him", or "their blood
shall be on them", it is to be understood of stoning.

[Leviticus 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 20:10</span></span>

And the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife,.... Which
is a breach of the seventh command, [Exo
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014),

even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife: which is
only an explanation of the former clause; though the Jewish writers, as
Jarchi and Ben Gersom, say this is so expressed to except the wife of a
stranger, or a Gentile; but it means whether a Gentile or an Israelite;
and which may be confirmed by the instance of Phinehas slaying a prince
of Israel, that lay with a Midianitish woman, [Num
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006),

the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death; on
account of her that is espoused, by strangling, with a hard napkin
within a soft one; and on account of her that is married, by casting
stones; even both the adulterer and adulteress, as the Targum: and the
Jews say (b), strangling was thus performed; they that were strangled
were fixed up to their knees in dung, and then they put a hard napkin
within a soft one, and rolled it about his neck, and one drew it to him
this way, and another drew it to him that way, until he expired: and
there is no unlawful copulation punished with strangling, according to
Maimonides (c), but lying with another man's wife; and who observes,
that the death which is spoken of in the law absolutely, that is,
without specifying any kind of death, is strangling; but stoning seems
rather meant, agreeably to [Deu 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#024).

\(b\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 3. (c) Hilchot lssure Biah, c. 1.
sect. 6.

[Leviticus 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 20:11</span></span>

And the man that lieth with his father's wife,.... Whether she be his
mother, or another woman, as the Targum of Jonathan; that is, whether
she is his own mother, or a stepmother, or whether he did this in the
lifetime of his father, or after his death, or whether she was betrothed
or married, it mattered not; according to the Jewish tradition (d), this
is a breach of the law, [Lev 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#008); and
a man guilty of this

hath uncovered his father's nakedness; and which is a foul and shameful
piece of wickedness; the penalty follows:

both of them shall be put to death; by casting stones on them, as the
Targum of Jonathan adds; for, as before observed, wherever the following
phrase:

their blood shall be upon them, is used, stoning is meant; and so,
according to the Misnah (e), all those were to be stoned, after
mentioned, of whom this phrase is used.

\(d\) Misn. ut supra, (Sanhedrin, c. 7.) sect. 4. (e) lbid.

[Leviticus 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 20:12</span></span>

If a man lie with his daughter in law,.... His son's wife, whether in
the lifetime of his son, or after his death, or whether she was espoused
or married, according to the above tradition (f):

both of them shall surely be put to death; it being a breach of the law
in [Lev 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#015); and this is the penalty
annexed to it, even death:

they have wrought confusion: have been guilty of a shocking and shameful
mixture, as Jarchi and Ben Gersom, as well as confounded the degrees of
relation and affinity:

their blood shall be upon them; it being a capital crime, their, blood
shall be shed for it; they shall be found guilty of death by stoning, as
the Targum of Jonathan.

\(f\) Misn. ut supra. (Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 4.)

[Leviticus 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 20:13</span></span>

If a man lie also with mankind, as he lieth with a woman,.... Is guilty
of the sin of sodomy, this is a breach of the law in [Lev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022),

both of them have committed an abomination; he that lies, and he that is
lain with, both consenting to perpetrate the abominable wickedness;
which may well be called an abomination, being contrary to nature, and
more than brutish, for nothing of that kind is to be found among brutes:

they shall surely be put to death; if he that is lain with is not
forced, as Aben Ezra observes:

their blood shall be upon them; be slain by stoning, as the above
Targum.

[Leviticus 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 20:14</span></span>

And if a man take a wife, and her mother,.... Marry both the one and the
other, or commit uncleanness with them, they consenting to it:

it is wickedness; abominable wickedness, shocking and detestable; there
are other things, which also are wicked and not to be done, but this is
extremely wicked, wickedness to a high degree:

they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; the man, the mother and
her daughter both being married together to him, or both consenting to
his lying with them; otherwise, if one of them was first his wife, it
was not reasonable that she should be put to death; and therefore some
interpret "they", one of them, as Jarchi observes, one or other of them;
and so Aben Ezra explains it, this or that; if the mother was his wife,
the daughter was to be burnt; and so on the contrary, if the daughter
was his wife, the mother was to be burnt; according to the Targum of
Jonathan, they were to be burnt by pouring lead into their mouths: and
so the manner of burning is described in the Misnah (g); they that are
to be burnt are fixed in dung up to their knees, then they put a hard
napkin within a soft one, and roll it about is neck; one draws it one
way, and another another way, until he opens his mouth; then they take
hot melted lead, and pour it into his mouth, which goes down into his
bowels and burns them. But it was rather done with faggots, of which an
instance is given:

that there be no wickedness among you; of such kind, continued,
countenanced, and pass unpunished. This punishment was to be inflicted,
to deter persons from it. The law against it is in [Lev
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#017).

\(g\) Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 2.

[Leviticus 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 20:15</span></span>

If a man lie with a beast,.... A sin quite unnatural, exceeding shocking
and detestable, forbid [Lev 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023),

he shall surely be put to death: by stoning, as the Targum of Jonathan
adds; and this is the death such are condemned to in the Misnah (h):

and ye shall slay the beast; with clubs, as says the Targum of Jonathan;
the reasons given in the Misnah (i), why the beast was to be slain, are,
because ruin came to the man by means of it, and that it might not be
said, as it passed along the streets, that is the beast for which such
an one was stoned. Aben Ezra says it was to be slain, that it might not
cause others to sin; and he adds, there are that say it was to cover the
reproach: no doubt the true reason was to deter the more from this
detestable sin, that if a beast, which was only accessory to it, and an
instrument of it, was put to death, of how much sorer punishment must
the man that committed it be worthy of, even of eternal wrath and
destruction, and, unless repented of and forgiven, must be expected by
him?

\(h\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 4. (i) Ibid.

[Leviticus 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 20:16</span></span>

And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto,.... In
order that the beast may lie with her, and solicit it to commit such an
action with her, see [Lev 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023),

thou shall kill the woman and the beast: the woman by stoning, and the
beast with clubs, as the Targum of Jonathan; and this for the same
reasons as before, as well as to prevent monstrous births:

they shall surely be put to death; both the one and the other, and not
spared:

their blood shall be upon them; they are guilty of a capital crime, a
crime which deserves death; this must be understood of the man that lies
with a beast, and of the woman; for as for the beast itself, as it is
not capable of sinning, so not of guilt, in a proper sense.

[Leviticus 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 20:17</span></span>

And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his
mother's daughter,.... Take her to be his wife, or commit lewdness with
her, whether she be his sister by both father and mother's side, or
whether by one only, either way she is his sister, and it is not lawful
to marry her, or lie with her, see [Lev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009),

and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; which is not to be
understood of an immodest view, exposing to each other what should not
be seen, and pleasing themselves wills such obscene sights, but of the
act of lying together, for so it is afterwards explained by a phrase
frequently used to express that action by; and it denotes, as Aben Ezra
observes, their mutual consent and agreement in it:

it is a wicked thing; and by no means to be done; it is a breach of a
former law, it is a scandalous and reproachful thing, and the word is
sometimes used for reproach, as in [Pro
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034),

and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people; by death, either
by the hand of the civil magistrate, or by the hand of God, by the
pestilence, as the Targum of Jonathan; Ben Gersom interprets it, of
their dying childless, as in some following cases, [Lev
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#020),

he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness; or lay with her, which
explains a preceding clause:

he shall bear his iniquity; the punishment of it, and he alone, as Aben
Ezra observes.

[Leviticus 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 20:18</span></span>

And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness,.... Her monthly
courses, which make her weak and languid, which is forbidden, [Lev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#019); this is not to be understood of
a man's lying with his wife ignorantly, when in such a condition, for
this being the case, he was only unclean seven days, [Lev
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#024); whereas this made him and her
liable to cutting off, as in an after clause; but of his lying with her,
knowing this to be the case with her, and of which she could not be
ignorant, and therefore both liable to the same punishment; or else of
any other man lying with her, or of any man lying with any woman,
married or unmarried, being in such circumstances:

and shall uncover her nakedness; that is, have carnal knowledge of her:

he hath discovered her fountain; from whence her issue of blood flows:
and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood; freely and willingly,
as Aben Ezra observes; for if she had been forced, he alone would have
been cut off; but both these phrases put together show agreement in this
matter, that they both had knowledge of her case, and both consented to
commit the sin:

and both of them shall be cut off from among their people; by death,
either by the hand of the civil magistrate, the case being known and
proved, or else by the hand of God being known by mortality or the
pestilence, as the Targum of Jonathan, or they should die childless; See
Gill on [Lev 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#017).

[Leviticus 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 20:19</span></span>

And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of
thy father's sister,.... An aunt either by mother or father's side,
against which the law is, [Lev 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#013),

for he uncovereth his near kin; as an aunt is to a man, and so an uncle
to a woman, and both equally criminal; for it is a rule that holds good
in all those cases, though not expressed, that what is binding upon one
sex is upon the other, being in the same degree of relation, whether of
consanguinity or affinity:

they shall bear their iniquity; "both" of them, as the Vulgate Latin
version, the man and his aunt, and so a woman and her uncle:

the guilt of their sin shall be upon them, and the punishment of it be
inflicted on them; either they should be cut off from their people, as
before, or be childless, as in the following instances.

[Leviticus 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 20:20</span></span>

And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife,.... His uncle being dead,
and he marry her, which is forbidden, [Lev
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#014),

he hath uncovered his uncle's nakedness: his wife's, which was his, and
therefore the kindred too near for a man to marry in, and such a
copulation must be incestuous:

they shall bear their sin; "both" of them, as the Vulgate Latin, as
before, [Lev 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#019); the punishment of
it, as follows:

they shall be childless; which Jarchi and other Jewish writers
interpret, if they had any children at this time, that is, by a former
marriage, they should die and be buried before them, which was reckoned
a great punishment, see [Jer 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#030).

[Leviticus 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 20:21</span></span>

And if a man shall take his brother's wife,.... To his wife, whether in
his life, as the Targum of Jonathan adds, or whether after his death,
unless when there is no issue, then he was obliged to it by another law,
[Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005); which is now ceased, and
the law in [Lev 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#016); here referred
to, stands clear of all exceptions:

it is an unclean thing; or a "separation" (k) from which a man should
remove and keep at a distance, as from menstruous women, of whom this
word is used; and so denotes that it is by all means to be avoided, as
an abominable and detestable thing; and it is observed that of all
copulations it is only used of this: and the Jewish writers, as Aben
Ezra and others, observe that this case is somewhat like that of a
menstruous woman, who in the time of her separation is unlawful, but
when out of it lawful; and so, in this case, a brother's wife might not
be taken, he being alive; but after his death she might, if she had no
son, according to the law before referred to, but that is now abolished:

he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness; his wife's, which was his
brother's; which through nearness of kin, he ought not to have done; and
the same holds good of a wife's sister, the relation being the same:

they shall be childless; they shall have none by such a marriage or
copulation, and die without any; and as this supposes the brother's wife
to have children by her first husband, or otherwise while the Jewish law
lasted, it would not have been unlawful to marry her husband's brother;
the meaning may be, that these should die before them, or rather, as
some think, those that might be born of such a marriage should not be
reckoned legitimate, and so not inherit.

\(k\) "separatio", Drusius,

[Leviticus 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 20:22</span></span>

Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes,.... All the ordinances,
institutions, and appointments of God, whether observed in this chapter
or elsewhere, but particularly those concerning incestuous marriages and
unlawful copulations:

and all my judgments, and do them; all the laws and commandments of God,
founded injustice and judgment, and according to the rules thereof; or
else, as Aben Ezra, the judgments of punishment, or the penalties
annexed to the above laws, which were carefully to be observed, and put
into execution, to deter from the transgression of them:

that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spew you not out;
as the stomach does its food when it is loathsome and nauseous to it,
and it cannot bear it; see [Lev 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025).

[Leviticus 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 20:23</span></span>

And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation which I cast out
before you,.... Nation seems to be put for nations, for there were seven
nations cast out for them; though the Canaanites may be intended, being
a general name for the whole: some think the Amorites are meant, who
were a principal nation, and notorious for their wickedness: hence we
often meet with this phrase in Jewish writings, "the way of the
Amorites", as being exceeding bad, and so to be avoided, and by no means
to be walked in, [Gen 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016),

for they committed all these things; were guilty of all the idolatries,
incests, and uncleannesses before mentioned, and forbid under severe
penalties:

and therefore I abhorred them; the sins committed by them, being so
abominable and detestable: their persons, though the creatures of God,
were had in abhorrence by him, and this he showed by casting them out of
the land; and hereby it is suggested, that, should they, the Israelites,
be guilty of the like, they also would be rejected and abhorred by him:
the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan are,"my Word abhorred them,''Christ,
the eternal Word, [Psa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007).

[Leviticus 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 20:24</span></span>

But I have said unto you, ye shall inherit the land,.... Promised it
unto them, as he had to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
also to them; or he had said the above things unto them, that they,
observing them, might possess the land of Canaan, and continue therein,
which is the sense of the Targum of Jonathan: the Jews say, that the
right of inheritance belonged to them, from Shem the son of Noah, whose
portion it was, and which they gather from Melchizedek being king of
Salem, whom they take to be Shem; and they say, the Canaanites only
dwelt in it to make it better, till they should come and inherit it:

and I will give it unto you to possess it; in whose gift it was, and who
had a right to dispose of it; and could give them a good title to it,
and secure them in the possession of it:

a land that floweth with milk and honey; abounding with all good things,
with all the comforts of life, with everything both for necessity and
delight; see [Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008),

I am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people; had
chosen them above all people, to be a special and peculiar people to
him; had distinguished them by his favours, and had given them
particular laws and ordinances, to observe and walk according to them,
different from all other nations, which it became them carefully to
regard.

[Leviticus 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 20:25</span></span>

Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean,....
The ten clean ones, as Aben Ezra observes, and all the rest that are
unclean, according to the law before given, [Lev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003), by using the one for food, and
not the other, and so the Targum of Jonathan, ye shall separate between
the beast which is fit for food, and that which is not fit for food:

and between unclean fowls and clean; and which the same Targum
interprets, what is unfit to eat and what is fit, even all that are
particularly mentioned as unclean, and not fit for food, in [Lev
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013) and all the rest not excepted to
as clean and fit for food, which was one way and means God made use of
to separate them from other nations, and so preserve them from their
idolatrous and evil works:

and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by
any manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground; that is, by
eating them, contrary to the command of God, which would make them
abominable in his sight; see [Lev
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#043); every sin or transgression of
this law being so to him:

which I have separated from you as unclean; which by law he had
commanded them to abstain from the use of, as clean, and not fit to be
eaten.

[Leviticus 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 20:26</span></span>

And ye shall be holy unto me,.... Separated from all unclean persons and
things, and devoted to his service, and obedient to all his commands,
and so live holy lives and conversations, according to his will, and to
his honour and glory:

for I the Lord am holy; and therefore they, his people, should be like
him, and imitate him, and observe those things which are agreeable to
his holy nature and will, and yield a cheerful obedience to his holy
precepts:

and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine; which is
a very forcible argument, a strong motive, and which laid them under
great obligation to obedience and holiness.

[Leviticus 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 20:27</span></span>

A man also or a woman that hath a familiar spirit,.... Or the spirit of
Python or divination, see [Lev 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031);
such as the damsel had in [Act 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016);
a woman is here particularly mentioned, though before included in the
above law; because, as Aben Ezra says, such sort of practices were more
frequently committed by women; to which Maimonides (l) adds another
reason, because men have a natural clemency towards the female sex, and
are not easily prevailed upon to put them to death; therefore the law
says, "thou shall not suffer a witch to live", [Exo
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018),

or that is a wizard; a knowing one, who pretends to a great deal of
knowledge of things; as of lost or stolen goods, and even knowledge of
things future, and imposes upon persons, and cheats them of their money
they give for information: such

shall surely be put to death: and not spared through favour and
affection: the death they are to be put to follows:

they shall stone them with stones; until they are dead; of the manner of
stoning; see Gill on [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058),

their blood shall be upon them: they are worthy of death, and they shall
suffer it: this phrase following upon the former, the Jews (m) gather
from hence, that, wherever it is used, it is to be understood of
stoning; See Gill on [Lev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009).

\(l\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 37. (m) Torat Cohanim in Yalcut in loc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 21](lev021)

</div>
