<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk012)  [Next](luk014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)

[Luke 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 13:1</span></span>

There were present at that season,.... Among the innumerable multitude
of people, [Luk 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001) that were then
hearing the above discourses and sayings of Christ:

some that told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with
their sacrifices. These Galileans were very likely some of the followers
of Judas Gaulonitis, or Judas of Galilee; see [Act
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037) who endeavoured to draw off the
Jews from the Roman government, and affirmed it was not lawful to give
tribute to Caesar; at which Pilate being enraged, sent a band of
soldiers, and slew these his followers; who were come up to the feast of
the passover, as they were offering their sacrifices in the temple, and
so mixed their blood with the blood of the passover lambs: this being
lately done, some of the company spoke of it to Christ; very likely some
of the Scribes and Pharisees, whom he had just now taxed as hypocrites;
either to know his sense of Pilate's conduct, that should he condemn it
as brutish and barbarous, they might accuse him to him; or should he
approve of it, might traduce him, and bring him into contempt among the
people; or to know his sentiments concerning the persons slain, whether
or no they were not very wicked persons; and whether this was not a
judgment upon them, to be put to death in such a manner, and at such a
time and place, and which sense seems to be confirmed by Christ's
answer. Josephus (z) relating a slaughter of the Samaritans by Pilate,
which bears some likeness to this, has led some, though without any just
reason, to conclude, that these were Samaritans, who are here called
Galileans. This history is neither related nor hinted at, by any other
writer but Luke. The phrase of mingling blood with blood, is Jewish; it
is said of one Trogianus the wicked (perhaps the Emperor Trajan), that
he slaughtered the Jews, , "and mingled their blood with their blood";
and their blood ran into the sea, unto Cyprus (a). The Jews (b) have a
notion, that

"in the age in which the son of David comes, Galilee shall be
destroyed.''

Here was a great slaughter of the Galileans now, see [Act
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037) but there was a greater
afterwards by the Romans: it may be that the Pharisees made mention of
this case to Christ, to reproach him and his followers, who were called
Galileans, as his disciples chiefly were.

\(z\) Antiqu. l. 18. c. 5. (a) T. Hieros. Succa, fol. 55. 2. Vid.
Lightfoot Hor. in loc. (b) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 97. 1.

[Luke 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 13:2</span></span>

And Jesus answering, said unto them,.... Neither approving, nor
condemning Pilate's action; and though he allowed the Galileans to be
sinners, which could not be denied, he does not bear hard upon them, but
improves the instance for the conviction of his hearers, and in order to
show them the necessity of repentance, and to bring them to it:

suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things? such a supposition they seem to have
made, by their speaking to Christ concerning this matter; and concluded
from their violent and untimely deaths, that they had been notorious and
uncommon sinners, and guilty of the most enormous crimes, which had
brought upon them the just judgments of God: whereas this is not a rule
of judging; oftentimes the best of men suffer exceedingly in this life;
God's judgments are a great deep, and not to be fathomed by us, nor is
it to be easily known, when any thing befalls persons in a way of
judgment; there is nothing comes by chance, but every thing by the wise
disposal of divine providence, to answer some end or another; nor are
persons that are punished, either immediately by the hand of God, or by
the civil magistrate, to be insulted, but rather to be pitied; besides,
love and hatred, the characters and states of men, are not to be known
by these effects in providence.

[Luke 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 13:3</span></span>

I tell you, nay, They were not greater sinners than others of their
neighbours, nor is it to be concluded from the bloody slaughter that was
made of them; others might be much more deserving of such an end than
they, who yet escaped it:

but except ye repent; of sin, and particularly of the disbelief of the
Messiah:

ye shall likewise perish; or perish, in like manner, as these Galileans
did: and so it came to pass in the destruction of Jerusalem, that great
numbers of the unbelieving Jews, even three hundred thousand men were
destroyed at the feast of passover (c); and that for sedition, as these
men very likely were.

\(c\) Vid. Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 11. & l. 7. c. 17. Euseb. l.
3. c. 5.

[Luke 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 13:4</span></span>

Or those eighteen,.... Men; the Persic version reads, "those twelve";
but all copies, and other versions, agree in this number:

upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them; there was a pool near
Jerusalem, called the Pool of Siloam, [Joh
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007) near, or over which, was a tower
built, which fell down and killed eighteen men; very likely as they were
purifying themselves in the pool, and so was a case very much like the
other, and might be a very late one: and this Christ the rather
observes, and puts them in mind of, that they might see that not
Galileans only, whom they had in great contempt, but even inhabitants of
Jerusalem, died violent deaths, and came to untimely ends; and yet, as
not in the former case, so neither in this was it to be concluded from
hence, that they were sinners of a greater size, or their state worse
than that of other men:

think ye that they were sinners; or debtors; for as sins are called
debts, [Mat 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012) so sinners are called
debtors:

above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? there might be, and doubtless
there were, as great, or greater sinners, in that holy city, and among
such that made great pretensions to religion and holiness, as they were.

[Luke 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 13:5</span></span>

I tell you, nay,.... I affirm it, and you may depend upon it, they were
not greater sinners than others: though such a melancholy accident
befell them, not without the providence of God:

but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; or perish in the
same manner; that is, shall be buried under the ruins of the city and
temple of Jerusalem, when one stone should not be left upon another;
just as these eighteen men were buried under the ruins of the tower of
Siloam, of which it was a pledge and emblem; and accordingly great
numbers of them did perish in the temple, and were buried under the
ruins of it (d).

\(d\) Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 4.

[Luke 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 13:6</span></span>

He spoke also this parable,.... That is, Jesus spake, as the Persic
version expresses it, that which follows; and at the same time, and upon
the above occasion; setting forth the patience of God towards the Jewish
nation, their unfruitfulness, and the danger of their being destroyed,
in case of non-amendment:

a certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard. This was not at
all contrary to the law in [Deu 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009)
"thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds": for according to
the Jewish canons (e),

"the prohibition on account of divers seeds in a vineyard, concerned
divers sorts of corn, (as wheat, barley, &c.) and divers sorts of herbs
only: but it was lawful to sow other sorts of seeds in a vineyard, and
there is no need to say other trees.''

And there are cases put, and instances given, which express, or suppose
fig trees, particularly, to have been planted in vineyards; for it is
said (f),

"if a man carries a vine over part of a tree for meat, he may sow seed
under the other part of it--it happened that R. Joshua went to R.
Ishmael to Cephar Aziz, and he showed him a "vine", carried over, ,
"part of a fig tree".''

Again, more than once it is said in a parabolical way (g),

"this is like unto a king that has a paradise, or orchard planted, , "a
row of fig trees, and of vines", and of pomegranates, and of apples,
&c.''

By the "certain man" may be meant, either God the Father, who is
sometimes called an husbandman; or rather the Lord Jesus Christ, who is
truly man, as well as properly God; and "by his vineyard" may be meant,
the Jewish nation; see [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001) which
were his own nation and people, from whence he sprung, and to whom he
was particularly sent, and among whom he had a special property; and may
also be applied to the church of God in any age or nation, which is
often compared to a vineyard, consisting of persons separated from the
world, and planted with various plants, some fruitful, pleasant,
profitable, and valuable, and are Christ's by his Father's gift, and his
own purchase. And by "the fig tree planted" in it, may be principally
meant the Scribes and Pharisees, and the generality of the Jewish
people; who were plants, but not of Christ's Father's planting, and
therefore to be cut down, or rooted up: and may be accommodated to
professors of religion; some of which are true and real, and may be
compared to the fig tree, because of its large and green leaves,
expressive of their profession; and become fruitful, as they are, being
filled with the fruits of the Spirit, of righteousness, and of grace;
and because it puts forth its fruit before its leaves, as there should
be the fruit of grace before a profession of faith is made. Others are
only nominal professors; and are like a fig tree, of which sort was this
in the parable, that has large leaves, but no fruit; make a large
profession, but bring forth no fruit to the glory of God; and though
they are planted in the house of God, yet not by God the Father, nor by
Christ, only at best by ministers and churches hoping well of them, but
mistaken in them:

and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. This, if
understood of God the Father, designs his coming to the Jewish people by
his servants and prophets, time after time, and at last by John the
Baptist, and Jesus Christ, and his apostles, seeking and requiring
fruits of holiness, righteousness, and judgment, but found instead
thereof the wild grapes of wickedness, oppression, and violence: but if
of Christ, which sense is rather to be chosen, it denotes his
incarnation, or his coming into the world in human nature, and seeking
by his ministry, the fruits of faith in himself, and repentance towards
God among the people of the Jews, but found none; at least instances of
faith in Israel were very rare, and few repented of their evil works;
and hence he upbraided many with their impenitence and unbelief; see
[Mat 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020).

\(e\) Maimon. Hilchot Celaim, c. 5. sect. 6. (f) Misn. Celaim, c. 6.
sect. 4. (g) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 164. 3. Shirhashirim Rabba,
fol. 9. 2.

[Luke 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 13:7</span></span>

Then said he unto the dresser of the vineyard,.... If by the owner of
the vineyard is meant God the Father, then by the dresser of the
vineyard Jesus Christ is intended; but as he seems rather designed by
the owner, the vinedresser, or "the gardeners", as the Persic version
reads, in the plural number, may signify the ministers of the word, to
whom Christ, who is Solomon's antitype, lets out his vineyard to dress
and cultivate it, and to keep the fruit of it; see [Sol
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011),

behold, these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and
find none; or "behold, there are three years since I came"; so read the
Vulgate Latin and Persic versions, and Beza's most ancient copy. Some
think Christ here refers to the three years of his public ministry,
which he had now gone through among the Jews with little success; but he
seems rather to allude to the nature of fig trees, which, if fruitful,
bear in three years time; for even , "a sort of white figs", which are
the longest before they bring forth fruit to perfection, yet their fruit
is ripe in three years time. These trees bear fruit once in three years;
they bear fruit indeed every year, but their fruit does not come to
maturity till after three years (i); and this may be the reason why this
number is fixed upon; for if such fig trees do not bring forth ripe
fruit in three years time, there is little reason to expect any from
them: and thus it was time after time with the Jewish nation; and so it
is with carnal professors: hence it follows,

cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground? or "that it may not cumber";
or "render the ground useless", as read the Arabic version, and one of
Beza's copies; for unfruitful trees suck up the juices of the earth, and
draw away nourishment from other trees that are near them, and so make
the earth barren, and not only hurt other trees, but stand in the way
and place of fruitful ones; and therefore it is best to cut them down.
So barren professors, as were the Jews, are not only useless and
unprofitable themselves, being fruitless, but make churches barren, and
stand in the way of others, who are stumbled by them; they are grieving
to God, to Christ, and to the blessed Spirit, and are troublesome and
burdensome to churches, ministers, and true believers: and the cutting
them down may regard the judgment of God upon the nation of the Jews,
which Christ would not have his apostles and ministers interpose for the
averting of; or the excommunication of such worthless and hurtful
professors out of the churches by them.

\(i\) T. Hieros. Sheviith, fol. 35. 4. Jarchi, Maimon. & Bartenora in
Misn. Demai, c. 1. sect. 1. & Sheviith, c. 5. sect. 1.

[Luke 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 13:8</span></span>

And he answering, said unto him, Lord,.... Which, if understood of God
the Father, may intend the intercession of Christ with him, who not only
intercedes for his elect, for those that are unconverted, that they may
be converted; and for converted ones, for the carrying on of the work of
sanctification; for fresh discoveries of pardoning grace; for
consolation and support under trouble; for their final perseverance, and
eternal glorification: but also for his enemies, for profane sinners,
and for formal professors; for the sake of his own people among them,
and for their preservation, and for the averting of divine judgments
from them, at least as yet: and so the Jewish nation was spared for some
time after this, though now deserving of immediate destruction. But
rather, the intercession of the ministers of Christ, and other good men,
may be here meant; who, as Abraham interceded for Sodom, and Moses and
Aaron for Israel, so do they for a sinful nation, a barren and
unfruitful church and people, and particular persons, that they may be
spared, at least a little longer, as here:

let it alone this year also; have patience one year more, or a little
while longer. The Ethiopic version renders it, "until the winter", that
being a time for digging about, and dunging of trees, as follows,

till I shall dig about it, and dung it; these same phrases are used in
the "Misna" (k),

, "they dung and dig" in gardens of cucumbers, and gourds, until the
beginning of the year:''

upon which their commentators say (l), that they carry dung into their
gardens to moisten the earth, and dig about the roots of the trees, and
lay them bare, and cover them again, and prune them, and smoke them to
kill the worms. And by these phrases may be signified the various means
Christ made use of by his own ministry, and by the ministry of his
apostles, to make the Jews a fruitful people; and rather the means
Christ's ministers make use of, as did the apostles with the Jews, to
reach the cases of barren professors; as by "digging", striking at, and
exposing some secret sin or sins, which are the root and source of their
barrenness; showing them, that they have no root in Christ, nor the root
of the matter in them; and declaring to them the insufficiency of a mere
profession of religion to save them: and "dunging", which as it supposes
want of heat, or coldness, which is the cause of barrenness, and
signifies, that such professors are without spiritual life, and without
spiritual heat, or real warmth of love to Christ, his truths,
ordinances, and people, and discharge their duty in a cold and lifeless
manner; so it may design the means they make use of to warm and fire
them with zeal for God, and true religion; by preaching the soul
quickening doctrines of the Gospel, and by laying before them the
agreeableness of a becoming zeal, and the disagreeableness of a lukewarm
spirit and disposition, an indolence and unconcern for the glory of God,
and interest of Christ.

\(k\) Sheviith, c. 2. sect. 2. (l) Jarchi, Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Luke 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 13:9</span></span>

And if it bear fruit, well,.... If hereby barren professors, as the
Jews, become fruitful, it is well, a good thing is done; it is well for
themselves, they shall eat the fruit of their doings; it is well for the
churches where they are, for good works are profitable to men; and it is
well for the owner of the vineyard, and the dresser of it too, for when
Christ has his fruit from his churches, his ministers have theirs also:

and if not, then

after that; "for the time to come", as the Vulgate Latin; or "year
following", as the Persic version renders it:

thou shall cut it down; do with it as thou pleasest, nothing more will
be said or pleaded in its behalf; full consent shall be given, and no
more intercession used: any trees might not be cut down, only barren
ones; there is a law in [Deu 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019)
about cutting down trees, and which the Jews explain thus (m);

"they may not cut down trees for meat without the city, nor withhold
from them the course of water, that so they may become dry; as it is
said, "thou shall not destroy the trees"; and whoever cuts any down is
to be beaten, and not in a siege only, but in any place: whoever cuts
down a tree for meat, by way of destroying it, is to be beaten; but they
may cut it down if it hurts other trees, or because it hurts in the
field others, or because its price is dear; the law does not forbid, but
by way of destroying. Every barren tree it is lawful to cut down, even
though a man hath no need of it; and so a tree for meat, which does
hurt, and does not produce but little fruit, and it is not worth while
to labour about it, it is lawful to cut it down: and how much may an
olive tree produce, and it may not be cut down? the fourth part of a
"Kab" of olives; and a palm tree which yields a "Kab" of dates, may not
be cut down.''

Much such a parable as this is formed by the Jews, upon Moses's
intercession for the people of Israel (n).

"Says R. Abin, in the name of R. Simeon ben Josedech, a parable, to what
is it like? to a king that hath an uncultivated field; he says to his
gardener, go and manure it, and make it a vineyard: the gardener went
and manured that field, and planted it a vineyard; the vineyard grew,
and produced wine, and it turned to vinegar; when the king saw that the
wine turned to vinegar, he said to the gardener, go, , "and cut it
down", why should I seek after a vineyard that brings forth that which
is sour? the gardener replied, my lord, the king, what expense hast thou
been at with this vineyard before it was raised? and now thou seekest to
cut it down; and shouldst thou say because its wine turns sour; the
reason is, because it is young, therefore its wine turns sour, and it
does not produce good wine: so when Israel did that work (of the golden
calf), the holy blessed God sought to consume them; said Moses, Lord of
the world, hast thou not brought them out of Egypt from a place of
idolatry, and now they are young, or children, as it is said, [Hos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001) wait a little for them, and go
with them, and they will do good works in thy presence.''

\(m\) Maimon. Hilch. Melacim, c. 6. sect. 8, 9. (n) Shemot Rabba, sect.
43. fol. 141. 2.

[Luke 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 13:10</span></span>

And he was teaching in one of the synagogues,.... That is Jesus, as the
Syriac and Persic versions express it; which was his work, he being a
teacher sent from God, and who took all opportunities of instructing men
in the truths of the Gospel; this was done either in Galilee, or in
Judea, in one of the synagogues of some city there, for in their larger
cities there were more synagogues than one. In Jerusalem, we are told
(o), there were three hundred and ninety four synagogues; and other
writers (p) increase their number, and say, there were four hundred and
eighty: and it was

on the sabbath; which was now in force, and was religiously observed by
Christ.

\(o\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 105. 1. (p) Pesikta in Jarchi in Isa. i. 21.
Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 20. 3. Ecka Rabbati, fol. 37. 4.

[Luke 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 13:11</span></span>

And behold there was a woman,.... In the synagogue, who, as infirm as
she is hereafter described, got out to the place of worship; and which
may be a rebuke to such, who, upon every trifling indisposition, keep at
home, and excuse themselves from an attendance in the house of God:

which had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years; or a weakness that was
brought upon her by an evil spirit, by Satan; as appears from [Luk
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#016) who, by divine permission, had a
power of inflicting diseases on mankind, as is evident from the case of
Job; and so the Ethiopic version renders it, "whom a demon had made
infirm": and this disorder had been of a long standing; she had laboured
under it for the space of eighteen years, so that it was a known case,
and had been given up as incurable, which made the following miracle the
more illustrious and remarkable.

And was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself; or lift up
her head, look up, or stand upright; it was a thing utterly impossible,
which she could by no means do; her body was convulsed, and every part
so contracted, that, as the Persic version renders it, "she could not
stretch out a hand or foot".

[Luke 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 13:12</span></span>

And when Jesus saw her,.... In the synagogue among the people, either
whilst, or after he had done teaching:

he called her to him, to come nearer him, and said unto her; of his own
accord, without being asked by the woman, or any other for her, out of
great compassion to her, seeing her in this miserable condition, and
knowing full well the nature, cause, and long continuance of her
disorder:

woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity; which had not only bowed
her, but it had bound her, as if she had been bound with cords; but
Christ by saying these words, with his hands laid upon her, burst her
bonds asunder, dispossessed the evil spirit, and delivered her from her
long affliction.

[Luke 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 13:13</span></span>

And he laid his hands on her,.... As he spoke the above words, which he
sometimes did when he healed diseases.

And immediately she was made straight; she lift up herself, stood
upright, and her body, and all the parts of it were as straight as ever
they had been, or as any were in the synagogue.

And glorified God; that is, "the woman" glorified God, as the Persic
version expresses it; she was filled with thankfulness for the mercy,
and gave God the glory of it. This woman was an emblem of a poor sinner
held in the bonds of iniquity by Satan, and led captive by him at his
will, who can by no means raise himself; nor is he able to lift up his
head to heaven, or look upwards to Christ for deliverance; and yet
attends upon the outward ministry, when Christ, in his own time, meets
with him under it, and manifests his power and grace, breaks his bonds
asunder, delivers him out of Satan's hands, and from the bondage of his
own corruptions, sets him straight, and causes him to lift up his head,
and look to him for life and salvation; and so puts a new song into his
mouth, even praise to God, to whose free grace and favour he readily
ascribes his deliverance.

[Luke 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 13:14</span></span>

And the ruler of the synagogue,.... For there never was but one in a
synagogue, whatever some writers have observed to the contrary; See Gill
on [Mat 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018) the Ethiopic version
reads, "the chief priests", but wrongly; these dwelt at Jerusalem, and
in Galilee:

answered with indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath
day; his indignation was at Christ, and the miracle he had wrought,
being filled with envy at the honour it would bring unto him; though he
covered it under pretence of its being a violation of the sabbath, and
that it ought not to have been done on such a day, and in such a place,
which were appropriated not to servile works, but to religious worship;

and said unto the people; over whom he had an authority, and who stood
in awe of him, because of his office and dignity; and not daring to
attack Christ himself, at least not directly, though he struck at him
through the people, whose doctrine and miracles were so extraordinary.

There are six days which men ought to work, in them therefore come and
be healed, and not on the sabbath day; referring to the fourth command:
but this observation and reproof were impertinent and needless, for the
people did not come to be healed; for ought appears, the cure was
unthought of and unexpected; nor was healing, especially as performed by
Christ, by a word and a touch, a servile work, and therefore could not
be any breach of the law referred to. The Ethiopic version reads, "is
there not a sixth day?----come on that day"; the day before the sabbath.

[Luke 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 13:15</span></span>

The Lord then answered him and said,.... Though he did not direct his
speech to him, he knew that he struck at him, and suggested that he was
a violator of the sabbath, as well as the people: and therefore in
defence of himself, and of what he had done, and to expose the hypocrisy
of this man, made answer as follows,

thou hypocrite; the Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions read in
the plural, "hypocrites"; as do the Complutensian edition, and four
ancient copies of Beza's, and the Alexandrian copy; but the Syriac and
Persic versions read in the singular, "hypocrite"; as this man was, who
covered his malice and envy at Christ, with a show of zeal for the
sabbath day; and yet did that upon it, which must be allowed by
themselves, and others, to be a much greater violation of the sabbath,
than this cure could ever be thought to be:

doth not each one of you, on the sabbath day, loose his ox, or his ass,
from the stall, or rack, where he is fastened with a rope;

and lead him away to watering? to some place of water, where he may
drink, after having filled himself at the rack: and that this was
agreeably to their own canons and practice, that beasts may be led out
on a sabbath day, is certain; for they deliver various rules concerning
leading them out, with what they might, and with what they might not be
brought out; and particularly, among others, mention asses and heifers
(q); and they speak (r) of leading them to water, not only to drink of
it, but to wash their chains in it, which, it seems, received pollution,
and needed washing, and might be done on a sabbath day; yea, they allow,
that not only a beast may be led out to watering, but a man might fill a
vessel of water, and pour it out into a trough for it, provided he did
not directly set it before it: the rule is this (s).

"a man may not fill water (a vessel of it), and put it on a sabbath day
before his beast, but he may fill it, and pour it out, and it may drink
of it.''

And particularly on a feast day, their rule is (t), that

"they do not water nor slay beasts of the desert, but they water and
slay domestic ones. Domestic ones are such as lie in the city (i.e. as
Maimonides says (u), within the sabbatical border, 2000 cubits from the
city), and those of the desert are such as lie in pastures.''

And therefore very justly does our Lord observe to the ruler of the
synagogue their own practices towards a beast, in defence of his works
of mercy to men.

\(q\) Misn. Sahbat, c. 5. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. & 18. 2. T. Bab. Sabbat,
fol. 51. 2. & Piske Tosephot in ib. art. 226, 227, 228, 233. (r)
Bartenora in Misn. Sabbat, c. 5. sect. 1. (s) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 20.
2. (t) Misn. Betza, c. 5. sect. 7. (u) In ib.

[Luke 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 13:16</span></span>

And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham,.... Not only a
woman, or rational creature, and much preferable, as such, to an
irrational one; but a descendant of Abraham, of whom the Jews gloried,
and in descent from him prided themselves, and trusted; and chose to
call their women by this name (w), which gave them a character above
others: and who, besides all this, was doubtless a good woman, a
spiritual worshipper of the God of Israel; who, in a spiritual sense,
was a daughter of Abraham, that walked in the steps of his faith, and
was now a believer in Christ, and appeared to be a chosen vessel of
salvation:

whom Satan hath bound, lo these eighteen years; with a bodily distemper
that none could loose her from in so long a time. The Persic version,
very wrongly, reads "twelve years"; though in [Luk
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#011) it observes the right number.

Should not such an one be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day? the
force of Christ's reasoning is this, that if it was lawful, on a sabbath
day, to lead out a beast to watering, to quench its thirst, that so it
may not suffer so much as one day for want of water, how much more
reasonable must it be, that a rational creature, one of Abraham's
posterity, and a religious person, who had been for eighteen years under
a sore affliction, through the power of Satan over her, by divine
permission, should be freed from so long and sore an affliction on the
sabbath day? if mercy is to be shown to beasts, much more to men and
women.

\(w\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 72. 2. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 109. 1.

[Luke 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 13:17</span></span>

And when he had said these things,.... Had argued with them from their
own practices, and in a way so strong and rational, that carried such
evidence and conviction with it:

all his adversaries were ashamed; not only the ruler of the synagogue,
but the Scribes and Pharisees, that were present, who followed him
wherever he went, and were his implacable enemies; these were confounded
and silenced; shame appeared in their countenances; they could not lift
up their heads, and look him in the face.

And all the people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done
by him; for the doctrines he taught, and the miracles he wrought, and
his wise and close reasonings at this time, to the shame and confusion
of all that opposed him: for his audience consisted of different sorts,
and what he said, and did, had different effects upon them. Some were
filled with joy, and others with wrath, malice, and envy. And this is
true with respect to spiritual and eternal things. Glorious things have
been done by Christ in eternity, by becoming the surety of his people,
by entering into a covenant with his Father on their account, and by
taking the care and charge of their persons, and of all grace,
blessings, and promises for them; and in time, by assuming their nature,
fulfilling the law, bringing in an everlasting righteousness, making
peace and reconciliation, procuring pardon, and finishing the work of
redemption and salvation; and now in heaven, by entering as the
forerunner for them, appearing in the presence of God on their account,
presenting their prayers, and making intercession for them: and these
are glorious things; they make for the glory of all the divine
perfections; they issue in the glory of Christ himself; and in
consequence of them, the saints enjoy eternal glory and happiness: these
are things of the greatest importance, are wonderful and amazing, and
for which saints and angels will glorify God both here and hereafter;
and these occasion joy, and gladness in the Lord's people now. For not
carnal and profane persons, or hypocrites, and formal professors, or
Pharisees, and self-righteous persons rejoice at these things; but such
as are the Lord's own people, who are openly his; who have passed under
a work of the Spirit of God, who have seen their need of these things,
and are sensible of the value of them; who know Christ, and love him,
and believe in him.

[Luke 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 13:18</span></span>

Then said he, unto what is the kingdom of God like?.... The same with
the kingdom of heaven, in [Mat 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)
and so the Ethiopic version reads it here, "and whereunto shall I
resemble it?" of this way of speaking; see Gill on [Mar
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#030).

[Luke 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 13:19</span></span>

It is like a grain of mustard seed,.... Both for its smallness at first,
and its after increase; wherefore both the Evangelists Matthew and Mark
observe, that it "is the least of all seed": which is true of the
ministry of the Gospel, of the Gospel church state, and of the grace of
God in the hearts of his people:

which a man took and cast into his garden; the Ethiopic version renders
it, "and sowed in his field", as in [Mat
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031) though mustard used to be sowed
in gardens as well as in fields. (x) Says R. Simeon ben Chelphetha, I
have one stalk of mustard seed, , "in my garden": so (y) Buxtorf
translates it. And by the place in the text, where this seed is cast,
may be meant, either the "field" of the world, where the Gospel is
preached, and churches are raised; or the "garden" of the church, where
the word and ordinances are administered, and in the hearts of the
members of it, the grace of God is implanted and increased; see [Sol
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012)

and it grew and waxed a great tree, which may design the spread of the
Gospel in the world, the flourishing state of the church of Christ, and
the growth of grace in the hearts of believers.

And the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it; the Syriac
version reads in the singular number, "the fowl of the air"; not Satan,
and his principalities and powers, which devour the seed sown by the
wayside; nor the angels of heaven; but rather gracious men on earth, who
sit under the shadow of a Gospel ministry with great delight; and "make
their nests", as the Persic version here renders the words, and take up
their residence in Gospel churches; See Gill on [Mat
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031), [Mat
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032), [Mar
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#031), [Mar
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#032).

\(x\) T. Hieros. Peah, fol 20. 2. (y) Lex. Talmud. col. 823.

[Luke 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 13:20</span></span>

And again he said,.... That is, Jesus, as the Syriac and Persic versions
express it; besides the parable of the grain of mustard seed, that also
of the leaven hid in three measures of meal:

whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God; either the Gospel of the
kingdom, and the mysteries of it; or the church, which is Christ's
kingdom; or the grace of God in the heart, which makes meet for the
kingdom of glory; the first seems rather to be intended; See Gill on
[Mat 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033).

[Luke 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 13:21</span></span>

It is like leaven,.... Which is small in quantity, but is of a swelling,
spreading quality; and fitly expresses the small beginnings of the
Gospel ministry, and its increase, also the state and case of Gospel
churches, and the nature of the grace of God; unless false doctrine
should rather be meant, which privately, secretly, and by little and
little, got into the churches of Christ, the kingdom of God, and spread
itself all over them, as in the times of the papacy:

which a woman took; Christ, and his ministers, Wisdom, and her maidens,
understanding it of the Gospel; but if the leaven of error is intended,
that woman, Jezebel, is meant, who calls herself a prophetess, and
teaches, and seduces the servants of God, [Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)

and hid in three measures of meal: among a few of God's people at first,
both among Jews and Gentiles,

till the whole was leavened; until all the elect of God are gathered in,
and evangelized by it; even the whole fulness of the Gentiles, and all
the people of the Jews, which shall be saved in the latter day; but if
the parable is to be understood of the false doctrine and discipline of
the Antichristian and apostate church of Rome, it may denote the small
beginnings of the mystery of iniquity, which began to work in the
apostle's time by the errors and heresies then propagated, and the
manner in which the man of sin was privately introduced; whose coming is
after the working of Satan, with signs and lying wonders, and with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, first among a few, and then more,
until at length the whole world wondered after the beast, [Th2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007).

[Luke 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 13:22</span></span>

And he went through the cities and villages,.... Either of Galilee, or
of Judea, or both; since he was upon his journey from Galilee, through
Judea, to Jerusalem, as it follows:

teaching and journeying toward Jerusalem; as he was journeying he taught
in every place he came, where he could have an opportunity; his delight
was to do good both to the bodies and souls of men; and he was constant
and assiduous in it.

[Luke 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 13:23</span></span>

Then said one unto him,.... Not one of his disciples, but one of the
company, in some one of the cities or villages he passed through, or as
he was in the road to Jerusalem:

are there few that be saved? It is a received opinion among the Jews
(z), that all Israel shall have a part in the world to come; and this
man might put the question to know whether Christ was of this sentiment
or not. And by some things he had observed drop from him, and it may be
the foregoing parables, which express the small beginnings of his
kingdom, and seem to signify, that at first his Gospel should be
received but by a few, though it should afterwards spread, he might
collect, that his sense was, there would be but a few saved; or this
might be a question of mere curiosity and speculation, as it seems to
be, by Christ's treatment of it, who does not give a direct answer to
it, but puts him and others upon showing a concern for their own
salvation.

And he said unto them; not to the man only that put the question, but to
the whole company; though the Persic and Ethiopic versions read, "he
said unto him", as follows.

\(z\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 1.

[Luke 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 13:24</span></span>

Strive to enter in at the strait gate,.... What is meant by the strait
gate, and by entering in at it; see Gill on [Mat
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013). To "strive", is to be diligent
in the use of means; to search the Scriptures with care; to attend on
the preaching of the word with constancy, neglecting no opportunity; to
pray earnestly for spiritual light, knowledge, and grace; to contend
with every enemy that opposes the salvation of the soul, as sin, Satan,
and the world; to bear all reproaches and persecutions, and press
through all difficulties, for the prize of the incorruptible crown: the
metaphor seems to be taken from the striving, wrestling, and combat in
the Olympic games, for a corruptible crown:

for many I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able:
either when it is too late, when the door is shut; or else before, very
faintly, in a superficial manner, from a mere natural affection, from a
principle of self-love, which leads every one to desire happiness; and
by very indirect and improper methods, by their own civility, morality,
and righteousness; by works of the law, moral, or ceremonial; or by a
profession of religion, and an outward compliance with the ordinances of
the Gospel, and not by Christ, and faith in him.

[Luke 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 13:25</span></span>

When once the master of the house is risen up,.... From table, or off of
his couch, the entertainment being over: and so here, the Gospel feast,
or dispensation, being at an end, and all the guests come in, who were
effectually called, and long patience and forbearance being used towards
others; or has entered in, as the Vulgate Latin version reads, and so
Beza's ancient copy, and one of Stephens's; is come from the wedding;
see [Luk 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036) Christ having espoused
all his elect to himself, by the ministry of the word: for by "the
master of the house" is meant, the bridegroom of the church, the head of
the body, the King of saints, who is Son over his own house, and high
priest there; of whom the whole family in heaven and earth, is named:

and hath shut to the door; the door of mercy and of hope; the door of
faith; the preaching of the word, and the administration of ordinances,
when these shall be no more:

and ye begin to stand without; or "do stand without"; without the holy
city, where dogs are; having no admittance to the nuptial chamber, to
the marriage supper of the Lamb, and the joys of heaven:

and to knock at the door; which shows how near some persons may come to
heaven, and yet not enter there, even to the very door; and what an
expectation, yea, an assurance they may have, of admission into it, not
at all doubting of it; and therefore knock as if they were some of the
family, and had a right to enter; but not finding the door opened to
them, so soon as they imagined, they begin to call as well as knock:

saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; they acknowledge Christ to be Lord, as
all will at the last day, to the glory of God the Father, even
professors and profane; they repeat the word, to show the vehemency and
earnestness of their entreaty; and according to the Syriac and, Persic
versions, they claim an interest in Christ, which read, "our Lord, our
Lord"; and on account of which they doubted not, but the door would be
opened: but alas! he was only their Lord in a professional way; they had
only called him Lord, Lord, but had never truly and heartily yielded
obedience to him; their hearts had never been opened to him, and he had
never had a place there, nor his Gospel; wherefore though they knock, he
will not open;

and he shall answer and say unto you. The Persic version adds, "nay, but
be ye gone hence", for the following reason,

I know you not, whence you are: not but that Christ being the omniscient
God, will know who they are, from whence they come, of what country and
place they be, and to whom they belong; but the sense is, that he will
not own them, and express any approbation of them, as his; but will
treat them as strangers, that come, it is not known, from whence; he
will reject them, as not being born from above, as not being the sheep
of his fold, or members of his true church: they did not come from
heaven, they were not heaven born souls, or partakers of the heavenly
calling, and therefore shall not be received there; they belonged to the
men of the world, and were of their father the devil, and shall be sent
to him: so the foolish virgins, or formal professors of religion, and
such as have been preachers of the Gospel, will entreat Christ at the
last day, and shall have such an answer as this returned to them, which
will be very awful and startling; See Gill on [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023), [Mat
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012).

[Luke 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 13:26</span></span>

Then shall ye begin to say,.... Or ye shall say; in favour of
themselves, and in order to be admitted within, the following pleas will
be made by them:

we have eaten and drank in thy presence: which may be understood both
literally of many, who were miraculously led by Christ, or at whose
tables he had ate and drank, and they with him; as did not only
publicans and sinners, but some of the Pharisees, who invited him to
their houses; and in a religious sense, of many who eat of the legal
sacrifices; and of others, who eat the bread, and drink the wine at the
Lord's table; all which will be insufficient to introduce men into the
kingdom and glory of Christ: natural relation to Christ, which the Jews
may claim, being born of them, and personal acquaintance with him, and a
bare profession of him, will be of no avail another day:

and thou hast taught in our streets; in the streets of many cities in
Galilee and Judea: it was customary with the Jewish doctors to teach in
the streets:

"says Rabba, behold I am as Ben Azzai, in the streets of Tiberias (a);''

the gloss upon it is,

"who was , "expounding in the streets of Tiberias."''

And it is said (b) of Rabban Jochanan ben Zaccai,

"that he was sitting in the shade of the temple, and expounding all the
whole day;''

the gloss on the place is,

"the temple being an hundred cubits high, its shade went very far "in
the street", which is before the mountain of the house; and because "the
street" was large, and held abundance of men, he was expounding there by
reason of the heat, for no school could hold them:''

and it is also said of R. Chija (c), that

"he went out and taught his brother's two sons, "in the street".''

So that what our Lord did, was no other than what was usual with their
doctors; nor is this contrary to what is said in See Gill on [Mat
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#019), this is also a fruitless plea
and which will be of no service; it will signify nothing, to have heard
Christ preached, or Christ himself preach, unless there is faith in him,
which works by love; for not hearers of the word only, but doers of it
are regarded.

\(a\) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 29. 1. (b) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 26. 1. (c)
T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 16. 2.

[Luke 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 13:27</span></span>

But he shall say, &c. The Persic version adds, "be gone from my sight,
and be far from my door"; expressing indignation at them, an abhorrence
of them, as not being able to bear them in his sight, or near unto him:

I tell you, I know you not whence you are; this is repeated, and with a
strong asseveration, to denote the certainty of the truth expressed, and
to cast off all hope in them, of ever succeeding by their entreaties and
importunity:

depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; or "of a lie", as the Syriac
and Persic versions render it: for they were deceitful workers, they
professed what they did not from the heart believe; they said they were
Christians, but were not, and now are found liars; they only attended on
the word and ordinances in an hypocritical way, and trusted in, and
depended upon, their outward profession of religion, and subjection to
ordinances; and by so doing, instead of working righteousness, wrought
iniquity; and so as they did not submit to Christ and his righteousness,
they are bid to depart from him, as wicked and unrighteous men, as they
were: the word "all" is here used, which is not in [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023) which agrees with [Psa
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008) to which there seems to be a
reference, though it is omitted here, in the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic
versions; See Gill on [Mat 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023).

[Luke 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 13:28</span></span>

There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,.... See Gill on [Mat
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012). This will be upon hearing the
above sentence and character, "depart from me", &c. and will be
increased,

when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: whose offspring they were,
and to whom they stood related according to the flesh; and of descent,
from whom they boasted, and even trusted in it, thinking themselves the
favourites of heaven, and expecting to be admitted into the kingdom of
God, on account of it: sad will be the disappointment of such persons; a
being born of religious parents, will neither give right unto, nor
meetness for eternal glory; regeneration is not of blood:

and all the prophets in the kingdom of God; whose prophecies were
transmitted to them, and whose books they had in their hands, and read;
and who desired to see and hear what they did, and which they now plead,
and yet they did not enjoy, but were nevertheless happy: and

you yourselves thrust out: with indignation and contempt, with shame and
"ignominy", as the Persic version adds; not suffered to go in with them,
though their sons and successors; but bid to depart, and ordered to be
for ever separated from them, as only fit company for devils and damned
spirits.

[Luke 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 13:29</span></span>

And they shall come,.... From all parts the world, from every nation
under the heavens; meaning the Gentiles, and which will be a greater
aggravation of the punishment of the Jews, and cause still more rage and
madness: these shall

come from the east and from the west; from the rising of the sun, to the
going down of the same, [Isa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#006)

and from the north, and from the south; from the most distant parts of
the world inhabited by men; see [Isa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005). God has his chosen ones, and
Christ has a people in all parts of the world; and therefore his Gospel
must be preached to all nations, for the gathering of them in, which
will be done in the latter day; and in the resurrection morn, as these
will be raised in the several places where they will have been buried,
they will come from thence, and make one body, and will be caught up to
meet the Lord in the air, and will be for ever with him:

and shall sit down in the kingdom of God; in Christ's kingdom, in the
new heavens, and new earth, as persons that sit down at a table, to
partake of a feast; see [Luk 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030) and
in the ultimate glory, where they shall have rest, peace, and joy, for
evermore. The Ethiopic version renders it, "they shall rejoice in the
kingdom of God"; they shall partake of the joys of heaven; everlasting
joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away;
and the Persic version, "and they shall take a repose, and sit and
rest"; they shall rest from all their labour, and be in perfect ease and
peace; See Gill on [Mat 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011).

[Luke 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 13:30</span></span>

And behold, there are last which shall be first,.... The Gentiles, the
most mean and abject, afar from God, aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel, called last of all; these shall be first, and sit down among
patriarchs and prophets, men of the first rank here on earth, in the
kingdom of heaven, and enjoy the same glory and happiness with them:

and there are first which shall be last: the Jews, who were first the
visible professing people of God, to whom the oracles of God, and
outward privileges and ordinances were given; who had the Messiah first
sent to them, and the Gospel first preached among them; these shall be
last, be rejected and despised, and shut out of the kingdom of heaven,
they thought themselves heirs of, and expected to enjoy; see [Mat
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030).

[Luke 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 13:31</span></span>

The same day there came certain of the Pharisees,.... Who dwelt in
Galilee, for they were in all parts of the country: these being nettled
and filled with indignation at Christ, because of the parables he had
that day delivered, the miracles he had wrought, and the several awful
and striking things which dropped from him, and which they knew
respected them; contrived to get rid of him, by frightening him with a
design of Herod's, to take away his life, should he continue there: for
this seems to be rather a stratagem of theirs, than of Herod's; though
it may he, that Herod might take this method, and make use of these men
in this way, to terrify him; fearing to lay hold on him, and put him to
death; partly because of the people, and partly because of the remaining
uneasiness and terror of his mind, for taking off the head of John the
Baptist:

saying, get thee out and depart hence; in all haste, as soon as
possible:

for Herod will kill thee: he is resolved upon it, he has formed a
design, and will quickly take methods to execute it. This was Herod the
tetrarch, of Galilee; from whence we learn, that Christ was as yet in
Galilee, though he was journeying towards Jerusalem, [Luk
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#022) for Herod's jurisdiction reached
no further than Galilee: this was either a device of Herod's, or of the
Pharisees, or of both, to get rid of Christ in the easiest manner.

[Luke 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 13:32</span></span>

And he said unto them, go ye and tell that fox,.... Herod, who it may be
sent them, of which Christ was not ignorant, nor of his design in it;
and who, as Nero, for his cruelty, is compared to a lion, so he for his
subtlety in this instance, as well as in the whole of his conduct, to a
fox; though some think Christ has a regard to the Pharisees, and their
craftiness, in forming this story, pretending good will to him, by
acquainting him of Herod's malicious designs, when their view was only
to scare him out of their country; so the false prophets and teachers,
are for their cunning, subtlety, and flattery, compared to foxes, [Sol
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015) as well as for their greediness
and voraciousness: the word is used with the Jews, for a vain and empty
man, in opposition to a good man; as in that saying (d) of R. Jannai,

"be thou the tail of lions, and not the head of "foxes;"''

or "vain men", as the gloss explains it:

behold, I cast out devils; or "I will cast out devils", as the Ethiopic
version reads, in spite of him, let him do his worst:

and I do cures today and tomorrow; and so for some time to come; and
which was doing good, and was what Herod and the Pharisees, had they any
humanity in them, would have rejoiced at, and have chose that he should
have continued with them, and not have threatened him with his life, or
have took any methods to send him from them:

and the third day I shall be perfected; that is, in a little time after,
I shall be made perfect by sufferings, my course will be finished, and I
shall have done all the work completely, I came about; and till that
time come, it is not in his power, nor yours, nor all the men on earth,
or devils in hell, to take away my life, or hinder me doing what I am
about.

\(d\) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 15. & Jarchi in ib.

[Luke 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 13:33</span></span>

Nevertheless, I must walk,.... The Syriac version reads, "I must work",
and so the Arabic: as going about doing good, casting out devils, and
healing diseases:

today and tomorrow, and the day following: a few days more in Galilee,
and towards Jerusalem: all the Oriental versions read, "the day
following I shall depart"; either out of this world; or out of Galilee,
and go to Jerusalem, and there suffer and die:

for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem; because the
great sanhedrim only sat at Jerusalem, to whom it belonged to try and
judge a prophet; and if found false, to condemn him, and put him to
death; the rule is this (e);

"they do not judge, neither a tribe, nor a false prophet, nor an high
priest, but by the sanhedrim of seventy and one.''

Not but that prophets sometimes perished elsewhere, as John the Baptist
in Galilee; but not according to a judicial process, in which way Christ
the prophet was to be cut off, nor was it common; instances of this kind
were rare, and always in a violent way; and even such as were sentenced
to death by the lesser sanhedrim, were brought to Jerusalem, and
publicly executed there, whose crimes were of another sort; for so runs
the canon (f);

"they do not put any one to death by the sanhedrim, which is in his
city, nor by the sanhedrim in Jabneh; but they bring him to the great,
sanhedrim in Jerusalem, and keep him till the feast, and put him to
death on a feast day, as it is said [Deu
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#013) "and all the people shall hear
and fear."''

And since Jerusalem was the place where the prophets were usually put to
death, it follows,

\(e\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 1. sect. 5. & T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 18. 2.
(f) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 10. sect. 4.

[Luke 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 13:34</span></span>

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets,.... These words,
with what follow, as they stand in [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037) were delivered by Christ, when
he was in the temple at Jerusalem; but here they were spoken by him when
in Galilee, in Herod's jurisdiction; so that it appears, that the same
words were spoken by Christ at different times, in different places, and
to different persons: unless it can be thought, that Luke transcribed
them from Matthew, and inserts them here, on occasion of Christ's having
mentioned the perishing of a prophet in Jerusalem; where many had been
killed and put to death, in one way or another, and particularly in the
following:

and stonest them that are sent unto thee; as Zechariah, [Ch2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020)

how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth
gather her brood under her wings, and ye would not? and therefore ought
not to have been condemned as a false prophet by their sanhedrim, as he
suggests he should be, and as he afterwards was; See Gill on [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037).

[Luke 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 13:35</span></span>

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate,.... That is, would be in a
little time, both city and temple; See Gill on [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038).

and verily I say unto you; affirm in the strongest manner:

ye shall not see me; the Arabic version adds, "from henceforth", and so
some copies, as in [Mat 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#039) and so
the Ethiopic version, "from this time"; that he spoke these words,
whether in Galilee, or in the temple:

until the time come; or "until he shall come", meaning himself, and his
second coming:

when ye shall say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord;
not they themselves in person, but their posterity, who will be
converted in the latter day: and shall acknowledge the Messiah, the
blessed of the Lord, who will come in his name, to judge the world in
righteousness: or else the meaning is, that when Christ shall come a
second time, and every eye shall see him, these Jews, among the rest,
shall behold him, whom they have pierced, and mourn; and wish themselves
among those, that shall receive him with joyful acclamations; and
however, will be obliged to own him as the Messiah, and to confess that
he comes in the name, and with the authority of the Lord, and that he is
blessed for evermore.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 14](luk014)

</div>
