<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk003)  [Next](luk005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

[Luke 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 4:1</span></span>

And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost,.... The Spirit of God having
descended on him at his baptism, and afresh anointed, and filled his
human nature with his gifts, whereby, as man, he was abundantly
furnished for the great work of the public ministry, he was just about
to enter upon; yet must first go through a series of temptations, and
which, through the fulness of the Holy Spirit in him, he was
sufficiently fortified against.

Returned from Jordan; where he came, and had been with John, and was
baptized by him; which, when over, he went back from the same side of
Jordan, to which he came:

and was led by the Spirit; the same Spirit, or Holy Ghost he was full
of; See Gill on [Mat 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001).

into the wilderness; of Judea, which lay near Jordan, and where John had
been preaching and baptizing, namely, in the habitable: part of it: but
this was that part, which was uninhabited by men, and was infested with
wild beasts, and where Christ could neither have the comfort and benefit
of human society, nor any thing for the sustenance of life, and where he
was exposed to the utmost danger; and so in circumstances very opportune
and favourable for Satan to ply him with his temptations, for which
purpose he was led thither.

[Luke 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 4:2</span></span>

Being forty days tempted of the devil,.... The Vulgate Latin, Syriac,
Persic, and Ethiopic versions read the phrase, "forty days", in
connection with the latter part of the preceding verse; according to
which the sense is, that Jesus was led by the Spirit forty days in the
wilderness, before he was tempted by Satan, and in order to it: but our
reading is confirmed by [Mar 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#013) who
affirms, as here, that he was so long tempted by Satan; as he might be
invisibly, and, by internal suggestions, before he appeared visibly, and
attacked him openly, with the following temptations. The Ethiopic
version adds, "and forty nights": and such were these days in which
Christ was in the wilderness, and fasted, and was tempted there: they,
were such as included nights, as well as days; see [Mat
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)

and in those days he did eat nothing not any sort of food whatever; he
tasted of no kind of eatables or drinkables, during the whole space of
forty days; nor in the nights neither, in which the Jews allowed persons
to eat in times of fasting; See Gill on [Mat
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002). And this entire abstinence, as it
shows the power of Christ in the supporting of his human nature, without
food, for such a time, and the disadvantages under which, as man,
combated with Satan; so, that this fast was never designed as an example
to his followers, and to be imitated by them:

and when they were ended; the forty days, and forty nights:

he afterward hungered; which he did not before; and which shows the
truth of his human nature; and is mentioned to observe the occasion of
the following temptation, and the advantage on the tempter's side.

[Luke 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 4:3</span></span>

And the devil said unto him,.... Who now visibly appeared, and spoke
unto him with an articulate voice:

if thou be the Son of God; as has been just now declared by a voice from
heaven; or seeing thou art in such a relation to God, and so equal to
him, and possessed of all divine perfections, and among the rest, of
almighty power; wherefore, since thou art hungry, and in a wilderness,
where no food is to be had,

command this stone that it be made bread; say but the word, and this
stone, which he held out to him, or pointed at, as lying before them, or
any one of the stones, which were in sight, for Matthew speaks of them
in the plural number, will immediately be converted into bread, if he
was what he was said to be: this he suggests might easily be effected by
him, and he had no need to continue hungry.

[Luke 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 4:4</span></span>

And Jesus answered him, saying, it is written,.... In [Deu
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)

that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God;
suggesting hereby, that when it is the will of God, human nature may be
maintained by the influence of divine power, without the use of ordinary
means; and that bread itself, without a divine blessing, would not
support life; and so not this stone, or stones, if turned into it:
wherefore, it became him, as man, to depend upon God, submit to his
will, and wait the issue of providence, who had brought him thither, and
not take any such steps to remove his hunger; and especially at his
solicitations, who had no other end, but to have him, if he could, at
his beck and will. By "every word of God", is not meant all Scripture,
and every part of it, which is given by inspiration of God, and may be
said to proceed out of his mouth; neither the law, and the precepts of
it, as the Jews interpret it, by obedience to which the Israelites lived
in the land Canaan; nor the Gospel, and the truths of it, which are the
wholesome words of Christ, and the words of faith and good doctrine,
with which believers are nourished, and are that to the soul, as bread,
or any other wholesome food, is to the body; for of spiritual living,
and the means of that, the text is not to be understood; but either of
the word of God's power, by which he upholds and sustains all things in
being, which he has created; and with which he could, if he would,
support the bodies of men without the use of any sort of food; as the
bodies of Moses and Elijah, and now the body of Christ, were for many
days; and as the bodies of the saints will be after the resurrection, to
all eternity: or else the blessing of God, which he commands on bread,
and other food, and the virtue and strength which he puts into them, and
conveys by them, are meant, without which not, any sort of food is
nourishing; or rather every thing which God declares and orders to be
eaten, even every creature of his which is good, and not to be refused,
but received, with thanksgiving, being sanctified by the word of God,
and prayer, as well as bread; so manna, which is mentioned in the text
in Deuteronomy; and likewise any other food, as pulse: and water, he is
pleased to direct to. Some little difference there is between Matthew
and Luke, in citing this passage; in the latter it is, "by every word of
God"; and in the former it is nearer the Hebrew text in [Deu
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003) "by, every word that proceedeth
out of the mouth of God"; and so some copies read here, as do also the
Arabic and Ethiopic versions: but neither of them have the words exactly
as in the original text, where it is added, "doth man live"; which,
doubtless, were not produced by our Lord, as being unnecessary, and
therefore not mentioned by any of the evangelists.

[Luke 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 4:5</span></span>

And the devil taking him up into an high mountain,.... Somewhere near
Jerusalem, but what mountain is not certain. The Evangelist Luke makes
this to be the second temptation, which, with Matthew, is the third and
last; and whose order seems to be more proper and natural than this, and
to be the true and genuine one, which Luke neglects, though he does not
contradict it: he relates matters of fact, without attending to the
strict order of them; whereas Matthew strictly regards it, observing,
that after the first temptation, "then the devil taketh him, &c." and
that being finished, says, "again the devil taketh him, &c." and upon
those words, "get thee hence", with what follows, remarks, that then the
devil leaveth him: all which show, that his order is the most accurate,
and to be followed. But to go on with the account; the devil having
taken him from the pinnacle of the temple, and carried him to some high
mountain, as Lebanon, or Pisgah, or some other near Jerusalem, showed
unto him all the kingdoms of the world; not of the Roman empire only,
though that consisted of many kingdoms, and is called the whole world,
[Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001) where the same word is used,
as here; but of the whole universe, every kingdom that was under the
heavens; which he represented to Christ, not in a map, since the glory
of them could not be described in that way: for

he showed him all the glory of them, as Matthew adds; and for this a
mountain was no more a proper place, than any other; nor was, it any
real object he presented to his bodily sight, or any real prospect he
gave him of the kingdoms of the world, which are not to be seen from any
one place, no not one of them, not even from the highest mountain in the
world, and still less to be seen together at once in a moment: but this
was a mere phantasm, a deception of the sight, with which he endeavoured
to impose on Christ, but could not; nor did Christ; who is the maker of
the world, and the governor among the nations, need any representation
of the kingdoms of the world from him; see Gill on [Mat
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008) and this he did in a moment of
time; in the twinkling of an eye, not by succession, and in process of
time, as one kingdom after another, but all at once, and in an instant:
what a moment of time is; see Gill on [Mat
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008).

[Luke 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 4:6</span></span>

And the devil said unto him, all this power will I give thee,..... That
is, all the kingdoms of the world, and all the government and
jurisdiction over them:

and the glory of them; the riches, honours, and grandeur belonging to
them:

for that is delivered unto me: so far he spoke modestly, in that he
owned an original, superior governor of them, by whom he pretended they
were transferred to him; but lied, in that he suggested they were put
into his hands by him, who had the supreme power over them; and that he
acted by his constitution and appointment, as a deputy under him; when
what power he had, as the God of the world, was by usurpation, and not
by designation of God; and at most only by permission: and least of all
was it true what follows;

and to whomsoever I will I give it; or "these", as the Vulgate Latin
reads; that is, these kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; when
so to do is the peculiar and sole prerogative of God: nor can Satan
dispose of the goods of a single man, nor of a herd of swine, nor enter
into them without leave from God.

[Luke 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 4:7</span></span>

If thou therefore wilt worship me,.... Or "before me"; that is, fall
down before him, and give him divine worship and homage. A wide
difference there is between a good angel and a fallen angel; a good
angel will not suffer himself to be worshipped by men, but directs to
the worship of God only, [Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)
but a fallen angel not only seeks to be worshipped by men, but by the
Son of God himself, even by him whom all the holy angels worship, [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006) This was what Satan at first
aspired after, and by which he fell: he affected deity, and sought to
have divine worship given him; and in this sin he still persisted, and
grew worse and worse, more daring and insolent, desiring worship of him
who is God over all, blessed for ever.

All shall be thine: he promises to give him a title to all the kingdoms
of the world, and the glory of them, on condition of homage done him, by
which he should hold the tenure of them under him; these being delivered
up solely to him, by the author of them; and he having them in his
power, to dispose of them at pleasure. O horrid impudence, arrogance,
and insolence!

[Luke 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 4:8</span></span>

Jesus answered and said unto him,.... The following words, with
indignation at him, and detestation of his proposals:

get thee behind me, Satan; which are omitted in the Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions, and in three ancient copies of
Beza's, and in his most ancient one; but stand in other copies, and in
the Arabic version.

For it is written, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shalt thou serve. This passage stands in [Deu
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013) where the words are, "thou shalt
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and thou shalt swear by his name":
the last clause is not cited by Christ at all, swearing being only a
species, or part of religious worship; and the other two clauses are
somewhat different from the original text, as here cited, and may be
accounted for: instead of "fear the Lord", it is "worship the Lord"; and
the one well explains the other; the fear of God being often, in
Scripture, put for the whole worship of God, both internal and external:
and in the next clause, the word "only" is added by Christ, as
expressing the true sense of it, and agreeably to other places of
Scripture, particularly [Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003); see
Gill on [Mat 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010).

[Luke 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 4:9</span></span>

And he brought him to Jerusalem,.... The holy city, as Matthew calls it,
from the wilderness thither; where he found him, and first attacked him,
and perhaps he brought him through the air: and set him on a pinnacle of
the temple; which was in Jerusalem; See Gill on [Mat
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006).

And said unto him, if thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from
hence; from the pinnacle of the temple, on which he was set; See Gill on
[Mat 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006).

[Luke 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 4:10</span></span>

For it is written,.... In [Psa 91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)
"He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee; and in their
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone." It is an observation made long ago by Jerom, on [Psa
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011) that Satan, in citing this text,
has left out the middle clause,

to keep thee in all thy ways, which he knew was against him, and has
only taken that which made for him; and on [Mat
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006) he observes, that this prophecy is
not concerning Christ, but any holy man; therefore the devil wrongly
interpreted Scripture; and that had he certainly known, that this is
written concerning the Saviour, he ought to have cited what follows,
"thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder, the young lion and the dragon
shalt thou trample under feet": and in these observations, he has been
followed by many interpreters; but Surenhusius (i) is not satisfied with
them, especially with what respects the manner of citation, leaving out
some words, and not mentioning others that follow; since such a way of
citing perfectly agrees with the method of the Jewish doctors; who
reckon one word of a passage being cited all that follows, if it makes
to the purpose, all one as if it was cited, and to be so accounted; and
since, if such a method is blame worthy, Christ, the evangelists, and
apostles, must be blamed also, seeing they frequently use the same,
which can never be allowed of: besides, supposing the clause omitted was
added, he asks of what advantage it would be? since the two verses being
connected together as they are, the sense with respect to God's
providence and preservation, is clear enough and complete: and I must
confess, though I have pursued the above observation, in the note on See
Gill on [Mat 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006) yet by comparing the
evangelists together, it is not a clear case to me, what Satan did leave
out, or whether any thing at all; but it seems rather, that the words
are put, as the evangelists themselves thought fit to transcribe them,
in which they are not exactly alike; more is left out by one, than by
another; Matthew leaves out the whole clause, "to keep thee in all thy
ways"; but Luke only omits these words, "in all thy ways": but I am
still of opinion, that the passage is applicable to Christ, as to any
holy good man, yet it appears that Satan failed not, neither in the
manner of citing it, nor in the application of it to Christ; but by
wresting it to a wicked purpose, to countenance an action unwarrantable
and criminal, being a tempting God; when the text only regards the
preservation of good men in the way of duty, trusting in the Lord; and
which is confirmed by the answer of Christ, who takes no notice of any
faulty citation of the passage, or misapplication of it, as to his
person; only suggests, by opposing another Scripture to him, that what
he had produced, was to a wrong and wicked purpose; and to take it in
his sense, would be to tempt God; see Gill on [Mat
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006).

\(i\) Biblos Katallages, p. 210, 211.

[Luke 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 4:12</span></span>

And Jesus answering said unto him, it is said,.... In [Deu
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016)

Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God: in the text in Deuteronomy the
words are, "ye shall not tempt the Lord your God." The second person
plural, is here changed into the second person singular, to accommodate
the words to Satan; whom Christ singly addresses, and makes answer to,
and who was under this same general law as other rational creatures: and
Jehovah may be called the Lord his God, as he is his creator and
governor; by whom he is upheld in his being, and to whom he is subject,
whether he will or not; though not his covenant God: and even if our
Lord Jesus Christ is intended by the Lord God, as some think; he is God
over all; over all principalities and powers, good and bad, by whom all
are created, and in whom all consist; and whose power and authority over
Satan and his angels, have abundantly appeared, in dispossessing devils
out of men, sending them where he pleased, and in spoiling the powers of
darkness, and in destroying him that had the power of death, the devil;
and great insolence and wickedness it must be in a creature, to tempt
the Lord his God, in any way, or form whatever; See Gill on [Mat
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007)

[Luke 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 4:13</span></span>

And when the devil had ended all the temptation,.... Or "all his
temptations", as the Syriac version reads; not only the last mentioned,
but all the rest, whether inward or outward, in a visible or in an
invisible manner; whether during his forty days fast, or after he was an
hungered, when he had tried every way, and all sorts of temptations with
him; and when he had done this, "in", or "with all his power", as the
Ethiopic version reads; "when he had done his utmost", and his best; and
as the Persic version adds, "and profited nothing"; could not succeed,
or get any advantage over him:

he departed from him for a season; till another opportunity should
offer, or till that time should come, when would be the hour and power
of darkness; and by means of one of his disciples, he should bruise his
heel, and bring him to an accursed death; [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030).

[Luke 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 4:14</span></span>

And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit,.... Of which he was full,
and by which he was led into the wilderness, and had combated with
Satan, and had got the victory over him; and by virtue of which, he
entered on his public ministry, wrought miracles, and taught with
authority. A like way of speaking is used by the Targumist, on [Mic
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#008). I am filled, , "with the power of
the spirit of prophecy", from before the Lord. Moreover, this phrase is
used, to show that his return

into Galilee, where he had been brought up, and from whence he came to
John at Jordan, did not arise from a natural love to his country, and a
fond desire of being there again; but was owing to the powerful impulse
of the Holy Spirit, which was in him, and moved him to return thither;
where he was to begin his ministry, and work his miracles, and so fulfil
a prophecy of him, in [Isa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) see
[Mat 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012).

And there went out a fame of him through all the region round about:
throughout all Galilee and Syria, Decapolis and Judea; see [Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023), the report of his doctrines and
miracles, was spread far and near; and on account of them, he became the
subject of the common talk of people every where, who highly applauded
and commended him for them.

[Luke 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 4:15</span></span>

And he taught in their synagogues,.... In the public places of worship
used by the Galilaeans, where they met on sabbath days and weekdays, to
read and pray, and hear the Scriptures expounded; and Christ engaging
here as a public teacher, was the reason of his fame being spread around
the country:

being glorified of all; that heard him: they were astonished at his
doctrine; they wondered at his gracious words; they praised him as a
preacher; and glorified him, and God for him, because of the mighty
works which were done by him.

[Luke 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 4:16</span></span>

And he came to Nazareth,.... After some length of time, when he had gone
through all Galilee, and had acquired great credit and reputation by his
ministry and miracles; he came to the place,

where he had been brought up: where he was conceived, though not born;
and where he had his education, and wrought at a trade, and was well
known to the inhabitants; and therefore it was proper that he should
first exercise his ministry, and obtain a character in other places,
which would prepare him a reception among his townsmen, who otherwise,
in all likelihood, would have treated him at once with neglect and
contempt:

and as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day.
This was either his custom from his youth, when he dwelt at Nazareth,
while a private person, and before he was engaged in public service,
whither he had used to repair as an inhabitant of the city, and a member
of the congregation, to attend synagogue worship, as he now did; or it
refers to his custom, since he became a public preacher, who at
Capernaum, or any other city of Galilee, where there was a synagogue,
used to frequent it, whether on sabbath days, or any other, and so he
did here:

and stood up for to read: by rising and standing up, and perhaps by some
other gesture he signified his inclination to read a portion of
Scripture, if liberty was given, and a book delivered him, for, as yet,
he had no book to read in; nor might any read in public, unless he had
an order from the congregation, or the chief of it; for so runs the
Jewish canon (k):

"a reader may not read until the chief of the congregation bids him
read; yea, even a minister of the congregation, or a ruler of the
synagogue, may not read of himself, until the congregation, or the chief
among them, bids him read.''

This custom of reading the Scriptures publicly, was an appointment of
Moses, according to the account of the Jews; who say (l).

"Moses our master, ordered the Israelites to read in the law publicly,
on the sabbath, and on the second and fifth days of the week, in the
morning; so that they might not be three days without hearing the law
and Ezra ordered, that they should read so at the evening sacrifice,
every sabbath, on account of those that sit in the corners of streets;
and also he ordered, that three men should read on the second and fifth
days of the week, and that they should not read less than twenty
verses.''

It was also the custom to stand at reading the law and the prophets:
with regard to the book of Esther, the rule is (m) this;

"he that reads the "Megilia", or book of "Esther", stands or sits.''

That is, as their commentators (n) explain it, if he will he may stand,
and if he will he may sit, he may do as he pleases; but so he might not
in reading the law: hence it is asked (o),

"why is it not so in the law? R. Abhu replies, because the Scripture
says, [Deu 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#003) "Stand thou here by
me."''

Wherefore they say (p), the law must be read standing, and it is even
forbidden to lean on any thing. Christ conformed to these rules; he went
into the synagogue to read on the sabbath day, and stood up when he
read, and waited for order, and a book to be given him to read: it may
be asked, how he came to be admitted to read publicly in the synagogue,
when he was not of the tribe of Levi, nor was he brought up in the
schools and academies of the Jews, and was known to be a mechanic? It
may be observed, that common Israelites, as well as priests and Levites,
were allowed to read the Scriptures publicly; every sabbath day, seven
persons read, a priest, a Levite, and five Israelites: the order was
this; the priest read first, and after him the Levite, and after him an
Israelite: and it is said to be a known custom to this day, that even an
unlearned priest read before the greatest wise man in Israel; and he
that was greater than his companion in wisdom, read first (q). Now
Christ, on account of the great fame he was in for his wisdom and mighty
works, was admitted to this public service, though he was no Levite, and
known by the inhabitants of this place, to have been brought up to a
trade.

\(k\) Maimon. Hilchot Tephilla, c. 12. sect. 7. (l) Maimon. Hilchot
Tephilla, c. 12. sect. 1. (m) Misn. Megilia, c. 4. 1. (n) Jarchi &
Bartenora in ib. (o) T. Bab. Megilia, fol. 21. 1. (p) Robbenu Asher in
T. Megill. c. 3. sect. 1. & Piske Harosh in ib. (q) Maimon. Hilch.
Tephillah, c. 12. sect. 16, 18.

[Luke 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 4:17</span></span>

And there was delivered unto him,.... By the "Chazan", or minister, to
whom he gave it again, [Luk 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020), for
the "Chazan" of the synagogue, was, "the minister" (r); one part of
whose business was, to deliver the book of the law to, and take it from
him that read: when an high priest read, the method taken was this (s);

"the "Chazan", or minister of the synagogue, took the book of the law,
and gave it to the ruler of the synagogue, and the ruler of the
synagogue gave it to the "Sagan", and the "Sagan" gave it to the high
priest, and the high priest stood and received, and read standing.''

The same method was observed, when a king read in the book of the law
(t); but when a common priest, or an inferior person read, so much
ceremony was not used, as to hand the book from one to another: the
manner in their synagogues and schools, was this (u);

"the "Chazan" brought out the book of the law, and the priest read, and
after him a Levite; then the "Chazan" of the synagogue brought the book
of the law down, to the head of the captivity, and all the people stood;
and he took the book of the law into his hands, and "stood and read" in
it; and the heads of the schools stood with him, and the head of the
university of Sofa interpreted it; and returned the book of the law to
the "Chazan", and he returned it to the chest.''

That part of the sacred volume which was delivered unto Jesus at this
time, was

the book of the prophet Esaias; it is very likely, that the lesson out
of the prophets for that day, was to be read out of the prophecy of
Isaiah; and it seems probable, that it was the single book of Isaiah, or
that prophecy rolled up by itself, in one volume, that was delivered to
Christ; as the law was divided, into five parts, each fifth part was
sometimes in a book, or volume by itself: hence a fifth part of the law,
is by the Jews interpreted (w), "a book" of the law, in which there is
but one fifth part; so might the prophets be in separate and distinct
books, and it as if they sometimes were, by the following account (x) a
man may

"join together the law, the prophets, and the holy writings, as one, the
words of R. Meir. R. Juda says, the law by itself, the prophets by
themselves, and the holy writings by themselves; and the wise men say,
each by themselves (i.e. each book by itself;) and says R. Judah, it
happened to Baithus ben Zunin, that he had eight prophets joined
together as one; and there are that say, that he had not, but, , "every
one by itself."''

And when he had opened the book; or unrolled it, for books formerly were
written in rolls of paper and parchment; and in this form, is the book
of the law with the Jews, in their synagogues, to this day:

"all books, they say (y), are rolled from the beginning to the end of
them, but the book of the law is rolled to the middle of it, and a
pillar, or column, is made for it here and there; says R. Eliezer with
R. Zadok, so the writers of books in Jerusalem made their books: the
Rabbins teach, that they do not make the book of the law its length,
more than its circumference, nor its circumference more than its
length.''

Such a roll, or volume, of the prophet Isaiah, Christ unrolled, till he
came to the place he intended to read: it is a rule with the Jews (z)
that

"they do not unroll the book of the law in the congregation, because of
the glory of the congregation.''

It may therefore be asked, whether Christ did not break this rule, since
he unrolled the book that was given him, publicly in the synagogue? To
which it may be replied, that it was lawful to unroll the book of the
prophets, which was what Christ did, but not the law; for so runs
another of their rules, (a).

"they skip in the prophets, but not in the law, because, , "that they
unroll a prophet publicly", but they do not unroll the law publicly.''

Christ having thus unrolled the volume of the prophet Isaiah, which was
put into his hands by the "Chazan", or minister,

he found the place where it was written; as is expressed in the
following verse, and which is to be seen in [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001), and which was either the lesson
of the day, or what Christ particularly sought for, and looked out; or
was providentially directed to, as what was pertinent to himself, and
proper to read and insist on at this time; for it was not by chance that
he hit on this place, and read it, but it was according to purpose, and
with design. Before the reading of the prophets, a blessing used to be
said, which was in this form (b);

"blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the king of the world, Who hath
chosen the good prophets, and art well pleased with their words, which
are said in truth; blessed art thou, O Lord, who hast chosen the law,
Moses his servant, and Israel his people, and the prophets of truth and
righteousness.''

Whether this was delivered by Christ, is not certain; however, he read
the following passage.

\(r\) Jarchi & Battenora in Misn. Sota, c. 7. sect. 7. & Yoma, c. 7. 1.
(s) Misn. Yoma, c. 7. sect. 1. Maimon. Yom Haccippurim, c. 3. sect. 10.
(t) Misn. Sota, c. 7. sect. 8. (u) Juchasin, fol. 123. 1. (w) Gloss. in
T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 27. 1. (x) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 13. 2. &
Massechet Sopherim, c. 3. sect 1, 5. (y) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 14.
1. (z) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 70. 1. Maimon. Hilch, Tephilla, c. 12. sect.
23. (a) Massecheth Sepherim, c. 11. sect. 2. (b) Seder Tephillot, fol.
127. 2. Ed. Basil.

[Luke 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 4:18</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,.... By whom is meant, the third
person in the Trinity; so called, to distinguish him from all other
spirits; and who was given to Christ as man, without measure, whereby he
was qualified for his great work: and intends the Spirit of Jehovah,
with all his gifts and graces, who was, and abode on Christ, as a Spirit
of wisdom and of understanding, of counsel and of might, of knowledge,
and of the fear of the Lord; he was upon him, and in him, the first
moment of his conception, which was by his power; and he visibly
descended on him at his baptism; and the phrase denotes the permanency
and continuance of him with him:

because he hath anointed me; or "that he might anoint me": the Ethiopic
version renders it, "by whom he hath anointed me"; for it was with the
Holy Ghost he was anointed, as to be king and priest, so likewise to be
a prophet: hence he has the name Messiah, which signifies anointed: and
this unction he had, in order

to preach the Gospel to the poor: in Isaiah it is, "to the meek"; which
design the same persons, and mean such as are poor in spirit, and are
sensible of their spiritual poverty; have low and humble thoughts of
themselves, and of their own righteousness; and seek to Christ for
durable riches and true righteousness, and frankly acknowledge that all
they have and are, is owing to the grace of God: and generally speaking,
these are the poor of this world, and poor in their intellectuals, who
have but a small degree of natural wisdom and knowledge: to these the
Gospel, or glad tidings of the love, grace, and mercy of God in Christ,
of peace, pardon, righteousness, life and salvation by Christ, were
preached by him; and that in so clear a manner, and with such power and
authority, as never was before, or since; and for this purpose was he
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows:

he hath sent me to heal the broken hearted; whose hearts are broken, and
made contrite by the word of God, under the influence of the Spirit of
God, and with a sense of sin; and are wounded with it, and are humbled
for it; and are in great pain and distress, and even inconsolable, and
ready to faint and die; for a wounded spirit who can bear? now Christ
was sent to heal such persons by his own stripes, by binding up their
wounds, by the application of his blood to them, which is a sovereign
balm for every wound; by the discoveries of pardoning grace to their
souls, and by opening and applying the comfortable promises of the
Gospel, by his Spirit, to them:

to preach deliverance to the captives; who are captives to sin, Satan,
and the law; from which, there is only deliverance by him; who saves his
people from their sins, redeems them from the law, and leads captivity
captive; and which liberty and deliverance are preached and published in
the Gospel, and by Christ the author of them:

and recovering of sight to the blind; which in the prophet is, "and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound"; and which the Septuagint
render, as here in Luke, and the Chaldee paraphrase in part agrees with
it, interpreting it thus, "to the prisoners", "be ye revealed to the
light" now because persons in prison are in darkness, and see no light,
therefore they are represented as blind; and both are the case of
sinners, they are in the prison of sin and of the law, and are blind,
ignorant, and insensible of their state; until Christ both opens the
prison, and sets them free, and opens their eyes, and gives them
spiritual sight; when he says to the prisoners go forth, to them that
are in darkness show yourselves, [Isa
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009)

To set at liberty them that are bruised: these words are not in [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001) but in the Septuagint version of
[Isa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006) from whence they seem to be
taken, or else from [Isa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007) it being
allowable for a reader in the prophets, to skip from place to place,
which our Lord here did, in order to explain this passage more fully.

[Luke 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 4:19</span></span>

To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. The time which he willed and
fixed for the redemption of his people, and in which he showed his
goodwill and pleasure unto sinful men, in the gift of his Son to them,
and for them; and which, as the Arabic and Syriac versions render it,
was a time "acceptable to the Lord": the sufferings of Christ were
according to his will; his sacrifice was of a sweet smelling savour to
him; his righteousness he was well pleased with; and the satisfaction
and atonement for sin he made was a plenary and complete one: all Christ
did, and suffered, were grateful to God, because hereby his perfections
were glorified, his purposes, counsel, and covenant were accomplished,
and his people saved. The Persic version renders it, "to preach the law
acceptable to God", neither agreeable to the original text, nor its
sense; for Christ was sent to preach the Gospel, and not the law. In the
Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions is added, "and the day of vengeance",
out of the prophecy in [Isa 61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002) but
is not in any of the copies, or other versions. Our Lord did not read
through all the three verses in the prophet, as it might be thought he
would, and which was agreeable to the Jewish canon (c):

"he that reads in the law may not read less than three verses, and he
may not read to an interpreter more than one verse, and in a prophet
three; and if those three are three sections, they read everyone; they
skip in a prophet, but they do not skip in the law.''

This last our Lord did, though he did not strictly attend to the former.
Indeed, their rule, as elsewhere (d) given, obliged to read one and
twenty verses; but this was not always observed; for

"if on a sabbath day there was an interpreter, or a preacher, they read
in a prophet three verses, or five, or seven, and were not solicitous
about twenty and one (e)''

\(c\) Misn. Megilia, c. 4. sect. 4. Massechet Sopherim, c. 11. sect. 1.
(d) Piske Harosh Megilla, c. 3. art. 6. (e) Massechet Sopherim, c. 12.
sect. 7.

[Luke 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 4:20</span></span>

And he closed the book,.... "Or rolled it up"; and so the high priest
did, after he read in the book of the law, on the day of atonement, all
that was necessary to be read, , "he rolled the book of the law", and
put it in his bosom (f):

and he gave it again to the minister; the Chazan (g), who was the
minister, or servant of the congregation, who had the affairs of it upon
him, to let in, and bring out, and to order all things; and particularly
to take care of the book of the law, and the chest, or ark in which it
was. If the same rule was observed giving and taking the book of any
prophet, as the book of the law; then Christ gave it to the minister,
and he received it with his right hand: for so it is said (h),

"he that gives the book of the law to his friend, may not give it but
with the right hand; and he that receives it may not receive it but with
the right hand; for so was the giving of it on Mount Sinai, according to
[Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002).''

And sat down; as was the manner of the Jews, when they taught, or
preached; See Gill on [Mat 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001).

and the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were fastened on
him: they looked very wistly at him, and were very attentive to what he
should say, upon such a passage of Scripture, which they knew referred
to the Messiah; and the rather, as they had known him formerly, and had
heard that he was said to be the Messiah.

\(f\) Misn. Yoma, c. 7. sect. 1. (g) Bartenora in Misn. Sota, c. 7.
sect. 7. (h) Massechet Sopherirn, c. 3. sect. 10.

[Luke 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 4:21</span></span>

And he began to say unto them,.... To preach from those words; the
explanation of which he gave, though not here recorded, and applied them
to himself, to whom they belonged, saying:

this day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; which is as if he
should say, I am the person here spoken of; and at this present time the
Spirit of God is upon me; I am anointed with the Holy Ghost, and now
preach glad tidings to you, and all the good things here mentioned, and
for the several ends proposed; and this Scripture has its full
accomplishment which has been read unto you, and you have heard this
day. So the Syriac version renders it, "which is in your ears"; that is,
which you have now heard. The Jews themselves acknowledge, that these
words are spoken of the Messiah. One of their writers (i) says,

"these are the words of the prophet with respect to the Messiah; for the
Messiah shall say so, "because the Lord hath anointed me", &c.''

And so said the true Messiah Jesus. Another of them expresses himself
thus (k):

"these are the words of the prophet with respect to the Messiah; for the
Messiah shall say thus, "because the Lord hath anointed me", &c. or they
are the words of the prophet concerning himself.''

And elsewhere it is said by them (l),

"the holy, blessed God, will send his Messiah to us, and he shall be
worthy of this, (i.e. the character of a meek person) as it is said,
[Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001) "he hath sent me to preach
glad tidings to the meek."''

\(i\) Kimchi in Sepher Shorash. rad. (k) R. Sol. Hamelec in Miclol Yophi
in loc. (l) Juchaain, fol. 69. 1.

[Luke 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 4:22</span></span>

And all bare him witness,.... That he was right in applying the words to
the Messiah; but not that he himself was the Messiah, and that he was
right in applying them to himself; for they did not believe in him, as
appears from what follows

and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth; not
so much at the matter, the sum, and substance of them, as expressive of
the love, grace, and favour of God shown in the mission and unction of
the Messiah, and in that liberty, deliverance, and salvation he was sent
to effect and proclaim; as at the graceful manner in which he delivered
himself, and the aptness of his words, the propriety of his diction, and
the majesty, power, and authority, with which his expressions were
clothed; and they were more amazed at all this, since they knew his
parentage and education, and in what manner he had been brought up among
them; and therefore it was astonishing to them, where he had his
learning, knowledge, and wisdom:

and they said, is not this Joseph's son? the carpenter, and who was
brought up, by him, to his trade, and never learned letters; from whom
had he this doctrine? of whom has he learned this way of address, and to
speak with so much eloquence and propriety, since his education was
mean, and he has never been at the feet of any of the doctors, or has
been brought up in any of the academies and schools of learning?

[Luke 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 4:23</span></span>

And he said unto them, ye will surely say unto me this proverb,.... Or
"parable"; for any pithy sentence, or proverbial expression, was, by the
Jews, called a parable:

physician heal thyself; and which was a proverb in use with the Jews;
and which is sometimes expressed thus, , "go heal thyself" (m); and
sometimes in this form, , "physician, heal thy lameness" (n): the
meaning of which is, that a man ought to look at home, and take care of
himself, and of those that belonged to him; and Christ was aware that
his townsmen would object this to him, that if he was the person he was
said to be, and could do the miracles and cures which were ascribed to
him, he ought to do something of this kind at home, among them, who were
his townsmen, neighbours, relations, and acquaintance; that is, heal
their sick, lame, blind, leprous, deaf, and dumb: and that this is the
sense of it, is manifest from what follows,

whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum: a place where Christ often
was, and where he cured the centurion's servant of the palsy, and
Peter's wife's mother of a fever, and another man sick of a palsy, and
the woman of her bloody issue, and a man that had a withered hand, and
where he raised Jairus's daughter from the dead:

do also here in thy country; or city, as the Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and
Ethiopic versions render it: hence it appears, that this was not the
first of our Lord's ministry; he had preached elsewhere, and wrought
miracles before he came to Nazareth, and of which his townsmen had
heard; and therefore were desirous that he would do the like among them,
if he was able, for they seem to be very incredulous, and to question
the reports of him, and his ability to perform such things; however, if
he could, they thought they had as good a right to his favours and
benefits, as any, this being his native place.

\(m\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 31. 2. (n) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 20.
4.

[Luke 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 4:24</span></span>

And he said, verily I say unto you,.... Another proverb in use among
them, the meaning of which was well known to them, and was very
appropriate to the present case:

no prophet is accepted in his own country; See Gill on [Mat
13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057)

[Luke 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 4:25</span></span>

But I tell you of a truth,.... Or in truth: it answers to a phrase often
used by the Jewish writers (o); and, which, they say (p), wherever, and
of whatsoever it is spoken, it signifies a tradition of Moses from Mount
Sinai, and so that which is most true, sure, and firm, and to be
depended on; and such is what our Lord hereafter delivers; yea, the
word, "truth", or "of a truth", and which is the same as "in truth", is
used by the Jews (q), as , "the form of an oath": so that these words of
Christ are a strong asseveration, and amount to a solemn oath with
respect to what follows:

many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias; or Elijah, the prophet;
that is, there were many that were not only widows, but poor widows, and
in very famishing circumstances in the land of Israel, when Elijah was
the prophet of the Lord to that people:

and when the heaven was shut up three years and six months; so that no
rain descended all that time: the same is observed by [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017) and though the space of time, in
which there was no rain, is not so clear from the history of it in the
book of Kings; yet, as this is fixed by Christ, and his apostle, and
there is nothing in the history that contradicts it, it is to be
received without scruple:

when great famine was throughout all the land of Israel; and which so
long a drought must needs bring.

\(o\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 1. sect. 3. Trumot, c. 2. sect. 1. (p) T. Hieros.
Sabbat, fol. 3. 2. & 12. 1. Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Trumot, c. 3.
sect. 1. (q) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 55. 1. & Gloss. in ib.

[Luke 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 4:26</span></span>

But unto none of them was Elias sent,.... That is, to none of the poor
widows in the land of Israel was the prophet sent, to supply them with
food, and relieve them in their famishing circumstances, as might most
reasonably have been expected:

save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon; which in [Kg1
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010) is called "Zarephath"; and by
the Septuagint there, "Sarepta of Sidon", as here. Pliny (r) speaks of
it by the same name, and reckons it to Sidon:

unto a woman that was a widow: she is said by the Jews (s), to be the
mother of Jonah the prophet. Our Lord meant to observe, by this
instance, as by the following, that God bestows his favours on persons
in a sovereign way, and sometimes upon the most unlikely; as in a time
of famine, he overlooked the poor widows in Israel, his peculiar people,
and sent his prophet to a Gentile woman in one of the cities of Sidon;
and therefore they should cease to wonder if he wrought his miracles in
other places, and not in his own country; since this was agreeable to
the divine procedure in other cases, especially since they were a
cavilling and unbelieving people. The Jews say (t), that in all that
generation there was not found any one that was worthy, as this woman.

\(r\) L. 5. c. 19. (s) Pirke Eliezer, c. 33. (t) Zohar in Exod. fol. 89.
2.

[Luke 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 4:27</span></span>

And many lepers were in Israel,.... The leprosy was a disease very
common among the Jews; hence those laws concerning it in [Lev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001) and it seems by this account,
that it was very prevalent,

in the time of Eliseus the prophet; that is, the prophet Elisha; who, by
the Septuagint, in

1Ki 19:16 and, in other places, is called "Elisaie": and none of them
was cleansed; from their leprosy, by any direction of the prophet,

saving Naaman, the Syrian: or but Naaman, who was not an Israelite, but
a Syrian: he was cleansed and cured of his leprosy, being ordered by
Elisha to dip himself seven times in Jordan, which he did, and was
healed, [Kg2 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014).

[Luke 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 4:28</span></span>

And all they in the synagogue,.... The ruler and minister, and the whole
multitude of the common people that were met together there for worship;
and who before were amazed at his eloquence, and the gracefulness of his
delivery; and could not but approve of his ministry, though they could
not account for it, how he should come by his qualifications for it:

when they heard these things; these two instances of Elijah and Elisha,
the one supplying the wants of a Sidonian woman, and the other healing a
Syrian leper, when no notice were taken by them of poor widows and
lepers in Israel:

were filled with wrath; for by these instances they perceived, that they
were compared to the Israelites in the times of wicked Ahab and Jezebel;
and that no miracles were to be wrought among them, or benefits
conferred on them, though they were his townsmen; yea, that the Gentiles
were preferred unto them: and indeed the calling of the Gentiles was
here plainly intimated, which was always ungrateful and provoking to the
Jews; and it was suggested, that the favours of God, and grace of the
Messiah, are dispensed in a sovereign and discriminating way, than which
nothing is more offensive to carnal minds.

[Luke 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 4:29</span></span>

And rose up,.... In great wrath, and, in a noisy and tumultuous manner,
before the service was well over, and without being regularly dismissed:

and thrust him out of the city; first out of the synagogue, and then out
of their city, as unworthy to be in it, though an inhabitant of it; and
as if he had done something deserving of death; and therefore to be
punished as a malefactor without the city:

and led him unto the brow of the hill; the edge of it, where it run out,
and hung over the precipice:

whereon their city was built; so that it was a city upon an hill, and
very visible, to which Christ may allude in [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014). That they might cast him down
headlong; and break him to pieces: in this manner ten thousand Edomites
were destroyed by the Jews, in the times of Amaziah, [Ch2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#012) though this was not an usual way
with the Jews of putting persons to death, as with some other nations
(u); their four capital punishments were stoning, strangling, burning,
and killing with the sword (w): nor did the inhabitants of Nazareth
proceed in any judicial manner with Christ, but hurried him away, in
order to destroy him, without any formal process, in the manner the
zealots did; though to put any man to death, or to inflict any
punishment on a person on the sabbath day, as this was, was contrary to
their own canon, which runs thus (x);

"they do not inflict punishment on the sabbath day, even though it is
the punishment of an affirmative precept; they do not beat one that is
guilty, nor put to death, as it is said, [Exo
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#003) "ye shall kindle no fire
throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day": this is a caution to
the sanhedrim, that they do not burn on the sabbath day he that is
condemned to burning; and this is the law with respect to any one that
is liable to the other punishments.''

But these men, without any regard to the place where they were, and the
worship they were concerned in, and the day of the sabbath which then
was, rise up in great wrath and fury, and without any show of justice,
and in the most brutish and barbarous manner attempt to take away the
life of Christ.

\(u\) Vid. Rycquium de Capitol. Born. c. 4. (w) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 7.
sect. 1. (x) Moses Kotseneis Mitzvot Tora, pr. neg. 67.

[Luke 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 4:30</span></span>

But he passing through the midst of them,.... Either in so strong and
powerful a manner, and with so much swiftness, that being once out of
their hands, they could not lay hold on him again; or else he put on
another form, or made himself invisible to them; or he held their eyes
that they could not see him, or know him, as in [Luk
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#016) however it was, he made use of,
and showed his divine power; and which he did, because his time to die
was not yet come, nor was he to die such a death: and this also shows,
that when he did die, he laid down his life freely and voluntarily,
since he could then have exerted his power, and delivered himself out of
the hands of his enemies, as now: and

went his way; from Nazareth elsewhere; nor do we read of his returning
there any more.

[Luke 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 4:31</span></span>

And came down to Capernaum,.... Which was, as Dr. Lightfoot thinks,
sixteen miles or more from Nazareth; and Christ may be said to "come
down" to it, because of the situation of Nazareth, which was upon an
hill:

a city of Galilee: of lower Galilee, near the sea of Galilee:

and taught them on the sabbath days: that is, he went into the synagogue
at Capernaum, on the sabbath days, whenever he was there, and taught the
inhabitants, explained some passage or other in the Old Testament, as he
had done at Nazareth and instructed them in the doctrines of the Gospel.

[Luke 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 4:32</span></span>

And they were astonished at his doctrine,.... At the matter of it, as
well as the manner in which it was delivered, it being so different from
the Scribes and Pharisees, they had been used to:

for his word was with power: he spake with great fervency, majesty, and
authority, and not with coldness and indifference, and dependence on the
sense and authority of others, as their teachers did; and besides, such
power went along with the word, that it reached their hearts; and as the
Persic version renders it, "he penetrated them with it"; and he also
confirmed it by powerful operations, by miraculous works, such as
casting out devils, and healing diseases, of which an account follows.

[Luke 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 4:33</span></span>

And in the synagogue there was a man,.... That is, in the synagogue at
Capernaum, as Christ was there teaching, on one of the sabbath days
before mentioned; there was a certain man,

which had a spirit of an unclean devil: who was possessed with the
devil, who is by nature and practice unclean; and was filled with the
spirit of the devil, with a spirit of divination, and was acted by him,
to impose upon the people; he influenced his mind as an enthusiast, as
well as possessed his body: and this was on the sabbath day; whereas the
Jews say (y), that

"Satan and the evil demon flee on the sabbath day to the mountains of
darkness, and do not appear all the sabbath day, because that day is
holy, and they are "unclean"; but in the evening of the sabbath they
prepare themselves, and meet the children of men, and hurt them.''

And cried out with a loud voice; See Gill on [Mar
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#023).

\(y\) Ib pr. affirm, 29.

[Luke 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 4:34</span></span>

Saying, let us alone,.... Not that there were more spirits in him than
one, as the whole account shows; but he includes the rest of the devils
in that country; See Gill on [Mar
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024).

[Luke 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 4:35</span></span>

And Jesus rebuked him,.... Not the man, but the unclean spirit: or "that
demon", as the Persic version reads it:

saying, hold thy peace, or "be thou muzzled", as the word signifies,

and come out of him; See Gill on [Mat
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025).

and when the devil had thrown him in the midst; in the "midst of them",
as the Arabic version adds; that is, in the midst of the people that
were in the synagogue; or, as the Ethiopic version reads, "in the midst
of the synagogue", where he threw him into convulsive fits, and left
him:

he came out of him, and hurt him not; though he sadly convulsed him, and
put him to great pain, yet he did not wound him in any part of his body,
or take away the use of any of his limbs; and much less hurt his soul so
as to destroy it; all which was desired and intended by him, but was
hindered by Christ; See Gill on [Mar
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#026).

[Luke 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 4:36</span></span>

And they were all amazed,.... The people in the synagogue; they were
astonished at his doctrine before, and now at his miracles:

and spake among themselves; as they were in the synagogue,

what a word is this? meaning, either what sort of doctrine is this which
is attended with such power and miracles; or what a word of command is
this, "hold thy peace, and come out of him?" and so the Ethiopic version
renders it, "what is this mandatory", or "commanding word?" to which
agrees the Syriac version, rendering it with the following clause thus;
"what is this word", that "with authority and power it commands the
unclean spirits, and they come out?" See Gill on [Mar
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#027).

[Luke 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 4:37</span></span>

And the fame of him went out,.... From hence on account of his
dispossessing this unclean spirit, which seems to be the first instance
of this kind:

into every place in the country round about; into every city, town, and
village in Galilee, and even into all places round about Galilee; [Mar
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#028).

[Luke 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 4:38</span></span>

And he arose out of the synagogue,.... That is, when he had dispossessed
the unclean spirit, he rose up, and went out of the synagogue:

and entered into Simon's house; the house of Simon Peter, and which was
also Andrew's; and in Beza's ancient copy, and in one of Stephens's, it
is added, "and of Andrew"; who, though they were both natives of
Bethsaida, yet, it seems, had an house at Capernaum, whither Christ went
of his own accord, or by an invitation given him:

and Simons wife's mother was taken with a great fever. The Vulgate Latin
version reads, "with great fevers". The fever is

"a disease, or rather a class of diseases, whose characteristic is a
preternatural heat felt through the whole body, or, at least, the
principal parts thereof, attended with other symptoms----"One" defines a
fever, a strenuous endeavour, or effort of nature to throw off some
morbific matter, that greatly incommodes the body.---- "Another", an
augmented velocity of the blood; others, a fermentation of the blood;
accompanied with a quick pulse and excessive heat.----The causes of
fevers are innumerable, and the disease even often arises in the
soundest bodies, where there was no previous morbific apparatus, as
cachochymia, plethora, &c. but merely from a change of air, food, or
other alteration in the non-naturals. A fever, "one" observes, is an
inseparable companion of an inflammation. The symptoms are many: every
fever, arising from any internal cause, is attended with a quick pulse,
and unusual heat at different times, and in different degrees. Where
these are intense, the fever is acute, where remiss, slow. The disease
begins almost always with a sense of; chillness, and in its progress is
chiefly distinguished by the velocity of the pulse: so that a too quick
contraction of the heart, with an increased resistance, or impulse
against the capillaries, furnishes the proper idea of a fever (z).''

The fever Peter's wife's mother lay ill of, is said to be a "great one";
which circumstance is the rather mentioned, to illustrate the miraculous
cure of it by Christ; See Gill on [Mat
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014).

And they besought him for her; either his disciples Peter, Andrew,
James, and John, who were all present, or the other relations and
friends of the sick person, which were in the house; who having heard of
his casting out the unclean spirit in the synagogue, believed that he
had power to heal this disease; and therefore intreat him, for her sake,
and upon her account, that he would restore her health.

\(z\) See Chambers's Cyclopaedia in the word "Fever".

[Luke 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 4:39</span></span>

And he stood over her,.... "At her head", as the Persic version reads:
he inclined himself towards her, to see how she did, and to take her by
the hand, and lift her up;

and rebuked the fever. The Syriac and Persic versions read, "her fever",
that which was upon her;

and it left her, as Mark says, "immediately"; as soon as ever he had
touched her hand, and rebuked the fever, and bid it be gone:

and immediately she arose, and ministered unto them; See Gill on [Mat
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015).

[Luke 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 4:40</span></span>

Now when the sun was setting,.... And so the sabbath was over; See Gill
on [Mat 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016).

all they that had any sick, with divers diseases, brought them unto him;
that is, as many of the inhabitants of Capernaum as had sick persons in
their houses, let their diseases be what they would, brought them to
Christ in Simon's house; which, sabbath being over, they might do
consistent with their laws, and the traditions of the elders, and
without any just offence to the Scribes and Pharisees, who were
tenacious of them; and they were encouraged to do so, partly through the
dispossessing the unclean spirit in their synagogue that day, which many
of them had been witnesses of; and partly through the cure of Peter's
wife's mother, which they had heard of:

and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them; without the
use of medicine, by the mere imposition of his hands; which was
accompanied with such power and virtue from him, as to remove, at once,
every disease; nor did he refuse any person, how unworthy soever they
might be in themselves, and how obstinate their disease might be.

[Luke 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 4:41</span></span>

Not willingly, nor of themselves, but at the word and command of Christ,
who ordered them to depart,

crying out and saying; as they left the bodies, of men, and not with any
goodwill to Christ:

thou art Christ; the true Messiah, that was of old promised and
prophesied of, and has been long expected to come:

the Son of God; the only begotten Son of God, possessed of the same
perfections with God his Father; and particularly of almighty power, of
which they were convinced by his dispossessing them;

and he rebuking them, suffered them not to speak; for he needed not
their testimony, nor did he choose to be made known by them:

for they knew that he was Christ, or "that they knew that he was
Christ"; so the Syriac version: they certainly did know that he was the
Messiah, partly by the voice from heaven at his baptism, and partly by
his power over them: but Christ would not suffer them to say that he was
the Messiah, or that they knew him to be so; either because the time was
not come for such a declaration to be made, or they were not the proper
persons to make it; and lest such a publication, by them, should be made
a handle of by the Scribes and Pharisees, to say that he had society
with devils, and by them cast them out.

[Luke 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 4:42</span></span>

And when it was day,.... The "day after", as the Persic version renders
it;

at the dawning, or "break of day", as the Syriac. He rose a great while
before it was day, as Mark says, [Mar
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035) but did not go out till it was
day, or till day was coming on, when

he departed from Peter's house, and from Capernaum:

and went into a desert place; for the sake of solitude, that he might be
retired from company, and have an opportunity of privately praying to
God:

and the people sought, and came unto him: they first went to Simon's
house, and not finding him there, sought for him elsewhere: and when
they understood where he was, they came to him,

and stayed him that he should not depart from them; they laid hold on
him, and held him, and did all they could to persuade him, to abide with
them constantly, and not think of removing from them: though perhaps
this was not so much from love to Christ's person and presence, or any
regard to his ministry, and the good and welfare of their immortal
souls, as on account of the miracles he wrought, and the corporal
benefits he bestowed on them.

[Luke 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 4:43</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... In answer to their importunate requests:

I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also; as well as to
Capernaum; and though they did not express their desire of his
continuance with them, in order to preach the Gospel to them; yet Christ
signifies, that a principal part of his work lay in preaching the things
concerning the kingdom of God, the Gospel dispensation on earth, the
doctrines and ordinances of it, as well as the things which relate to
the kingdom of glory; as what is the saints meetness for it, their
regeneration, and their right unto it, which lies in his righteousness:
and that as he had preached these things at Capernaum, there was a
necessity upon him to preach them in other cities of Galilee and Judea:
for therefore am I sent; as he was by his heavenly Father, and had
himself also undertook and engaged to do it.

[Luke 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 4:44</span></span>

And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee. In the several synagogues
that were in different cities and towns throughout all Galilee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 5](luk005)

</div>
