<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk022)  [Next](luk024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)

[Luke 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 23:1</span></span>

And the whole multitude of them,.... Of the chief priests, Scribes, and
elders; the whole of the sanhedrim, excepting Nicodemus, and Joseph of
Arimathea, having in their court condemned Christ to death:

arose; from the council chamber, where they sat in judgment upon him:

and led him unto Pilate, the Roman governor, and into the praetorium, or
judgment hall, where causes were tried by him; hither they brought
Jesus, having bound him as a prisoner and a malefactor, that their
sentence might be confirmed by civil authority, and that he might be put
to the death of the cross, which was a Roman punishment.

[Luke 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 23:2</span></span>

And they began to accuse him,.... After they found that Pilate would not
receive him as a malefactor upon their word, and delivery of him to him
as such; but insisted on knowing what they had to charge him with, and
what accusation they had to bring against him:

saying, we have found this fellow perverting the nation; the nation of
the Jews. Three of Beza's copies read, "our nation"; and so do the
Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions; and it is to be
understood, either of his perverting the nation from the true doctrine
of Moses and the prophets; by spreading among them new notions, and
false principles of religion; whereby he was a troubler of God's Israel,
as Ahab charged Elijah, [Kg1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#017)
where the Septuagint use the same word as here; and so is a charge of
heresy, or innovation in religion against Christ: and thus Jesus stands
charged in their writings (o); on those words in [Psa
91:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#010). "Neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling", they have this note;

"that thou mayest not have a son, or a disciple, that corrupts his food
publicly (i.e. his doctrine, who departs from the true doctrine and
worship, to heresy and idolatry, and propagates the same), , "as Jesus
the Nazarene".''

Which last clause, in some later editions of the Talmud, is left out: or
it may be understood of his perverting the nation in their politics, and
so is a charge of sedition against him, as follows;

forbidding to give tribute to Caesar; than which, nothing was more
false; see [Mat 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021) nor does what is
after alleged, support this charge:

saying, that he himself is Christ, a King; or Christ the King, or the
King Christ; that is, he whom the Jews so frequently in their writings
call , "the King Messiah", for so he might be, and was, without any hurt
to Caesar's dignity, or revenue; for though he was a king, yet not an
earthly one; and though he had a kingdom, yet not of this world: indeed
they would insinuate by this, that he set himself up as an earthly king,
in opposition to Caesar, to draw off the people from him, and their
allegiance and duty to him; and so the Jews say of Jesus of Nazareth,
that he was put to death, and had no mercy shown him, because he was ,
"near to the kingdom" (p). The whole of this charge was untrue; he was
so far from perverting the nation with false doctrine and worship, that
he taught the true doctrine, and right way of worship, and refuted the
false glosses of the Pharisees, and opposed the vain traditions of the
elders, by which both were corrupted; and so far was he from any
seditious principles and practices, or doing any injury to Tiberius
Caesar, the then reigning emperor, that he taught the people to give
Caesar the things that were Caesar's, and he himself paid the tribute
money; and when the people would have took him by force, and have made
him a king, he avoided it by getting out of the way, [Joh
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015).

\(o\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 103. 1. & Beracot, fol, 17. 2. (p) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 43. 1.

[Luke 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 23:3</span></span>

And Pilate asked him, saying,.... Observing that it was said, he had
given himself out to be a king; for as for what regarded religion, he
took no notice of it; he put this question to him,

art thou the King of the Jews? that their prophecies speak of, and they
have expected;

and he answered him and said, thou sayest it; that is, thou sayest well;
it is as thou sayest, I am the King of the Jews; See Gill on [Mat
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011) though he did not leave this
without an explanation; without informing him what sort of a king he
was, and what kind of a kingdom he had; see [Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036) which made Pilate perfectly
easy, and desirous to release him, as appears by what follows.

[Luke 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 23:4</span></span>

Then said Pilate to the Chief priests, and to the people,.... Both to
the sanhedrim, and to the mob that were gathered together about the
governor's palace on this occasion; and who were standing without the
judgment hall, into which they would not enter, lest they should be
defiled, and be unfit to eat the passover: wherefore Pilate came out to
them; and this was the second time of his coming out to them, when he
said the following words, [Joh 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028).

I find no fault in this man; no cause, or reason, why any punishment
should be inflicted on him, and especially he be put to death; no crime
that can be fastened on him, or accusation proved against him, or any
thing that amounts to a charge of sedition: the man is an harmless and
innocent man, that has done nothing against Caesar, or the government,
and good of the nation; and therefore is not worthy of death, or of
stripes, but should be discharged. This was Pilate's sense.

[Luke 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 23:5</span></span>

And they were the more fierce,.... Or urgent to have him put to death;
so the Hebrew word is rendered in [Exo
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033) which answers to that here used.
"They cried out", as the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions read;
they were more clamorous and noisy; they cried out louder, and exerted
themselves with great fury and violence, and added strength to their
clamour, and increased their charges:

saying, he stirreth up the people; to sedition and rebellion:

teaching throughout all Jewry; or "Judea"; not in one, or a few places
only, but every where:

beginning from Galilee; where indeed our Lord did begin his ministry,
and where he chiefly taught; see [Mat
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012) and which they rather chose to
mention, because that the Galilaeans were reckoned a seditious people,
and had been drawn into rebellion, and had suffered for it; see [Act
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037)

to this place; the city of Jerusalem, the metropolis of the nation;
suggesting, that he taught seditious principles not only in Galilee, but
all the way from thence throughout Judea, and even in their chief city,
and had drawn many disciples after him every where; so that it was a
notorious case, as well as of great consequence, and much danger, and
ought not to be trifled with.

[Luke 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 23:6</span></span>

When Pilate heard of Galilee,.... "The name of Galilee", as the Syriac
and Persic versions read when that was mentioned,

he asked; the Ethiopic version says, the "Galilaeans"; some of which
might be present, being come to the feast of the passover, and were very
proper persons to inquire of:

whether the man were a Galilean; so Jesus was reputed to be: for though
he was born at Bethlehem of Judah, he was brought up at Nazareth in
Galilee, where he spent the greater part of his private life, and his
public ministry was chiefly exercised in those parts; hence the Jews
thought, that he came out of Galilee, and was a Galilean, [Joh
7:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#041) and so he used to be called by
Julian the apostate; and it seems, that the answer returned to Pilate
was, that he was a Galilean; and so the Persic version adds, and they
said, yes; for it follows,

[Luke 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 23:7</span></span>

And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction,....
The country which was under his power, and he had the government of; for
Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, [Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001). This was Herod Antipas, the son
of Herod the great, and the same that beheaded John the Baptist;
wherefore as soon as Pilate found that Jesus was one of his province,
immediately he sent him to Herod: to be examined, and to have his cause
tried before him: and this he did partly, that he might be rid of this
troublesome business; and partly that he might show to Herod what a
regard he had to his jurisdiction, and power; and that he was unwilling
to break in upon it, or usurp that to himself, which did not belong to
him: the way from Pilate's hall, to the place where Herod was, is
computed, by Adrichomius, to be about three hundred and fifty steps:

who himself was also at Jerusalem at that time; or "in those days"; the
days of the passover; for Herod being born a Jew, and the son of a
proselyte, was come to Jerusalem, at this time, to keep the feast of the
passover.

[Luke 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 23:8</span></span>

And when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceeding glad,.... For though he had
been brought up in his country, and had so frequently preached, and
wrought miracles there, he had never seen him before; and to have a
sight of him, was a great indulgence to his curiosity:

for he was desirous to see him of a long season; perhaps ever since he
had heard of his fame, and had entertained a notion that Christ was John
the Baptist risen from the dead, whom he had beheaded; and therefore was
desirous of seeing him, that he might know whether he was John or not:

because he had heard many things of him; concerning his doctrine, and
miracles, and especially the latter; how that he cast out devils, and
healed all manner of diseases, and even raised the dead to life:

and he hoped to have seen some miracle done by him; which would have
still more gratified his curiosity, and have been the subject of further
inquiry and conversation.

[Luke 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 23:9</span></span>

Then he questioned with him in many words,.... Or talked very much to
him, inquiring who he was, whether John the Baptist, or no; whether it
was true that he had wrought such miracles he had heard of, and how he
wrought them, and by what power he performed them, and how he came by
it; and used many arguments to persuade him to work a miracle at that
time:

but he answered him nothing; would not give him one word in return to
his many words, nor work any miracle in his presence; he answered him
neither by words nor deeds; he would not indulge his curiosity, though
he might have obtained his liberty by it.

[Luke 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 23:10</span></span>

And the chief priests and Scribes,.... The sanhedrim that followed him
from Pilate's hall, to Herod's palace; fearing, lest Herod should be
disposed to let him go, should he gratify him by working a miracle:

stood; before Herod; so witnesses, and accusers, used to do; See Gill on
[Mar 14:57](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#057).

and vehemently accused him; of the same things they had accused him
before Pilate, with great bitterness and constancy, increasing, and
aggravating the charges against him.

[Luke 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 23:11</span></span>

And Herod, with his men of war,.... Or his soldiers, his bodyguards that
attended his person, who came with him from Galilee, and were both for
his security and service, and for his pomp and magnificence:

set him at nought; made nothing of him; had him in no account; treated
him as a silly, and contemptible creature, that could not do any thing
that was reported of him; nor able to say any thing for himself; but
took him to be a mere fool and idiot; and so they used him:

and mocked him; as a king, and made sport and pastime with him:

and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe. The Vulgate Latin renders it, "a
white robe"; a token of his innocence, though not so designed by them,
but rather by way of derision, as a symbol of his simplicity and folly.
The Syriac version renders it, "scarlet"; and the Arabic and Persic
versions, "red". It is very likely that it was an old worn-out robe of
one of the officers, or soldiers, which they put on him; in contempt of
his being a king, as the Roman soldiers afterwards did, upon the same
account:

and sent him again to Pilate; uncondemned, not knowing what to make of
him, or the charge against him, and he might be unwilling to have any
hand in his death, not having forgotten the case of John the Baptist;
and therefore remits him to Pilate, to do as he thought fit with him.

[Luke 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 23:12</span></span>

And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together,.... For it
pleased Herod, that Pilate should show such a regard to his authority
and power, as to send one that belonged to his jurisdiction to take
cognizance of his case; and especially as it was a person that was much
talked of, and he had long wanted to see; and Pilate, on the other hand,
was pleased with Herod, that though he was one that was under his
jurisdiction, and so had a right of trying the cause, and either absolve
or condemn, yet chose not to use this his power, but referred the case
to the Roman governor:

for before they were at enmity between themselves; it may be on account
of the Galilaeans, the subjects of Herod, whom Pilate had slain, whilst
they were sacrificing at Jerusalem, [Luk
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001), which Herod might resent, as an
infringement upon his authority and power; for had they been ever so
deserving of punishment, it ought to have been left to him, to have
inflicted it, and not the governor of Judea, who had nothing to do with
them: but now matters were made up by this step of Pilate's, in sending
Christ to him, supposed to be a Galilean, and so of Herod's
jurisdiction; which was tacitly acknowledging his former conduct to be
wrong, and showed a regard to Herod's authority: and thus they were
reconciled together, and agreed in their contemptuous usage, and
ill-treatment of Christ, and so fulfilled [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001).

[Luke 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 23:13</span></span>

And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests,.... That is,
after Herod had sent back Christ unto him, he then summoned the chief
priests together, to consider what should be done to him: and with them
also,

the rulers and the people; both the civil and ecclesiastical rulers, and
the chief among the people, who had been forward in accusing Jesus, and
seeking his death: the latter of these is not read in the Persic
version; and both are joined together in the Syriac and Ethiopic
versions, and read thus; by the former, "the princes, or chiefs of the
people": and by the latter, "the judges of the people": in a word, he
convened the whole sanhedrim, which consisted of the chief priests,
Scribes, and elders of the people.

[Luke 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 23:14</span></span>

Said unto them, ye have brought this man unto me,.... Pointing to Jesus,
who stood before him;

as one that perverteth the people; from their religion, and laws, and
allegiance to Caesar. The Syriac and Persic versions read, "your
people"; of the same nation with them, and that were under their care
and jurisdiction; at least in an ecclesiastical way:

and behold, I having examined him before you; not only privately, and
alone, between themselves in the judgment hall, [Joh
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033) but openly in the presence of
them, when he brought forth Jesus to them, and heard their charges, and
urged him to answer to them, [Mat
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011)

have found no fault in this man; cannot perceive any charge proved
against him, or any crime he is guilty of, for which punishment should
be inflicted on him; or at least, that he should be put to death:

touching, or with regard to

those things, whereof ye accuse him. The Syriac and Persic versions
read, "all those things"; intimating, that he had carefully looked into,
and examined every thing, and had omitted nothing, and that all their
accusations, and charges, put together, did not make it appear that he
was guilty of a single crime.

[Luke 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 23:15</span></span>

No, nor yet Herod,.... Who was a Jew, and better versed in their
religious affairs, and understood the nature of such charges, and the
amount of them, and what was sufficient proof in such cases; and who had
also examined Jesus, and that in their presence, and had heard all that
they had to accuse him with, and yet found no fault in him of any such
kind, as to condemn him to death for it:

for I sent you to him; along with Jesus, to make your allegations
against him good before him; or, "I sent him to him", as the Syriac
version reads; that is, Jesus to him, as the Persic version expresses,
he being of his country, and belonging to his jurisdiction; or, "he sent
him back to us"; as the Arabic version reads, and three of Beza's
copies: that is, Herod, after he had examined Jesus, and found no fault
in him, sent him again to us; not being able to make out any crime
against him, or to pass any judgment on the matter, for it follows;

and lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him; or "by him": the sense
is, either that it appeared to Herod, that Christ had done nothing that
deserved death; or that nothing was done to him by Herod, which showed
that he thought he was worthy of it; since he passed no sentence on him,
nor ordered him to be scourged, nor delivered him into the hands of an
executioner, or to be imprisoned until things could be cleared up.

[Luke 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 23:16</span></span>

I will therefore chastise him,.... Give him some correction, as by
scourging, or beating with rods: this he proposed, not because he
thought him deserving of it, but in complaisance to the Jews; since it
would look as if their charges were not altogether weak and groundless;
and that Jesus was not entirely innocent: this would carry a show of
guilt and punishment, and he hoped this might be thought sufficient, and
so he should please them, and save Jesus from dying, which he much
desired:

and release him; from his bonds, and let him go.

[Luke 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 23:17</span></span>

For of necessity he must release one,.... And therefore proposed to
release Jesus

unto them at the feast; of passover, which now was; not that there was
any law that obliged to it, but it having been customary with the Roman
governor to do so, the people expected it; custom had made it necessary:
and so the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic versions render it, "it was a
custom to release", &c. not at each feast, or every feast, as the last
of these versions read, only at the passover, as is expressed, [Joh
18:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#039).

[Luke 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 23:18</span></span>

And they cried out all at once,.... The chief priests, rulers, and
people, not bearing to hear of a release of him, now they had got him in
their hands; and enraged at the proposal, in a most clamorous way, cried
out, as one man, immediately:

Saying, away with this man; to the cross; to Calvary, the place of
execution; away with him out of the world; he is not fit to live:

and release unto us Barabbas; whose character is given in the next
verse; See Gill on [Mat 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#016).

[Luke 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 23:19</span></span>

Who, for a certain sedition made in the city,.... Of Jerusalem: he had
made an insurrection in it, in opposition to the government, in order to
have thrown off the yoke, and to have asserted and maintained their
liberties, as a free people; or rather to have seized and plundered the
properties of other people, since he is represented elsewhere as a
robber:

and for murder; which had either been committed by himself, or his
accomplices, in the insurrection; and for these things, sedition, and
murder, he

was cast into prison; where he lay till this feast, in order to be
executed.

[Luke 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 23:20</span></span>

Pilate therefore willing to release Jesus,.... Being more and more
convinced of his innocence; and still seeing more clearly into the
wickedness, malice, and envy of his accusers; and having received a
message from his wife:

spake again to them; putting it again to them, which he should release;
asking them what he should do with Jesus; plainly signifying his mind,
that he thought him innocent, and that it would be right to let him go.
The Ethiopic version represents him, saying, "will ye that I save for
you, or release to you the Lord Jesus?"

[Luke 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 23:21</span></span>

But they cried, saying, crucify him, crucify him. They were fierce and
furious, more noisy and clamorous, the more they perceived Pilate was
for saving him; and they were more desirous to have him crucified, and
more impatient until it was done, as the repetition of the word shows.

[Luke 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 23:22</span></span>

And he said unto them the third time,.... After Christ had been sent
back to him from Herod; for he had declared before he had sent him to
him, that he found no fault in him, [Joh
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#038).

Why, what evil hath he done? what capital crime has he committed? is he
guilty of murder? or sedition? or blasphemy? or robbery, and theft? or
any other enormous a crime?

I have found no cause of death in him; why he should be put to death at
all; and much less to this shameful and painful death of the cross,
which was the punishment of slaves, and of the vilest of men, which they
were desirous of:

I will therefore chastise him, and let him go; this he said, not as if
he was determined to do it, whether they liked it, or not; but as
signifying what he willed, or chose, and hoped they would be contented
with, that he should be scourged, or beaten, and dismissed, as he at
first proposed.

[Luke 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 23:23</span></span>

And they were instant with loud voices,.... They were urgent, and
insisted upon his crucifixion, and pressed hard for it, and exerted
their voices, and more loudly called:

requiring him, that he might be crucified: desiring it in the most
importunate manner; signifying, that it must be, that nothing else would
content them:

and the voices of them, and the chief priests, prevailed; upon Pilate to
grant their request, contrary to the dictates of his own conscience, the
conduct of Herod, and the message of his wife; the people being set on
by the chief priests, and the chief priests joining with them, their
numbers were so great, and their requests were pressed with so much
force, and violence, and importunity, that Pilate could not withstand
them.

[Luke 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 23:24</span></span>

And Pilate gave sentence,.... Resolved, determined, and gave out:

that it should be as they required; that they should have their request,
what they asked for; namely, that Jesus should be crucified, and
Barabbas released.

[Luke 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 23:25</span></span>

And he released unto them, him,.... Barabbas, who is not named, as being
a detestable person, and unworthy to be named; and is therefore
described by the infamous, though just character of him, as follows:

that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, as in [Luk
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#019)

whom they had desired; to be granted to them, and released; see [Act
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014)

but he delivered Jesus to their will; to do as they would with him, to
mock, and scourge, and crucify him.

[Luke 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 23:26</span></span>

And as they led him away,.... From Pilate's hall, and out of the city of
Jerusalem, towards Calvary; which was done by the Jews and Roman
soldiers, after they had stripped him of his own clothes, and put on him
a scarlet coat, and had platted a crown of thorn, and put it on his
head, and a reed in his hand, and bowed the knee, and mocked him,
saluting him as King of the Jews; after they had finished their sport
and pastime with him, and had put on him his own clothes again:

they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian; father of Alexander and
Rufus, [Mar 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021); see Gill on [Mat
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032).

coming out of the country; either out of the country part of Judea, to
the city of Jerusalem; or out of the field where he had been about rural
business, and was now returning home, and perhaps knew nothing of the
matter, what had been doing at Jerusalem:

and on him they laid the cross; on which Jesus was to be crucified, and
which he was bearing himself; but finding that he was weak, and languid,
and unable to carry it himself, and fearing, should he die by the way,
they should be disappointed of glutting their malice, and seeing him in
shame and agony on the cross, and of triumphing over him there; and
being in haste for the execution of their malicious designs, they put
the cross, at least one end of it, upon this man's shoulders:

that he might bear it after Jesus: either the whole of it, following
Jesus; or only one end of it, Jesus going before with the other end on
his shoulder; which seems to be the order in which it was carried
between them.

[Luke 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 23:27</span></span>

And there followed him a great company of people,.... Not only of the
common people, but of the principal inhabitants of the city; for among
these were the chief priests, Scribes, and elders: some went for one
thing, and some another; some pitying, and others mocking at him, and
all to see the melancholy sight, [Luk
23:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048) as is usual at executions: and
what might make the crowd the greater, was the number of people in the
city, which were come from all parts to the passover; as also the fame
and character of the person, who was going to suffer:

and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him; not that these were
the same with the preficae of the Romans, or the of the Grecians; for
though the Jews had their or mourning women, who were hired to assist in
mourning; by using mournful gestures, tones, and songs, see [Jer
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017), yet public mourning was not
allowed for persons that were executed as malefactors; and therefore it
is the more remarkable, that here, and in [Luk
23:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048) any public tokens of sorrow
should be expressed: for,

"those that are executed by the sanhedrim, "they do not mourn for them";
but their near relations come and ask the peace of, or salute the
witnesses, and they salute the judges, to show, that they have not any
thing in their hearts against them, seeing they have passed a true
sentence; but though they do not use mourning, lo, they grieve for them;
for there is no grief but in the heart (r).''

The reason why they did not mourn was, because their ignominy and death
atoned for their crime (s): but it seems, there was a difference between
those that were put to death by the order of the Roman government, and
those that were put to death by the sanhedrim:

"all that are put to death by the government, although they are executed
by the order of the king, and the law gives power to slay them, lo,
"they mourn for them"; and they do not restrain any thing from them, and
their substance goes to the king, and they are buried in the sepulchres
of their fathers; but all that are put to death by the sanhedrim, "they
do not mourn for them"; but they grieve for them; for there is no grief
but in the heart; and they are not buried with their fathers, till their
flesh is consumed; and their substance goes to their heirs (t).''

And since Christ was condemned to death by the Roman governor, hence it
may be public mourning was allowed of, and might be done without notice;
but these still were not the mourning women, but persons that followed
on their own accord: some expressed their concern and sorrow through a
natural tenderness of spirit, and from a principle of humanity, being
grieved that so useful and innocent a person, as Christ appeared to be,
should be put to such a cruel and shameful death; and others from a
spirit of gratitude, they, or their friends, having received cures from
him, being healed by him of sicknesses, or dispossessed of devils; and
others from a spiritual, as well as natural affection for him; among
whom were his own mother and his mother's sister, and Mary Magdalene,
and other women that followed him out of Galilee.

\(r\) Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 13. sect. 6. Vid. Misu. Sanhedrin, c.
6. sect 4. (s) Jarchi & Bartenora in Misn. ib. (t) Maimon. Hilch. Ebel.
c. 1. sect. 9.

[Luke 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 23:28</span></span>

But Jesus turning unto them,.... These women being behind Christ, at the
back of him; and he knowing who they were, and what they were doing,
turns himself to them, and addressed them in the following manner: and
said,

daughters of Jerusalem; or ye Jerusalem women; just as the inhabitants
of Jerusalem are called daughters of Zion in [Isa
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016)

weep not for me; signifying, that they need not be under any concern on
his account, for he was very willing to die; he desired nothing more;
this was that he came into the world about; nor was he afraid to die;
death was no king of terrors to him; he went to the cross with the
greatest courage and intrepidity: besides, his sufferings, though he
knew they would be very great and painful, yet that they would be soon
over; nor could he be long held in the power of death, but would be
raised again, and go to his Father, and be exalted at his right hand,
and which should be matter of joy: to which might be added, that hereby
his Father's counsels and covenant, purposes and promises, would have
their accomplishment, the law would be fulfilled, justice satisfied, and
all the perfections of God glorified, and the salvation of his chosen
people effected; which, as it was the joy set before him, is a ground of
rejoicing to believers: not that weeping on account of his sufferings
and death was sinful; for he had offered prayers to God with cries and
tears himself on this head; nor that it was altogether unreasonable,
stupid, and preposterous; but Christ's meaning is, that when things were
rightly considered, there would be great reason to assuage their grief,
on this account, and rather express it on another;

but weep for yourselves, and for your children; not themselves
personally, but their nation and posterity; and either for sin, their
own, and others; the sins of professors, and of the profane;
particularly the sin of crucifying him, which would be more injurious to
that people than to him, and do them more hurt than him, since they had
imprecated his blood upon them, and their children; or rather, and
chiefly on account of those distresses and calamities, that would come
upon them, in a short time, for their rejection and crucifixion of him;
on account of which he himself had wept over Jerusalem, and its
inhabitants, [Luk 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041).

[Luke 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 23:29</span></span>

For behold the days are coming,.... The time is hastening on; yet a
little while, a few years more, and such times of distress will be:

in the which they shall say; or it shall be commonly said; it will be in
every one's mouth:

blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps that
never gave suck; that is, happy wilt those persons be who have no
children, to be starved to death, for want of bread; or to be killed
with the sword before their eyes, which must greatly enhance their own
miseries. Dr. Hammond thinks, that one passage particularly is referred
to, related by Josephus; that when Titus had so closely encompassed the
city with a wall, that there was no coming out for provisions, upon
which a sore famine commenced, so that they fed on dung and dirt, and
shoes, and girdles, one rich and noble woman, whose name was Mary, the
daughter of Eleazar, being stripped of all she had, by the seditious,
killed her own child, and dressed it, and ate part of it; and the other
part being found by the soldiers that broke in upon her, the news of
this shocking fact was spread all over the city, and every one looked
with horror upon it, and with the same compassion, as if they had done
it themselves: and then might those words be said, "blessed are the
barren, and the wombs that never bare", &c. who, though starving
themselves, were under no temptation to do such a detestable action.

[Luke 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 23:30</span></span>

Then shall they begin to say,.... The Syriac, Arabic, and Persic
versions read, "then shall ye begin to say"; the tribulation being so
great, as never was the like since the creation of the world, nor never
will be to the end of it; and being so sore pressed with the sword and
famine; with the enemy without, and divisions, robberies, and murders
within; and their miseries being inexpressible, and intolerable, they
will seek to go into the holes of the rocks, and caves of the earth, as
is prophesied of them, [Isa 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019) and
as Josephus says, many of them did, when the city was taken; and, like
those in [Hos 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008) will say, "to the
mountains fall on us, and to the hills cover us"; will choose rather
that the mountains and hills round about Jerusalem, should fall upon
them, and they be buried under the ruins of them, than live in such
terrible distress, or fall into the hands of their enemies! Compare with
this [Rev 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015).

[Luke 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 23:31</span></span>

For if they do these things in a green tree,.... Or it may be rendered
impersonally, "if these things are done in a green tree"; by which is
meant the Lord Jesus Christ, who is often compared to a tree, as to a
green fir tree, an apple tree, a vine, and is called the tree of life:
and may be said to be a moist or green tree; because, as a green tree is
full of juice, so is he of grace and goodness; as that is flourishing,
so was he in the fame of his doctrine and miracles, in the spread of his
Gospel, and in the increase of his kingdom and interest; and as that is
fruitful and useful, so was he in preaching the Gospel, and healing
diseases; and as that is not proper to be cut down, nor fit fuel for the
fire, so he was not deserving of death, or to be used in the manner he
was; the metaphor seems designed to express the righteousness and
innocence of Christ; see [Eze 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#047)
who was pure in his nature, without sin in his life, harmless in his
conversation, and did no hurt to any man's person or property: his
enemies could find nothing, nor prove any thing against him; nor even
the devil himself, but owned him to be the Holy One of God; and he was
also declared innocent by his judge, the Roman governor: and yet, how
many hard and grievous things were done unto him! He was persecuted in
his infancy, and his life was sought for; he was despised and reproached
by men all his days; he was apprehended as if he had been a thief, and
was bound as a malefactor; and arraigned at the bar of men, as if he had
been the greatest criminal on earth; he was mocked, buffeted, and spit
upon in the palace of the high priest; be was scourged by Pilate, and
misused by his soldiers, who arrayed him with a scarlet robe, put a
crown of thorns on his head, and a reed in his hand, and in a mock way
bowed the knee to him, and saluted him as King of the Jews; they
crucified him between two thieves, and as he hung on the cross mocked
him, and gave him gall and vinegar to drink. To which may be added, that
he was forsaken by his God, and Father, and his wrath was poured out
upon him, as he sustained the persons, and bore the sins of his people;
the curse of the law was executed on him: and justice drew its sword,
and sheathed it in him: and now if all these things were done to such an
useful, holy, harmless, and innocent person, what shall be done in the
dry? by whom wicked men are designed; who, as dry trees are without
juice, so are they destitute of grace and righteousness, and all that is
good, and bring forth no fruit, neither to God, nor themselves, nor
others; but, like dead and withered trees, are dead in trespasses and
sins, and full of all manner of sin, and rottenness, and impurity; and
are deserving to be cut down, and are fit fuel for the fire of divine
wrath and displeasure, both in this, and in the other world. The wicked
Jews that rejected Christ, and crucified him, are particularly meant;
and if such evil things were done by them to so just a person, what may
not be expected will fall on them in retaliation for such usage? and if
the Roman soldiers, under their encouragement acted such a part to
Christ, who had never done them any injury, what will they not do to
these men, when provoked by their insults and rebellions? and if such
things were done to Christ by his Father, according to the requirement
of the law, and the strictness of divine justice, when he was made sin
for his people, though he knew none, nor committed any himself, what
vengeance will fall on them, who must answer for their sins in their own
persons? What devouring flames, and everlasting burnings, will such dry
trees be exposed to, as being fit for them, and deserving of them? so
the children of men are, by the Jews, in their writings, called, , "dry
trees" (u); the Targumist on [Eze
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#024) paraphrases the words thus;

"I have humbled the kingdom of the nations, which was strong as a green
tree, and I have strengthened the kingdom of the house of Israel, which
was weak as a dry tree.''

It is a common proverb with the Jews (x);

"two dry sticks, or brands, and one green, the dry burn up the green:''

intimating, that a few righteous persons among wicked men suffer with
them; but if righteous men suffer, how much more the wicked? see [Pe1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017).

\(u\) Zohar in Lev. fol. 14. 2. (x) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 93. 1.

[Luke 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 23:32</span></span>

And there were also two other malefactors,.... Not that Christ was one,
though indeed he was looked upon and treated as one by the Jews; but as
the words may be read, there were also two others that were malefactors;
really such, two thieves, who had been guilty of theft and robbery, and
were condemned to die: and these were led with him; for the greater
ignominy and reproach of Christ, that it might be thought he was equally
a malefactor, and as deserving of death as they:

to be put to death; the death of the cross, which was the death the
Romans put slaves, thieves, and robbers, and the worst and basest of men
to.

[Luke 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 23:33</span></span>

And when they were come to the place which was called Calvary,.... Or
Cranion, which signifies a skull; so called from the skulls of persons
that lay about, who were executed. It is a tradition of the ancients
(y), that Adam was buried in this place where Christ was crucified, and
that his skull lay here. It was usual to crucify on high places, and on
mountains, such an one as this was (z):

there they crucified him, and the malefactors; the two thieves;

one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and so fulfilled the
prophecy in [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012).

\(y\) Cyprian de Resurrectione Christi, p. 479. Hieron. Tom. 1. fol. 42.
Bar Bahluli apud Castell. Lex. Polyglott. col. 3466. (z) Lipsius de
Cruce, l. 3. c. 13.

[Luke 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 23:34</span></span>

Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them,.... When he was crucified between
the two thieves, and as he hung upon the cross, and while insulted and
abused by all sorts of men, and put to the greatest pain and torture, he
addressed himself to God his Father: the Arabic version reads, "my
Father", who was so to him, not as he was man; for as such he had no
father; but as he was God, being as a divine person, his beloved, and
only begotten Son: and this he uses, whilst, as man, he is praying to
him; partly to express his faith of relation to him; his confidence of
being heard; and partly to set believers an example of praying, as he
has directed, saying, "our Father", &c. and the petition put up by him
is for forgiveness; which is with God, and with him only; and that for
his enemies, his crucifiers: not for those who sinned the sin unto
death, the sin against the Holy Ghost, who knowing him to be the
Messiah, maliciously crucified him, for whom prayer is not to be made;
but for those who were ignorantly concerned in it, as the next clause
shows, even for his own elect, whom the Father had given him out of the
world, which were among his crucifiers; for those, and not the world, he
prays: and the fruit of this his prayer quickly appeared, in the
conversion of three thousand of them under Peter's sermon on the day of
Pentecost, next following, in six weeks time. Though such might be his
affection, as man, in general, as to wish for, and desire, as such, was
it consistent with the divine will, forgiveness for all of them; adding,

for they know not what they do, or "are doing", meaning, in crucifying
him, which was the case of many of them, and of their rulers; they did
not know that Jesus was the Messiah, nor the prophecies concerning him,
nor the evil they were committing in putting him to death: not that
their ignorance excused their sin; nor was it without sin; nor does
Christ use it as a plea for pardon, or found his intercession upon it,
which is always done upon his own propitiatory sacrifice; but this is
mentioned as descriptive of the persons Christ prays for, and points out
a branch of his priestly office he exercises, in having compassion on
the ignorant, and them that are out of the way;

and they parted his raiment, and cast lots: that is, upon his vesture,
or seamless coat, and so fulfilled the prophecy in [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018). See Gill on [Mat
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035). See Gill on [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023). See Gill on [Joh
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024).

[Luke 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 23:35</span></span>

And the people stood beholding,.... This dismal and affecting sight;
insulting and reviling him, and wagging their heads at him, as did also
those that passed by: and the rulers also with them derided him; the
chief priests, Scribes, and elders, the members of the sanhedrim, whose
characters should have restrained them from such an inhuman conduct. The
phrase, "with them", is wanting in the Oriental versions, and in one of
Beza's copies: saying,

he saved others; by healing their diseases, or raising them from the
dead:

let him save himself; from death, by unnailing himself, and coming down
from the cross; See Gill on [Mat
27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042).

if he be Christ; the Messiah, he and his followers give out he is; even
the chosen of God, referring to [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001). The Arabic version reads, "the
chosen Son of God", very wrongly; for Christ was not chosen to be the
Son of God; he was so by nature; but he was chosen to be a servant, as
the text cited shows, to be a Mediator between God and man, and the
Saviour of his people.

[Luke 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 23:36</span></span>

And the soldiers also mocked him,.... The Roman soldiers, to whom the
execution was committed, who crucified him, and parted his garments, and
stood at his cross watching; these joined in the insult, which is not to
be wondered at. Coming to him and offering him vinegar; which was what
was a part of their allowance, and was their drink; See Gill on [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029).

[Luke 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 23:37</span></span>

And saying, if thou be the King of the Jews,.... Or their Messiah, who
was spoken of as a divine person; for otherwise he might have been their
king, and not have been able to have done what is proposed:

save thyself: or deliver thyself from the cross.

[Luke 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 23:38</span></span>

And a superscription also was written,.... Containing the crime he was
charged with, and accused of; See Gill on [Mat
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037); See Gill on [Joh
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019); See Gill on [Joh
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020).

[Luke 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 23:39</span></span>

And one of the malefactors, which were hanged,.... On the cross, one of
the thieves crucified with Christ; the Oriental versions add, "with
him"; according to the Evangelists Matthew and Mark, both of them
reviled him, and threw the same things in his teeth as the priests,
people, and soldiers did; which how it may be reconciled; see Gill on
[Mat 27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044).

railed on him, saying, if thou be Christ, save thyself, and us; taking
up the words of the rulers, and adding to them, perhaps, with a design
to curry favour with them, hoping thereby to get a release; or, however,
showing the wickedness and malice of his heart, which his sufferings and
punishment, he now endured, could make no alteration in; see [Rev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009).

[Luke 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 23:40</span></span>

But the other answering, rebuked him,.... That is, the other malefactor
made answer to him, and reproved him for his baseness and wickedness:

saying, dost not thou fear God; or "neither dost thou fear God", any
more than these priests, people, and soldiers, that are acting such a
barbarous and inhuman part to a man in misery: and wilt thou do the
same, and show that thou art an impious wretch, now thou art just going
out of the world, and neither fears God, nor regards man, and art
without compassion to a fellow sufferer, adding sin to sin,

seeing thou art in the same condemnation? undergoing the same sort of
punishment, though not on the same account, which might be the reason
why they suffered on the same day: for the Jews say (a), they never
judge (or condemn) two in one day, but one today, and the other
tomorrow; but if they are in one transgression,

, "and one death", as an adulterer with an adulteress, they condemn them
both in one day; but if the adulterer lies with a priest's daughter,
seeing he is to be strangled, and she to be burnt, they do not execute
them both in one day.''

\(a\) Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 14. sect. 10.

[Luke 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 23:41</span></span>

And we indeed justly,.... For sins committed against the law; our
sentence is just, we are righteously punished: which shows that he had a
true sense of sin; for where that is, there will be not only an
acknowledgment of the offence, but a vindication of the justice of God,
should he proceed to deal according to the demerit of sin: for we
receive the due reward of our deeds; though, according to the law of
Moses, theft was not punishable with death, but with a restoration,
either double, or fourfold, or fivefold, according to the nature of it;
see [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001). It may be these men had
committed murder along with the robbery:

but this man hath done nothing amiss; or absurd, unreasonable, wicked,
and detestable: he did no injury to God, or man; wronged no man's person
or property; did all things well; obeyed the law of God perfectly, and
always did the things which were pleasing to God. Thus, from the mouth
of one of the malefactors Christ suffered with, was he declared
innocent; when the Jews designed, by crucifying him with them, to have
led the people to have believed that he suffered for a crime equal, or
superior to theirs.

[Luke 23:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 23:42</span></span>

And he said unto Jesus, Lord,.... Acknowledging him to be the Messiah,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords; the Lord of all, and especially of
his church and people, and his own Lord. So the Syriac and Persic
versions read, "my Lord": however, he said this by the Spirit of God,
who enlightened his understanding, and wrought faith in him to believe
in Christ; see [Co1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003) "remember me
when thou comest into thy kingdom"; or rather in thy kingdom, as in [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028) for this man had not only faith
in the kingdom of Christ, as being of a spiritual nature, and not of
this world, and not coming with outward pomp and observation; in which
respect his faith exceeded that of the apostles themselves, who were
looking for, and expecting a temporal kingdom; and he not only was
without all doubt, or scruple, about Christ's entering into his kingdom
and glory after death, but he had knowledge of, and faith in his second
coming, when his glorious kingdom should appear, or his kingdom appear
in glory; and when he desired he might be remembered by him, have favour
shown him, and he share in the glories and happiness of it. This was
great faith indeed to be exercised on Christ at such a time as this,
when he was under the greatest reproach and ignominy; while he was
insulted and derided by all sorts of people; and when he was forsaken by
his own apostles, and was suffering a shameful punishment, and now
dying.

[Luke 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 23:43</span></span>

And Jesus said unto him,.... Jesus immediately answered him, though he
said not one word to the other that railed at him, or to the multitude
that abused him; and promised him more than he asked for, and sooner
than he expected.

Verily I say unto thee, today thou shall be with me in paradise; , "in
the garden of Eden"; not the earthly paradise, nor the church militant,
but the future place, and state of the happiness of the saints, even
heaven, and eternal glory, which the Jews frequently call by this name;
See Gill on [Co2 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004) and is so
called, because, as the earthly paradise, or Eden's garden, was of God's
planting, so is the heavenly glory of his providing and preparing: as
that was a place of delight and pleasure, so here are pleasures for
evermore; as there was a river in it, which added to the delightfulness
and advantage of it, so here runs the river of God's love, the streams
whereof make glad the saints now, and will be a broad river to swim in
to all eternity: as there were the tree of life, with a variety of other
trees, both for delight and profit, so here, besides Christ, the tree of
life, which stands in the midst of it, are an innumerable company of
angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect: and as the inhabitants
of that garden were pure and innocent creatures, so into this paradise
shall nothing enter but what is righteous, pure, and holy: and whereas
the principal enjoyment of man in Eden was conversation with God, and
communion with him, the glory of the heavenly paradise will lie in
fellowship with God, Father, Son, and Spirit, in beholding the face of
God, and seeing him as he is: and this is the happiness promised by
Christ to the penitent and believing thief, that he should be here; and
not only so, but with him here, which is far better than being in this
world, and than which nothing can be more desirable: and which, when
enjoyed, will be for ever: and this he was to enter upon that very day;
which shows, that Christ's soul did not descend into hell, locally and
literally considered, or into the "Limbus Patrum", the Papists talk of,
to fetch the souls of the patriarchs thence, but as soon as it was
separated from the body was taken up into heaven; and also, that the
souls of departed saints are immediately, upon their separation from the
body, there; which was the case of this wonderful instance of the grace
of God; and shows the swiftness of the soul, or the velocity of angels
in conveying it thither immediately: and this agrees with the sense of
the Jews, who say (b), that

"the souls of the fathers, or patriarchs have rest, and in a moment,
immediately enter into their separate places, or apartments, and not as
the rest of the souls; of whom it is said, all the twelve months the
soul ascends and descends, (goes to and fro,) but the souls of the
fathers, , "immediately, upon their separation", return to God that gave
them.''

Some would remove the stop, and place it after "today", and read the
words thus, "I say unto thee today"; as if Christ only signified the
time when he said this, and not when the thief should be with him in
paradise; which, besides it being senseless, and impertinent, and only
contrived to serve an hypothesis, is not agreeably to Christ's usual way
of speaking, and contrary to all copies and versions. Moreover, in one
of Beza's exemplars it is read, "I say unto thee, that today thou shalt
be with me", &c. and so the Persic and Ethiopic versions seem to read,
which destroys this silly criticism. And because this was a matter of
great importance, and an instance of amazing grace, that so vile a
sinner, one of the chief of sinners, should immediately enter into the
kingdom of God, and enjoy uninterrupted, and everlasting communion with
him and that it might not be a matter of doubt with him, or others,
Christ, who is the "Amen", the faithful witness, and truth itself,
prefaces it after this manner: "verily I say unto thee"; it is truth, it
may be depended on. This instance of grace stands on record, not to
cherish sloth, indolence, security and presumption, but to encourage
faith and hope in sensible sinners, in their last moments, and prevent
despair. The Papists pretend to know this man's name; they say his name
was Disma; and reckon him as a martyr, and have put him in the catalogue
of saints, and fixed him on the "twenty fifth" of March.

(The story of the penitent thief has sometimes been considered the most
surprising, the most suggestive, the most instructive incident in all
the Gospel narrative. ... In the salvation of one of the thieves
\\@@vital\\@@ \\@@theology finds one of its finest demonstrations.\\@@

\\@@Sacrementalism was refuted,\\@@ for the thief was saved without
recourse to baptism, the Lord's Supper, church, ceremony, or good works.

\\@@The dogma of purgatory was refuted,\\@@ for this vile sinner was
instantly transformed into a saint and made fit for paradise apart from
his personal expiation of a single sin.

\\@@The teaching of universalism was refuted,\\@@ for only one was saved
of all who might have been saved. Jesus did not say, "Today shall ye be
with me in paradise", but "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise."

\\@@The notion of soul-sleep was refuted,\\@@ for the clear implication
of the entire incident is that the redeemed thief would be in conscious
fellowship with his Saviour in paradise even while his body
disintegrated in some grave.

Too, it is doubtful whether any other gospel incident presents the plan
of salvation more clearly or simply.--Dr. Charles R. Erdman)

\(b\) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 58. 4.

[Luke 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 23:44</span></span>

And it was about the sixth hour,.... Or twelve o'clock at noon; and so
the Ethiopic version, when it was noon; See Gill on [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045).

[Luke 23:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 23:45</span></span>

And the sun was darkened,.... There was an eclipse of it, which was
preternatural, it being now full moon, and lasted three hours, and so
total, as to darken the whole earth; and now was the prophecy in [Amo
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009) literally fulfilled: and the vail
of the temple was rent in the midst. The Persic version renders it, "the
gate of the temple"; and so the Syriac version, "the face of the gate of
the temple"; See Gill on [Mat 27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051).

[Luke 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 23:46</span></span>

And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice,.... A second time; for at
the first loud cry, he uttered these words, "Eli, Eli, lama,
sabachthani"; and at the second what follows; see [Mat
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046). See Gill on [Mat
27:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#047). See Gill on [Mat
27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048). See Gill on [Mat
27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049). See Gill on [Mat
27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050).

he said, Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; not the Holy
Spirit, nor his divine nature, but his human soul: for that he had a
reasonable soul, as well as a true body, is certain; from his having an
human understanding, will, and affections, ascribed to him; and indeed,
without this he would not have been a perfect man, nor like unto us; and
could not have been tempted, bore sorrows and griefs, and endured the
wrath of God; nor could he have been a Saviour of souls: now just as he
was expiring, as he made his soul an offering for sin, and which he
offered unto God, he committed it to his divine care and protection; and
to enjoy his presence, during its separation from his body, using the
words of the Psalmist in [Psa 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005) and
this shows, that his spirit, or soul, belonged to God, the Father of
spirits, and now returned to him that gave it; that it was immortal, and
died not with the body, and was capable of existing in a separate state
from it, and went immediately to heaven; all which is true of the souls
of all believers in Christ; and what the dying head did, dying members
may, and should, even commit their souls into the same hands: and having
said thus, he gave up the ghost; breathed out his soul dismissed his
spirit, laid down his life, freely and voluntarily, and which no man, or
devil, otherwise could have taken away from him.

[Luke 23:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 23:47</span></span>

Now when the centurion saw what was done,.... The eclipse of the sun,
the darkness upon the land, the earthquake, the rocks rent, and Jesus
expire in so uncommon a manner:

he glorified God; by confessing that Christ was the Son of God, and
declaring him an innocent person:

saying, certainly, this was a righteous man; clear of the charges
exhibited against him, and has suffered wrongfully; and this he
concluded from those unusual appearances, and which he considered as
tokens of divine resentment.

[Luke 23:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 23:48</span></span>

And all the people that came together to that sight,.... To see the
execution of Jesus; and some of them might be his inveterate enemies,
and came to insult him, and did insult him; many of these, though not
every individual of them:

beholding the things which were done; the eclipse, earthquake, &c.

smote their breasts; as conscious of guilt, and as fearing some dreadful
judgment would fall upon them, and their nation, for this sin of
crucifying Christ. The Persic version reads, "they went back, and
kneeled down, and prostrated themselves to the ground"; as being in the
utmost astonishment, confusion, fear, and dread:

and returned; to the city, and to their own houses, where they might
more seriously, and with the greater composure of mind, reflect on these
things.

[Luke 23:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 23:49</span></span>

And all his acquaintance,.... That were related to him in a natural, or
in a spiritual sense, or both, as his own mother, and beloved disciple
John, who were both present, [Joh
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026) or those that were known unto
him, and familiar with him, who attended on his ministry, and often
conversed, and were intimately acquainted with him:

and the women that followed him from Galilee; among whom were Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Joses, and Salome the
mother of Zebedee's children:

stood afar off; from the cross:

beholding these things; with wonder, as well as looking upon their dear
suffering Lord, with aching hearts, and flowing eyes.

[Luke 23:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 23:50</span></span>

And behold, there was a man named Joseph,.... See Gill on [Mat
27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057).

a counsellor; Mark says, he was an "honourable" one; he was either one
of the council of the high priest, or a member of the great sanhedrim;
See Gill on [Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043).

and he was a good man, and a just; he was kind and beneficent in his
temper, and just, and righteous in his life and actions; a like
character is given of Joseph the husband of Mary, the mother of our
Lord, [Mat 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#019).

[Luke 23:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 23:51</span></span>

The same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them,.... Though
he was with the Jews, the chief priests, Scribes, and elders, in the
high priest's palace, being one of that great council; yet he did not
agree with them; nor was it his advice and counsel, that they should put
Christ to death; he was against it, at least did not consent to it:

he was of Arimathea, a city of the Jews; See Gill on [Mat
27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057). This clause in the Syriac and
Persic versions stands in the preceding verse, and follows after the
mention of his name and office, and where it seems most natural;

who also himself waited for the kingdom of God; See Gill on [Mar
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043).

[Luke 23:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 23:52</span></span>

This man went unto Pilate,.... Mark says, he went "boldly" to him; See
Gill on [Mar 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043).

and begged the body of Jesus; knowing he was dead; that he might bury
it, as the Ethiopic version adds, and prevent its being inferred with
the two malefactors, or abused by the mob.

[Luke 23:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">luk 23:53</span></span>

And he took it down,.... From the cross, with the help of others, having
obtained leave of Pilate so to do;

and wrapped it in linen; as was the custom of the Jews in burying their
dead; See Gill on [Mat 27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059).

and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone; cut out of a rock;
See Gill on [Mat 27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060).

wherein never man before was laid; so that it could not be said it was
another body, and not that of Christ's, that was raised from the dead.
This circumstance, serves to confirm the truth of his resurrection.

[Luke 23:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 23:54</span></span>

And that day was the preparation,.... Both for the sabbath, and for the
"Chagigah", or grand festival, which they kept on the fifteenth day of
the month, in a very pompous manner; so that the day following was an
high day;

and the sabbath drew on, or "shone out"; which is so said, though it was
evening, on account of the lights, which were every where, in every
house, lighted up at this time, and which they were, by their
traditions, obliged to: for so run their canons (c);

"three things a man is obliged to say in the midst of his house on the
evening of the sabbath, when it is near dark, have ye tithed? have ye
mixed? (i.e. the borders of the sabbath, the courts and food) , "light
the lamp".''

This was what could by no means be dispensed with; for so they say (d),

"the lighting of the lamp on the sabbath is not in a man's power, (or at
his liberty,) if he pleases he may light, and if not, he may not
light.----But it is what he is obliged to, and every man and woman are
bound to have in their houses a lamp lighted up on the sabbath; and
though he has nothing to eat, he must beg, and get oil, and light a
lamp; for this is included in the delight of the sabbath.----And he that
lights, ought to light within the day, before the setting of the sun.''

So that when these lamps were every where lighting, before the sun was
set, and the sabbath properly come, it might be said to draw on, or to
be shining forth. Besides, it was usual to call the evening of any day
by the name of "light": thus it is said (e),

, on the light (i.e. the night) of the fourteenth (of the month
"Nisan"), they search for leaven, &c.''

So that the evangelist might, very agreeably to the way of speaking with
the Jews, say, that the sabbath was enlightening, or growing light,
though the evening was coming on.

\(c\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 2. sect. 7. (d) Maimon. Hilch. Sabbat, c. 5.
sect. 1, 3. (e) Misn. Pesachim, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Luke 23:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">luk 23:55</span></span>

And the women also which came with him from Galilee,.... See Gill on
[Luk 23:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#049).

followed after; Joseph; and those that were with him, when they carried
the body of Jesus, in order to inter it:

and beheld, the sepulchre; took notice of it, what an one it was,
whereabout it stood in the garden, that they might know, and find it
again:

and how his body was laid; in what position, form, and order; and
observed that it was only wrapped in linen, and not anointed, or
embalmed.

[Luke 23:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">luk 23:56</span></span>

And they returned,.... To the city, and to their own houses, or to some
one of them;

and prepared spices and ointments; for the anointing, and embalming the
body of Christ, called by the Jews the spices of the dead; see the note
on [Mar 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)

and rested the sabbath day, according to the commandment, in [Exo
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008) not knowing as yet the abolition
of it, with the rest of the ceremonial law; and therefore, though they
had bought and prepared the spices and ointments, they did not carry
them to the sepulchre to anoint the body with them, till the sabbath was
over; for this was forbidden to be done on a sabbath day. It is asked
(f),

"what is that thing that is lawful to be done to a living man, and is
forbidden a dead man? It is said, , "this is anointing".''

Though elsewhere (g) this

"is allowed of; for so runs one of their traditions; they do all things
necessary for the dead, (i.e. on a sabbath day,) "they anoint", and wash
him, only they may not move a limb of him.''

But how he could be anointed, and washed, without a limb being moved, is
not very easy to say, as his foot, or hand, or eye brows, which are the
parts one of their commentators instances in (h).

\(f\) T. Hieros. Sahbat. fol. 12. 2. (g) Misn. Sabbat. c. 23, sect. 5.
(h) Bartenora in ib.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 24](luk024)

</div>
