<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk023)  [Next](joh000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)

[Luke 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 24:1</span></span>

Now upon the first day of the week,.... On which day it appears by what
follows, Christ rose from the dead, and which was the third day from his
death, and so verified the Scriptures, and his own predictions:

very early in the morning; just as light began to spring, the day to
dawn, and break; the first appearance of the morning; when it first
began to dawn;

when it was yet dark, as in [Joh 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)
and so read the Syriac and Persic versions here; and the Ethiopic
version, "while it was yet night": this must be understood of the time
when the women set out from the city, or suburbs; for by that time they
got to the sepulchre it was at sunrise, [Mar
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#002) and shows their great love, zeal,
and devotion for Christ, and great courage and fearlessness to go out of
the city at such a time, without any man with them, and to a grave:

they came unto the sepulchre, where Christ was laid; that is, the women
who came with Christ from Galilee, and who had observed where, and how
his body was interred:

bringing the spices which they had prepared; on the sabbath eve, to
anoint the body, but were prevented by reason of the sabbath; see [Luk
23:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#056)

and certain others with them; that is, other women; besides Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Joses, and Salome, and other Galilean
women, there were other Jerusalem women, or of Bethany, it may be, Mary,
and Martha, the sisters of Lazarus, and of the parts adjacent: this
clause is left out in the Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic versions, and in
one ancient copy of Beza's; but is retained in the Syriac, Arabic, and
Persic versions.

[Luke 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 24:2</span></span>

And they found the stone rolled away the sepulchre. Which Joseph had
laid there, security of the body, and in the sight of these women; and
which gave them a concern, as they went along, seeing they were all
women, who should roll away the stone for them, [Mar
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#003) but when they came to the
sepulchre, to their great surprise, they found it rolled away, which was
done by an angel, [Mat 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#002).

[Luke 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 24:3</span></span>

And they entered in,.... To the sepulchre, being invited, encouraged,
and led on by the angel that sat upon the stone; for the Jews'
sepulchres were built large enough for persons to go into; See Gill on
[Mar 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005).

and found not the body of the Lord Jesus; as they expected, having seen
him put there, and had observed in what cave in the sepulchre, and in
what form he was laid.

[Luke 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 24:4</span></span>

And it came to pass as they were much perplexed thereabout,.... About
the body of Christ, and its being gone, what should become of it,
whither it was removed, and by what means, and by whom; whether by a
friend, or foe, for they had no thought, nor expectation of a
resurrection;

behold, two men stood by them in shining garments; who were angels in
the form of men; and as these were the first witnesses of Christs
resurrection, there were two of them; for by the mouth of two or three
witnesses every thing is established. Matthew and Mark take notice but
of one; but John makes mention of two, as here, seen by Mary Magdalene,
though in a different posture; they were sitting, the one at the head,
the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain; but when the
rest of the women came, they were risen up, and stood close by them, on
a sudden, at an unawares, being arrayed in white raiment, as white as
snow, as a token of their purity and innocence, and as bringers of good
tidings; and as joining in the triumph of their Lord's resurrection:
their garments were bright and glittering like lightning, to set forth
the glory and majesty of these celestial spirits, and that they might be
known to be what they were.

[Luke 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 24:5</span></span>

And as they were afraid,.... That is, the women were afraid of these
angels; these bright appearances and majestic forms, as it was usual for
good men and women to be, as appears from the cases of Zacharias, the
Virgin Mary, and others:

and bowed down their faces to the earth, through great fear and
reverence of these heavenly spirits, and as not being able to bear the
lustre of their countenances and garments:

they said unto them, that is, the angels:

why seek ye the living among the dead? intimating, that Christ, though
he had been dead, was now living, and not to be sought for in a
sepulchre; a way of speaking, much like this, is used in a parable of R.
Levi's, concerning Pharaoh's not finding the name of God among the gods
of the nations, upon searching for it. Moses and Aaron said to Pharaoh,

"thou fool, is it usual for the dead to "seek" them among the living? ,
"or ever the living among the dead?" our God is living, these thou
speakest of are dead (i).''

Nor is Christ to be found among dead sinners, or lifeless professors,
but among living saints, and among the churches of the living God; nor
is life to be found among the dead works of the law, or to be obtained
by lifeless performances on the dead letter of the law.

\(i\) Shemot Rabba, sect. 5. fol. 95. 3.

[Luke 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 24:6</span></span>

He is not here, but is risen,.... So in [Mat
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#006) see the note there:

remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee; for these
women that followed him from Galilee were along with the disciples when
he said the following words to them; and which are recorded in [Mat
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022).

[Luke 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 24:7</span></span>

Saying, the son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men,.... As Christ was, who is intended by the son of man, he being the
son of David, and the son of Abraham, and the son of Adam, though he was
the seed of the woman, and born of a virgin; he was truly man, and
subject to the infirmities of men; for this is sometimes used as a
diminutive expression, though a title of the Messiah in the Old
Testament, and regards him in his state of humiliation. He was delivered
into the hands of the band of men and officers by Judas, who came
against him with swords and staves, as against a thief; and by the Jews
to Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor, a very wicked man; and by him, to
the will of the Jews, who, with wicked hands, took him, and slew him;
and into the hands of the Roman soldiers, who crucified him, and who may
more especially be meant by sinful men, the Gentiles; and especially
Heathen soldiers, being reckoned by the Jews notorious sinners: to be
among sinners, in the company of such sinful men, must needs be very
disagreeable to the holy and harmless Lamb of God; but to be in their
hands, and at their mercy, whose tender mercies are cruel, must be very
afflicting:

and be crucified: which was a Roman death, and a very shameful, and
painful one:

and the third day rise again; it is for the sake of this chiefly that
the angels put the women in mind of this whole paragraph, which so fully
confirms their testimony of his resurrection; and which the women might
be assured of, upon calling to mind these words, which they themselves
had heard from Christ's mouth; and it being now the third day since the
death of Christ. The words declare, that all these things must be; that
there was a necessity of them; partly on account of the decrees of God,
by which it was determined they should be; and partly on account of the
covenant engagements of Christ, in which he agreed unto them; and also,
by reason of the prophecies of the Old Testament, which gave out, that
thus it must be; yea, our Lord's own predictions made them necessary;
and the law and justice of God required them; or otherwise, the
salvation of God's people could not have been obtained.

[Luke 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 24:8</span></span>

And they remembered his words. That is, the words of Christ, as the
Persic version expresses it; which they had forgot, and it may be had
never truly understood until now; and had now their memories refreshed
with them by the angels, and their understandings opened by the Spirit
of God. Saints are sometimes apt to forget even the gracious promises of
God, they have understood and received comfort from; the word, or words,
on which they have been caused to hope, until the Spirit of God, who is
their best remembrancer, puts them in mind of them.

[Luke 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 24:9</span></span>

And returned from the sepulchre,.... Quickly, immediately, as soon as
ever the angel had done speaking to them; they fled from the sepulchre
in great haste, as persons frightened and amazed, with fear and
reverence, on account of the vision they saw, and with joy at what was
told them; see [Mat 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#008)

and told all these things; as that the stone was rolled away from the
sepulchre: and that they found not the body of Jesus in it; that they
had seen a vision of angels, who had told them, that Christ was risen,
and had put them in mind of some words of his spoken to the disciples in
their hearing in Galilee:

unto the eleven, and to all the rest; of the disciples: not only to the
eleven apostles, but the seventy disciples, and as many others as were
assembled together, perhaps the hundred and twenty, [Act
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015). The Persic version very wrongly
reads, "to all the twelve"; for Judas was not now one of them, nor
alive; and Matthias was not yet chosen.

[Luke 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 24:10</span></span>

It was Mary Magdalene,.... Out of whom Christ had cast seven devils, who
was a sincere penitent, a true believer in Christ, and an affectionate
lover of him, and to whom he first appeared:

and Joanna; the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, one that had been a
follower of Christ, and had ministered to him of her substance; see [Luk
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#002)

and Mary the mother of James; called the less; and also of Joses, and
Simon, and Judas, the brethren, or kinsmen of Christ; this Mary, being
the wife of Cleophas, or Alphaeus, said (k) to be the brother of Joseph,
the husband of Mary, the mother of our Lord:

and other women that were with them; as Salome, the mother of Zebedee's
children, and others, that came from Galilee; [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040).

which told these things unto the apostles; before observed.

\(k\) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 11. 32. & 4. 22.

[Luke 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 24:11</span></span>

And their words seemed to them as idle tales,.... As fabulous things, as
mere whims, and the fancies of their brains: "as a dream", according to
the Persic version; or, "as a jest", as the Arabic version renders it.
They looked upon them as mere deceptions and delusions, and not real
things; the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions read,
"these words"; what they related concerning what they saw, and heard, at
the sepulchre:

and they believed them not: for they had no thought, nor expectation of
Christ's rising from the dead; they did not know that he was to rise
again, according to the Scriptures; nor did they understand him when he
told them of his rising again; and had no faith in it, nor hope
concerning it, and could give no credit to it, when it was told them;
and the Arabic version reads, "they did not believe it"; the word or
report which the women delivered to them.

[Luke 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 24:12</span></span>

Then arose Peter,.... Who, though he did not believe the report made,
yet listened to it, and was alarmed and aroused by it, and was willing
to know the truth of it:

and ran unto the sepulchre; not alone, but with John, being in haste to
be satisfied, how things were:

and stooping down; See Gill on [Mar
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005). See Gill on [Joh
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#005).

he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves; in which the body of
Jesus was wrapped; these lay by themselves, without the body, in one
place; and the napkin about his head was wrapped together, and lay in
another place by itself: so that it was a plain case, the body was not
stolen, nor taken away; for neither friends, nor foes, would have taken
the pains, or have lost so much time, as to have stripped the body, but
would rather have carried off the clothes along with it. The Alexandrian
copy leaves out the word alone, or by themselves:

and departed; from the sepulchre to Jerusalem, to John's house there:

wondering in himself at that which was come to pass; that the body
should not be there, and yet the clothes should remain; he could not
tell what to make of it. As for a resurrection, he had no notion of
that, and yet could not account for the removal of the body, either by
friends or foes, and the clothes left behind.

[Luke 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 24:13</span></span>

And behold two of them went that same day,.... Two of the disciples, as
the Persic version reads; not of the eleven apostles, for it is certain
that one of them was not an apostle; but two of the seventy disciples,
or of the society of the hundred and twenty that were together: one of
these was Cleophas or Alphaeus, as appears from [Luk
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018) the other is, by some, thought
to be Luke the Evangelist, as Theophylact on the place observes, who,
out of modesty, mentions not his name; others have thought that
Nathanael was the other person; and Dr. Lightfoot seems very confident,
from [Luk 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034) that the Apostle Peter
was the other; but it is not certain who he was: however, this very
remarkable affair happened, and therefore a "behold" is prefixed to it,
on the "same day"; the first day of the week; the day on which Christ
rose from the dead; and the third day from his death it was, see [Luk
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001) that these two disciples
travelled:

to a village called Emmaus; whither they might go either to see their
friends, or upon some secular affair, or to be retired from the noise of
the city, and be secure from danger by their enemies; or it may be this
was the place of Cleophas's abode, who, with the other disciple, was
returning home after the celebration of the passover. The place whither
they went is particularly mentioned, not because it was a place of note,
but for the certainty of the fact. It was now but a village, having been
burnt since the death of Herod the great, by the order of Varus, the
Roman governors (l); though it afterwards became a considerable city, if
it is the same with Nicopolis, as Jerom asserts (m); though that rather
seems to be the Ammaus, or Chammath of Tiberias, since it was situated
by the lake of Genesareth. However, it is certain, that Emmaus is
reckoned, by Josephus (n), one of their chief cities; and Jarchi, and
Bartenora (o) say, it is the name of a city; and Pliny (p) calls it a
toparchy, and says it was watered with fountains; which agrees with the
account the Jews give of it (q).

"R. Jochanan ben Zaccai had five disciples; all the time that he stood,
or lived, they sat before him; when he departed, they went to Jabneh;
and R. Eleazar ben Arach went to his wife, "at Emmaus", a place of
pleasant waters, and a beautiful habitation.''

It is mentioned, in company with Bethoron, and Lud, or Lydda: it is said
(r),

"from Bethoron, to "Emmaus", is the mountain; and from "Emmaus" to
Lydda, the plain; and from Lydda to the sea, the valley.''

Bethoron is mentioned as near Nicopolis, by Jerom; and perhaps is the
same with Betholone in Pliny: in Emmaus was a market: at least there was
a butcher's market in it; hence we read of, , "the shambles of Emmaus"
(s); mention is made of a place so called, as in:

"So they went forth with all their power, and came and pitched by Emmaus
in the plain country.'' (1 Maccabees 3:40)

"So the camp removed, and pitched upon the south side of Emmaus.'' (1
Maccabees 3:57)

"Now when Judas heard thereof he himself removed, and the valiant men
with him, that he might smite the king's army which was at Emmaus,'' (1
Maccabees 4:3)

Another Emmaus is here meant:

which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs; or seven miles and a
half; for eight furlongs make a mile. Josephus (t) says the same, and
confirms the account of the distance of this place from Jerusalem.

\(l\) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 17. c. 12. (m) Epitaph. Paul. fol. 59. B.
Catalog. Script. Eccl. fol. 98. B. Tom. I. & in Dan. viii. 14. Tom. V.
(n) Antiqu. I. 14. c. 18. (o) In Misn. Ceritot, c. 3. sect. 7. (p) Nat.
Hist. l. 5. c. 14. (q) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 74. 4. (r) T. Hieros.
Sheviith, c. 9. fol. 38. 4. (s) Misn. Ceritot, c. 3. sect. 7. T. Bah,
Cholin, fol. 91. 2. & Maccot, fol. 14. 1. (t) De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 27.

[Luke 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 24:14</span></span>

And they talked together,.... As they went along, on their journey:

of all these things which had happened; concerning their dear Lord and
master, Jesus Christ; how that he had been betrayed by Judas, one of his
disciples; had been led bound, first to Annas, and then Caiaphas, the
high priest, in whose palace he had been condemned to death; how that he
was delivered by the chief priests and elders, to Pontius Pilate, the
Roman governor of whom they requested, that he might be crucified: they
very likely discoursed also, about the ignominious treatment he met
with, both in the high priest's palace and: in Pilate's hall; and how at
last he was crucified between two thieves, and was dead and buried; and
particularly, they might be talking together of what they had heard that
morning from the women, that had been at the sepulchre of Christ, and
reported that he was risen.

[Luke 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 24:15</span></span>

And it came to pass, that while they communed together,.... About the
above said things:

and reasoned; with one another; about the truth and credibility of the
late report:

Jesus himself drew near: the Persic version adds, "suddenly"; he came up
at once to them, as if he had been a traveller on the road, and overtook
them:

and went with them; joined himself in company to them, and travelled
with them.

[Luke 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 24:16</span></span>

But their eyes were holden, &c. The Ethiopic version adds, "and were
covered"; and the Arabic version renders it, "now he had veiled their
eyes", ascribing it to Christ; and the Persic version renders it, "and
the eyes of the disciples were shut": to me it seems, that their eyes:
were held downwards; or they kept looking upon the ground as they
walked, which was a posture suitable to their melancholy spirits; and
there might be a peculiar influence of divine power and providence, so
disposing them, that they did not look up to Christ their new fellow
traveller, who walked on with them: and this was so ordered,

that they should not know him; that so they might not be surprised at
once, as they would have been, had they looked at him, and discerned who
he was; and that they might converse the more freely with him; and that
he might convince them of their stupidity and unbelief, by proper
arguments.

[Luke 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 24:17</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... That is, "Jesus", as the Persic version, or
"our Lord", as the Ethiopic version, expresses it:

what manner of communications are these, that ye have one to another, as
ye walk? what is the subject of your discourse; what is it your
conversation one with another turns upon in your journey?

and are sad? what melancholy story are you telling to one another, which
causes such sadness of countenance, and dejection of mind? for Christ by
their countenances and gestures, as the shaking of their heads, and
lifting up and wringing of their hands, could easily discern as man, as
well as know as God, that they were full of sorrow and heaviness, and
which were occasioned and increased by what they were talking of.

[Luke 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 24:18</span></span>

And one of them, whose name was Cleophas,.... Or Alphaeus, for it is the
same name; he was one of the seventy disciples, and father of the
Apostles James and Jude, and brother to Joseph, the husband of Mary, the
mother of Christ, as before observed:

answering, said unto him, art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and
hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?
The Persic version reads, "in these two days": the sense that whereas he
appeared to come from Jerusalem, that if he was only a stranger and a
sojourner, and not a stated inhabitant there, he could not be ignorant
of what had been done there a few days past; or if he was, that he must
be the only stranger, and the only man, that was so; for the facts
referred to were so notorious, that every one must know them, inhabitant
or stranger.

[Luke 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 24:19</span></span>

And he said unto them, what things?.... Still appearing as if he was
ignorant, and in order to, draw out of them a particular relation:

and they said unto him; both of them, or rather Cleophas, for himself
and his companion:

concerning Jesus of Nazareth; that is, what had happened to him, who was
commonly known by this name, and was called so by way of contempt: but

which was a prophet; not only a foreteller of things to come, as he
foretold his sufferings, death, and resurrection, the troubles that
should befall his disciples, the destruction of Jerusalem, and the end
of the world; but he was a preacher of the Gospel, an eminent one, a
famous and extraordinary one, that prophet which Moses spake of should
come; and who was mighty in deed and word: he was anointed with the Holy
Ghost and with power, which he showed by the miracles he wrought; such
as healing the sick, cleansing lepers, casting out devils, restoring
sight to the blind, causing the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the
lame to walk, and raising the dead to life; and in the doctrines he
taught, which were with authority, and such as never man spake:

before God and all the people; he was sent and anointed by God as a
prophet, and approved by him; who bore a testimony to him by a voice
from heaven, declaring him to be his beloved Son; and the works he
wrought, were done publicly before men, who glorified God on that
account; and the doctrines he taught, were not taught in secret, but in
the synagogues and in the temple, in the audience of all the people, and
to their surprise and admiration.

[Luke 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 24:20</span></span>

And how the chief priests and our rulers,.... Civil and ecclesiastic:

delivered him; to Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor:

to be condemned to death; the death of the cross, by the said governor,
having first seized him and examined him before their sanhedrim, and
pronounced him guilty of death:

and have crucified him; for though Pilate passed the sentence, and the
Roman soldiers executed it, yet these men are said to do it, because it
was at their request, and through their instigation, that it was done;
hence Peter charges the Jewish sanhedrim with it, [Act
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010).

[Luke 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 24:21</span></span>

But we trusted,.... "In him", as the Ethiopic version adds:

that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel; they thought,
hoped, and believed, that he was the Messiah, spoken of under the
character of the Redeemer of Israel; and they had been in expectation of
redemption by him, though only of a temporal kind, from the Roman yoke
and bondage; but now they could not tell what to think of it, since he
was dead; indeed they were not altogether without hope, since there was
a report of his being raised from the dead; but what credit was to be
given to that, they could not say: but certain it is, that he was the
true Messiah, and promised Redeemer; and who was to redeem, and has
redeemed the whole Israel of God; even all the elect of God, whether
among Jews or Gentiles, from the servitude and damning power of sin,
from the slavery of Satan, and the bondage of the law, and from every
enemy; and that by his precious blood, his sufferings and death, the
very things which were the occasion of these disciples' doubts about
him, as the Redeemer: so the Jews say (u),

"that upon the death of the Messiah, the son of Joseph, all Israel shall
flee to the deserts, and such as are of a doubtful heart shall turn to
the nations of the world and say, "is this the redemption we have waited
for", for the Messiah is slain?''

And besides all this, today is the third day, since these things were
done; which is either mentioned, as an aggravation of the ignorance of
the stranger, that these things should be done so lately, as within
three days, and yet he should be ignorant of them, or not remember them,
and need to be informed about them; or as a further reason of their
doubting, that it was now the third day since the death of Jesus, and
there was nothing certain of his resurrection, only the report of the
women, which they could not depend upon; or else as a reason of their
trusting, that he was the person that should redeem Israel; since this
was the third day from his crucifixion; the day on which he said he
should rise from the dead, and of which there was a report spread, not
to be disproved, that he was that day actually risen: this day is
greatly observed by the Jews (w): they take notice that the Scriptures
speak of several remarkable third days; and besides [Gen
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#004) is cited a passage which refers
to the resurrection of Christ on the third day; and they speak

"of the third day of the tribes, [Gen
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#018) of the third day of the spies,
[Jos 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#016) of the third day of the
giving of the law, [Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016) of the
third day of Jonas, [Jon 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#017) (which
was a type of the resurrection of the Messiah, [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)) of the third day of those that
came up out of the captivity, [Ezr
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015) of the third day of the
resurrection of the dead, [Hos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002) and
of the third day of Esther, [Est
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001).''

\(u\) Abkath Rocel, l. 1. par. 1. sign. 7. p. 53. (w) Bereshit Rabba,
sect. 56. fol. 49. 3.

[Luke 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 24:22</span></span>

Yea, and certain women also of our company,.... Who came with them from
Galilee, who were of the same religion, professed the same faith, and
belonged to the same society and community; who they were, and their
names, see [Luk 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#010).

made us astonished; surprised us, with an account they brought, so that
we could not, nor can we now tell, what to think or say of it; it is
such an one, we know not how to believe, nor to disprove; it is we fear
too good to be true, and should it be as they report, it is amazing
indeed:

which were early at the sepulchre; of the person now mentioned, Jesus of
Nazareth; even this very morning, by break of day, at least at sunrise,
whither they went to anoint his body, thinking nothing at all about the
resurrection of him.

[Luke 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 24:23</span></span>

And when they found not his body,.... In the sepulchre, as they
expected, and so could not do what they intended:

they came; they returned from the sepulchre with great haste, and in a
very great fright, and came to the disciples, where they were assembled;

saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels. The Syriac and
Persic versions add, "there"; at the sepulchre, for there were two of
them at least, if not three; see [Luk
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#004). They not only reported, that
they could not find the body of Jesus, but also that they had seen some
angels: or the sense may be, that they told them, that though they could
not find the dead body of their Lord, yet they had seen him alive, as
they did by the way, as they were returning, [Mat
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009) and also that a vision of angels
had appeared to them:

which said that he was alive; see [Luk
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#005). So that it was not a deception
of their sight, they certainly saw both Christ and the angels; and were
assured from their testimony, as well as by their own eyes and ears,
that he was certainly risen: now, though this was so clear a point, and
so well attested, the disciples knew not how to believe it; they were
perplexed about it; they could neither receive it, nor discredit it;
they hoped it might be so, but feared it was not.

[Luke 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 24:24</span></span>

And certain of them which were with us,.... The apostles and brethren,
who were together when the women came, and made the above report;
particularly Peter, who is named, [Luk
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012) and John, who also was with him,
as appears from [Joh 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002) these

went to the sepulchre; of Jesus, to satisfy themselves and their
companions, as much as they could, about these things:

and found it even so as the women had said; that is, that the body of
Jesus was not there, and that the linen clothes were laid by themselves:

but him they saw not; the Ethiopic version reads, "and him they found
not": the women, as before observed, might report, that though they
found not the body in the grave, yet they saw him alive by the way, but
so did not the disciples; which made it look very strange, doubtful, and
suspicious, that the women should see him, and not his apostles; they
could not tell how to account for this, and this made them to be in
suspense about the fact.

[Luke 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 24:25</span></span>

Then he said unto them,.... That is, Jesus said unto them, as the Syriac
and Persic versions read:

O fools; not in a natural sense, as if they were destitute of the common
understanding of men; nor in a moral sense, as wicked men, and as they
themselves had been in their unregenerate estate; nor in a way of anger
and contempt, and with a design to provoke; wherefore Christ did not act
contrary to his own rule, in [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)
but because they were so void of understanding in the Scriptures, and
were so very ignorant of them, and were so blind as to the knowledge of
them; particularly those which concerned the sufferings and resurrection
of the Messiah, being influenced by the popular prejudices of education:
he therefore expresses himself with much warmth, concern, and surprise,
that he should have been so long with them, and they so long under his
doctrine and ministry; besides the advantages of having the Scriptures,
and being conversant with them from their youth; and which they daily
read, and had heard expounded, and yet were so very senseless and
stupid:

and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken; that is,
upon these points, concerning the sufferings of Christ, and his
resurrection from the dead; and indeed, they were very slow of heart to
believe, not only what the women reported from the angels, but even
those of their brethren, who had seen him after he was risen; for which
Christ upbraids them, [Mar 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014). Yea,
one of them declared after all, that he would not believe, unless he saw
the print of the nails in his hands and feet, and put his hand into it,
and thrust it into his side; wherefore Christ had good reason to treat
them in this sharp manner, and charge them with folly and incredulity;
the Jews ought not to object to the word "fools", as unbecoming Christ,
since they frequently represent God as making use of it; as for
instance, it is said, (x).

"the holy blessed God said to them, "O ye fools" that are in the world,
whatsoever ye do, ye do for your own necessities. ---And a little after,
"O ye fools" that are in the world, he that labours on the evening of
the sabbath, shall eat on the sabbath day.''

\(x\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 2. 2. & 3. 1.

[Luke 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 24:26</span></span>

Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,.... Mentioned in [Luk
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#020) as to be delivered by the chief
priests, to be condemned to death, and to be crucified: Christ suffered
many things in his personal character, being traduced as a sinful and
wicked man, and a friend and encourager of sinners; as a man of immoral
principles and practices; as an idolater, a blasphemer, an impostor, a
seditious person; as one that had had familiarity with the devil, and
did his miracles by his assistance, with a load of other reproaches; and
these he endured, to answer to the loss of the divine honour and glory,
sustained by the sin of man; and to teach his people patience, under the
loss of their good names, characters, and reputations: and he suffered
much in his body, in the infirmities of it; which he assumed with it,
being in all things like to his brethren, excepting sin; and in the
pains which he endured, through buffeting and scourging before his
crucifixion, and when he hung upon the cross: and he suffered greatly in
his soul, partly from the temptations of Satan; and partly from the
treatment of his own disciples, through the frowardness of their
spirits; and especially his being betrayed by one, denied by another,
and forsaken by them all, must greatly afflict his mind; but chiefly
from his bearing the loathsome sins of men, the strokes of justice, and
the wrath of God; and particularly, through his being forsaken by him:
and of all these there was a necessity; he ought to have suffered these
things, as he did; the counsels and purposes of God, the covenant
transactions and agreement he himself entered into with his Father, the
prophecies of the Old Testament, and his own predictions concerning
these things, together with the salvation of his people, in a way
consistent with the justice of God, and the honour of his law, made them
necessary:

and to enter into his glory; which began at his resurrection from the
dead, and is seen in his exaltation and session at the right hand of
God; upon his ascension he was received up to glory, entered into it,
took possession of it, and is crowned with it; and which will still be
more manifest, when he shall come to judge the world in righteousness;
when his saints also shall appear in glory with him, and shall be
everlasting spectators of his glory; and indeed, his entrance into glory
is not merely for himself, but in the name and behalf of them. The
Vulgate Latin version reads, "and so, or thus to enter into his glory";
that is, by the way of sufferings, which is the way through which his
saints enter the kingdom, [Act 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022).
And by a view of the glory that was to follow them, and which he and his
people were to enjoy together, was he animated to endure them cheerfully
and patiently; and this he is entered into, possesses and enjoys, as the
consequence and reward of his sufferings.

[Luke 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 24:27</span></span>

And beginning at Moses,.... The writings of Moses, the book of Genesis
particularly, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015) which is the
first prophecy of him, and speaks of the bruising of his heel, or of the
sufferings of death by him; and proceeding to open and explain the types
concerning his bearing the cross, and the lifting him upon it, in the
business of Isaac, and of the brazen serpent; and concerning the
shedding of his blood, and the oblation of himself in the sacrifices of
the law of Moses:

and all the prophets; as David, Isaiah, Daniel, and others, very likely
the passages in [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001).

he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures in Moses, and the Prophets,

concerning himself; especially concerning these two points, his
sufferings, and his glory, which the Spirit of Christ, in the Prophets,
testified before hand: besides the above places referred to, concerning
the sufferings of Christ, see the following, in reference to his
resurrection and glory, [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010).

[Luke 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 24:28</span></span>

And they drew nigh unto the village,.... Of Emmaus, before they were
aware; their conversation was so very agreeable, that the way did not
seem tedious, nor the time long:

whither they went: where they intended to go, when they set out; this
was the end of their journey; wherefore this village was not some
intermediate place between Jerusalem and Emmaus:

and he made as though he would have gone further; when they were come to
Emmaus, and to the house where the two disciples intended to make their
abode that night: whether it was a public house, or an house of one of
their friends, or one of their own, it matters not; Christ stopped not,
nor attempted to go in with them, but stepped a few steps onward, taking
his leave of them. The Ethiopic version renders it, "he began to pass by
them": which carried in it an appearance as if he intended to have
travelled further; and in it there was no fraud, dissimulation, or
collusion: he would have gone some little way further, doubtless, had
they not detained him; and he intended to stay with them, provided they
should ask him, as he did, though not all night, which he never
designed: the whole of it is nothing else but a piece of modesty,
civility, and prudence; for guile was never found in his mouth.

[Luke 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 24:29</span></span>

But they constrained him,.... The Arabic version renders it, "they held
him by force": but the meaning is not, that they laid hands on him, and
held him in a forcible manner against his will; but they were very
urgent and importunate with him, that he would stay with them; they
would take no denial. The sense is better given in the Persic version,
"the disciples with importunity said unto him"; they were so pressing
with arguments, that he could not withstand them:

saying, abide with us; his conversation was so engaging, and his
discourses were so heavenly and instructive, so sweet and delightful, so
powerful and moving, that they could not bear to part with him, but were
exceeding desirous of his continuance with them, even though he was a
stranger to them. And as they had in view their own pleasure and profit,
so they urge the necessity and advantage of his stay, with respect to
himself:

for it is towards evening, and the day is far spent; it might be four or
five o'clock in the afternoon:

and he went in to tarry with them; for a while, not all night. So
earnest, importunate, and resolute was the church, when she had found
Christ, that he would abide with her, [Sol
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004).

[Luke 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 24:30</span></span>

And it came to pass as he sat at meat with them,.... When they were sat
down at table with the provisions before them:

he took bread and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them; as if he was
the master of the house, when he was both a guest, and a stranger, and
as he used to do at common meals, when he ate with his disciples; and
thus he did, when he fed five thousand at one time, and four at another,
[Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019) see the notes there. See
Gill on [Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019). See Gill on [Mat
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026). Whether only Christ, and the
two disciples, sat down together, or whether others that belonged to the
house sat down with them, is not certain: if they were only three, they
were a proper company to bless the bread together; that is, one in the
name of the rest, they joining with him: if there were but two, they
blessed, or said grace for themselves separately; but if three, the
rules were these, according to the Jews (y):

"three that eat together, they are obliged to call a blessing (or for
one) --and how do they call a blessing among three? one says, let us
bless: if there are three besides himself, he says, bless ye. --Three
that eat together have no power to divide;''

that is, to make a separate blessing, but are obliged to it conjunctly:
thus here, being three at least, Christ blessed bread for them all.

\(y\) Misn. Betasot, c. 7. sect. 4, 3, 4.

[Luke 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 24:31</span></span>

And their eyes were opened,.... Not that they were before shut, or
closed up, but what before held them was removed, and what hindered
their sight and knowledge was taken away; and perhaps these actions of
his taking the bread, and blessing, and breaking, and giving it to them,
might put them in mind of him, and cause them to look wistfully at him,
when, what beclouded their sight being gone, and he appearing in his
usual form, they perceived who he was:

and they knew him; to be their dear Lord and master, for whose death
they had been sorrowing, and of redemption by him, and of whose
resurrection they had been doubting:

and vanished out of their sight; not that he vanished as a spectre, or
as smoke vanishes into air; but agility being a property of his risen
body, he very suddenly, and swiftly, and in a moment, withdrew himself
from them; for if he could withdraw himself from company in a very
speedy manner before his resurrection, much more after; see [Luk
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030). The Syriac version renders it,
"he was taken away from them"; as if some of the ministering angels were
made use of to remove him at once; but this seems not necessary: the
Arabic version renders it, "he was hidden from them"; that same power of
his that held their eyes all the while they were travelling together,
interposed some object between him and them, so that he could not be
seen by them that very instant, even before he was gone out of the
house.

[Luke 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 24:32</span></span>

And they said one to another,.... After Christ was gone, being surprised
at what happened, that they should not know him all that while; and that
as soon as they did, he should disappear, or withdraw himself in this
manner:

did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the Scriptures? concerning himself, his
sufferings, death, and resurrection, which are in Moses, the Prophets,
and the Psalms. The Scriptures are as a sealed book to men, learned and
unlearned; and none so fit to open them as the lion of the tribe of
Judah: he did open and explain them to these his disciples, as well as
conversed with them about other things, as they travelled together; and
his words came with such evidence, power, and sweetness, that they were
ravished with them; their minds were irradiated with beams and rays of
divine light; their hearts were warmed and glowed within them; they
became fervent in spirit, and their affections were raised and fired;
they found the word to be as burning fire within them; and they now knew
somewhat what it was to be baptized with fire, which is Christ's
peculiar office to administer; see [Psa
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003) they seem as it were not only to
reflect on these things with wonder and pleasure, but also to charge
themselves with want of thought, with inattention and stupidity; since
they might have concluded from the uncommon evidence, force, and energy
with which his words came to them, who he was, seeing no man could speak
as he did, and with such effect as his words had.

[Luke 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 24:33</span></span>

And they rose up the same hour,.... Though it was now evening, and the
day was spent and gone; and notwithstanding what business they might
have to do at Emmaus, about which they came, and even might not have
made an end of eating, or sufficiently refreshed themselves; and though
they had had a walk of sixty furlongs that afternoon, yet being big with
this appearance of Christ to them, and in haste to impart the joyful
news to their fellow disciples, they immediately rose up from table:

and returned to Jerusalem; the same night, from whence they had come
that day:

and found the eleven gathered together; at a certain house known to
these two, and who met together in the night season, for the sake of
privacy, and for fear of the Jews, and who were now up, though it was
late: these are called "eleven", because Judas was now gone from them,
and dead; and this being their whole number, it is used, though every
one might not be present, as particularly Thomas was not; see [Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)

and them that were with them; the seventy disciples, and other
believers, both men and women; see [Act
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015).

[Luke 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 24:34</span></span>

Saying,.... The following words; and which are not the words of the two
disciples, but of the apostles, whom they found gathered together; and
who, just as these two entered the room, said to one another, or rather
to these two disciples, to whom at once, and as soon as ever they saw
them, not being able to hold it in, they communicated the good news they
had just heard, and which; perhaps, Peter had been just telling them:

the Lord is risen indeed; it is certainly matter of fact: for though the
women were not credited, but their accounts were as idle tales, and, at
most, only occasioned some thoughts and reflections, which they could
not settle; yet now they were satisfied of the reality of his
resurrection, and speak of it with the greatest assurance and joy:

and hath appeared unto Simon; he appeared to him first, before he did to
any of the rest, though he had denied him in so shameful a manner: which
is an instance of great grace and goodness: and he appeared to him, on
purpose, no doubt, to comfort him under his distress; as well as being
the oldest, disciple, and a man of figure and credit among them, his
report would be believed. None of the writers of the New Testament take
notice of this appearance besides, only the Apostle Paul, [Co1
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#005). It is certain that it was the
same day Christ rose from the dead; and was after the women had seen
him, and after Peter had, been at the sepulchre; and before the return
of the two disciples from Emmaus, and before he showed himself to the
rest of the apostles.

[Luke 24:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 24:35</span></span>

And they told what things were done in the way,.... That is, when the
eleven had done speaking, and had finished their report, which they did
with great joy and pleasure; then "these two disciples", as the Persic
version expresses it, to confirm them the more in the truth of Christ's
resurrection, gave them a particular account, how, as they were
travelling, Jesus joined himself to them, and entered into a
conversation with them, and opened the Scriptures in a sweet and
powerful manner to them; and yet their eyes were holden all the while,
so that they did not perceive who he was:

and how he was known of them in breaking bread; that so it was, that
whilst he was breaking bread, and giving it to them, and they were
eating together, their eyes were opened, and they saw plainly who he
was: now, though this was a common meal, and not the ordinance of the
Lord's supper, yet since Christ made himself known to his disciples at
an ordinary meal, may not his followers expect that he will make himself
known to them, and grant them communion with him at his table? and which
should be no small argument to engage believers to a constant attendance
on it.

[Luke 24:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 24:36</span></span>

And as they thus spake,.... While the two disciples, that came from
Emmaus, were giving the above relation; just as they had finished it,
and had scarcely done speaking:

Jesus himself stood in the midst of them; the apostles; who were
assembled together in a certain house, the doors being shut for fear of
the Jews; and it was on the evening of the same day Christ rose from the
dead, and late at night; see [Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019) and without hearing the doors
opened, or the sound of the feet of Jesus, and without seeing him come
in, and approach unto them, he, in a moment, at once, stood in the
middle of them, as if he had immediately rose up out of the earth before
them; and so the Persic version renders it, "Jesus rose up out the midst
of them": by his power he opened the and secretly let himself in, and
shut them again at once; and by the agility of his body moved so
swiftly, that he was not discerned until he was among them, where he
stood to be seen, and known by them; whereby he made that good in a
corporeal sense, which he had promised in a spiritual sense, [Mat
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020) and was an emblem of his
presence in his churches, and with his ministers, to the end of the
world.

And saith unto them, peace be unto you; which was an usual form of
salutation among the Jews; See Gill on [Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019). The Vulgate Latin, and all the
Oriental versions add, "I am he, fear not"; but this clause is not in
the Greek copies.

[Luke 24:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 24:37</span></span>

But they were terrified and affrighted,.... At the sight of him, and at
his sudden appearance among them, without being heard, or seen before,
and the doors shut and bolted; they could not tell how to account for
it, that it should be Jesus himself risen from the dead in his own body,
though they had been just speaking of his resurrection, and had had a
confirmation of it from the disciples that went to Emmaus:

and supposed that they had seen a spirit; that what they saw was a
phantom, or apparition, or a spirit, that had assumed, and appeared in,
the shape of Jesus, and was not he himself.

[Luke 24:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 24:38</span></span>

And he said unto them, why are ye troubled,.... Who had more reason to
rejoice, and be glad, as they were when they knew that it was Jesus:

and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? whether what they saw was
Jesus, or an apparition, which gave them a great deal of trouble and
uneasiness, and filled them with fright and terror; as it was, and is
usual with persons when they fancy they see a spirit, or an apparition;
see [Mat 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026).

[Luke 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 24:39</span></span>

Behold my hands, and my feet,.... The Evangelist John adds, "and side";
that is, the prints of the nails and spear, in his hands, and feet, and
side; and the wounds they made there, and the scars they left behind; by
which they might be convinced he was not a spirit, and be assured of the
truth of his resurrection, and that in the same numerical body in which
he suffered; as well as that it might be observed by them how great was
his love to them, to endure what he did for them.

Handle me and see; or know by feeling, as well as by sight; so that if
the one was not sufficient, the other might confirm; sight might be
deceived, but feeling could not: Apollonius Tyaneus, to them that did
not know whether he was alive or dead, and who took him for a spirit,
proposed himself to be touched, and handled, that they might be
convinced (z):

for a spirit hath not flesh and bones; nothing but appearance, or air at
most; no solid substance to be felt and handled:

as ye see me have; or may perceive, both by sight and feeling.

\(z\) Philostratus de Vita Apollon. l. 8, c. 5.

[Luke 24:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 24:40</span></span>

And when he had thus spoken,.... And put them into a method of
satisfying themselves by their senses:

he showed them his hands and his feet; that is, he held them forth to be
seen and handled by them, which no doubt they did; and which were the
infallible proofs by which he showed himself alive to them after his
passion; and by which they knew the truth of his incarnation, or that he
assumed a true and real body, and of the resurrection of the same body;
see [Act 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003).

[Luke 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 24:41</span></span>

And while they yet believed not for joy,.... Though they had been
prepared for the belief of resurrection, by the report of the women, the
relation of Simon Peter, and the account of the two disciples that came
from Emmaus; yet such was the joy they were transported with, upon the
evidence of it, the news was so good, and the favour and benefit so
great, that they could scarcely believe their own senses of seeing and
feeling:

and wondered; at the sight of their risen Lord, and at the power of God,
which was seen herein: the thing was marvellous in their eyes, and was a
wonderful confirmation of the truth of his deity, sonship, and
Messiahship.

He said unto them, have ye any meat? not that he needed any, or was
hungry and desirous of some to satisfy, or gratify his appetite, but to
give them a further proof that he was not a spirit; and that he was
risen from the dead in a true and real body, which was capable of eating
and drinking.

[Luke 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 24:42</span></span>

And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish,.... Which was left by them
at supper, of which they had been eating; for being fishermen, most of
them, this was agreeable food to them:

and of an honeycomb; not to eat with the fish, but after it.

[Luke 24:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 24:43</span></span>

And he took it, and did eat before them. That is, he took both the fish,
and the honeycomb, and ate of them before them, they looking on all the
while; and which was a proof of his being truly risen from the dead, and
not a spectre, or apparition, and which they failed not afterwards to
make use of; see [Act 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041). The
Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions add, "he took the rest, or
what remained, and gave it to them".

[Luke 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 24:44</span></span>

And he said unto them, these are the words which I spake unto you,....
Or this is the substance of them, the sense and meaning of them; for
what follows, we do not find any where expressed in so many words:

while I was yet with you; that is, whilst he was in his state of
humiliation, whilst he dwelt among them, and had his abode with them;
otherwise he was now with them, but not to continue with them; in a
short time he was to ascend to his God, and their God, to his Father,
and their Father:

that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me: concerning
his sufferings, and death, and resurrection from the dead, spoken of in
[Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015) [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010) and in this he refers to what he
had said to his disciples in [Mat
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021) and alludes to the usual
distinction among the Jews of the books of the Old Testament into the
Law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa; among which last stands the book
of Psalms, and is put for the whole; a division often to be met with in
both their Talmuds (a), and other writings (b).

\(a\) T. Hieros. Shekalim, fol. 47. 3. T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 15. 1. &
18. 2. & 21. 1. Roshhashana, fol. 32. 1. Taanith, fol. 8. 1. & 16. 1. &
20. 1. & 30. 1. Megilla, fol. 21. 2. & 24. 1. Bava Bathra, fol. 8. 1. &
13. 2. & Sanhedrin, fol. 106. 1. (b) Zohar in Lev. fol. 39. 2.

[Luke 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 24:45</span></span>

Then opened he their understanding,.... He not only opened their hearts,
to attend to what he said, and the proofs he gave of his resurrection
from the dead in a true body; but he removed the veil from the eyes of
their minds, and gave them an understanding of the sacred writings,
respecting this matter:

that they might understand the Scriptures; concerning his sufferings,
death, and resurrection, which they were very ignorant of before, and
which were as a sealed book unto them, [Joh
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#009) though they had been from their
infancy brought up to the reading of the Scriptures, and had had the
advantage of Christ's ministry for some years; which shows the necessity
of the special illumination of the Spirit, and the influence of his
grace to remove the darkness of the mind, and give the true sense of the
sacred writings.

[Luke 24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 24:46</span></span>

And he said unto them, thus it is written,.... In the above cited books
of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms; not what after follows, in so
many words, but the matter and substance thereof:

and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day; it was necessary, both because of the decree and appointment
of God, and because of the prophecies and predictions of the Old
Testament; see [Luk 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025).

[Luke 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 24:47</span></span>

And that repentance and remission of sins,.... Which are the sum of the
Gospel ministry; see [Act 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#021) the
doctrine of "repentance" is not of the law, which neither requires, nor
admits of it, but of the Gospel. The Persic version calls it, "the
Gospel of repentance"; a doctrine preached by John the Baptist, Christ,
and his apostles; and the thing itself is a blessing of the covenant, a
gift of God's grace, and in the hands of Christ to bestow; and therefore
the doctrine of it is published in his name, as well as remission of
sins; which, though it springs from the free grace of God, is procured
by the blood of Christ, and through him it is preached. These two are
joined together, not because repentance is the cause of pardon; for
repentance makes no satisfaction for sin, or atonement for it; nor does
the law at all regard it: tears of repentance will not wash away sin;
notwithstanding these, iniquity remains marked before God; Christ's
tears themselves did not take away, nor atone for sin; his blood must be
shed, and it was shed for the remission of it; and that is the only
meritorious cause it. The Syriac version wrongly reads, "repentance for
the remission of sins": the Jews (c) indeed have a notion that
repentance atones for sin; but it is a very bad one, and has no
countenance neither from the law of nature, nor the law of Moses: but
these two are put together, because there is a connection between them,
as there is between repentance, and life, and salvation: repentance
issues in these things; and to whomsoever the grace of repentance is
given, to them the forgiveness of sins is applied; nor need any truly
repenting sinner despair of the pardon of his sin: and indeed, there is
no true evangelical repentance without views, or at least hopes of
pardoning grace, and mercy; for that is attended with faith in Christ,
and is heightened by the discoveries of forgiving love: such who have
the fullest view of the remission of their sins, have the clearest sense
of sin, and have the most sorrow for it, and loath themselves on account
of it, and are ashamed of it, and do most frankly confess it, and most
thoroughly forsake it. And now it was necessary, according to Old
Testament prophecies, that both these

should be preached in his name; in the name of the Messiah; by his
authority, and as coming through him; since the remission of sin is by
his blood; and he is exalted as a prince, and a Saviour, to give both
repentance and forgiveness of sins to all the Israel of God, whether
Jews or Gentiles; and therefore it is fitting and proper that these
should be preached,

among all nations; of the world, where God's elect are; that so they may
be brought hereby to repentance, and receive the forgiveness of their
sins:

beginning at Jerusalem; from whence, according to the Old Testament, the
word and doctrine of the Lord were to go forth, [Psa
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002) and is particularly mentioned,
because the Gospel was to be first preached to the Jews, and be the
power of God unto salvation to them; and because that in Jerusalem lived
those who had been concerned in crucifying Christ, to whom repentance
and forgiveness must be preached; and which would be a great
encouragement to the vilest of sinners, to hope for mercy and
forgiveness, since such received both.

\(c\) T. Bab. Ceritot, fol. 7. 1.

[Luke 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 24:48</span></span>

And ye are witnesses of these things. As they were witnesses of the
truth of his humanity, having seen, and heard, and handled him, both
before, and after his resurrection from the dead, and of all that he
did, of all the miracles that he wrought in Jerusalem, Judea, and
Galilee, and of his transfiguration on the mount; so likewise of his
sorrows in the garden, and of his sufferings in the palace of the high
priest, and in Pilate's hall, and on the cross; and of his death, which
was the death of the cross; and also of his resurrection from the dead,
in the same body, to whom he showed himself alive by many infallible
proofs; by showing them the print of the nails in his hands and feet; by
being handled by them; by eating and drinking in their presence; and by
conversing with them for the space of forty days: and their business was
also to testify the doctrine of repentance, and remission of sins, in
Jerusalem, in all Judea, and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the
earth, which they accordingly did; see [Act
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008).

[Luke 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 24:49</span></span>

And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you,.... By which is
meant the promise of the Spirit, called the promise of the Father,
because he was promised by the Father to be sent, and poured on the
saints in the times of the Messiah, [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003) and because Christ promised to
pray the Father for him, and to send him from him; and that the Father
should send him in his name, who would fit and qualify them for, and
assist them in bearing a testimony for him; since he would teach them
all things, lead them into all truth, take of the things of Christ, and
show them to them, and bring to their remembrance all things they had
seen and heard: and this promise of the Father was to be sent in a very
short time, in ten days time, as accordingly it was; and might be very
properly said to be sent "upon" them, since, when he was sent down, he
sat upon them in the appearance of fire; and this being a marvellous
thing, as well as of great moment and importance, it is introduced with
a "behold", as a note both of admiration and attention.

But tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem; for the space of ten days; here
they were to continue during that time, and not depart thence; yea, they
were to sit there, as the word used signifies: they were to sit still,
and be silent; they were not to begin to preach; they were only to
attend to prayer and Christian conversation, and to wait for the Spirit,
the promise of the Father; and who also is designed in the following
clause:

until ye be endued with power from on high; the Spirit of God is a
spirit of might, and of power, as well as of knowledge, of
understanding, of counsel, of love, and of a sound mind; whereby they
were to be fortified, and inspired with courage and greatness of soul,
so as to look their greatest adversaries in the face with boldness and
intrepidity, and freely, and without fear, speak unto them; and whereby
their ministrations would be succeeded to the conversion of many souls;
and accordingly so it was: for after the Spirit was poured out upon
them, they who before were timorous and fearful, came forth publicly,
with undaunted courage, and resolution, and boldness, to the amazement
of their adversaries; and their preaching was with the demonstration of
the Spirit, and of power; who may be said to be "from on high", since he
descended from heaven upon them; and they may be said to be "endued", or
"clothed" with him, since there was such an extra ordinary and plentiful
effusion of his gifts and graces on them: and now they were to wait in
Jerusalem for this, that in the place where the Spirit had been
dishonoured and blasphemed, and the unpardonable sin against him had
been committed by the Scribes and Pharisees, the might be in a most
visible and signal manner honoured; and also, because the doctrine of
the Lord was to go out of Zion, and the word of the Lord out of
Jerusalem. The Vulgate Latin version leaves out the word "Jerusalem",
and reads only, "sit ye in the city until", &c. but then no other city
can be designed.

[Luke 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 24:50</span></span>

And he led them out as far as Bethany,.... Not the town of Bethany;
could that be thought, it might be supposed that he led his disciples
thither, to pay a visit to his dear friends there, Lazarus, Mary, and
Martha, before his ascension; but the town of Bethany was fifteen
furlongs, or near two miles distance from Jerusalem, [Joh
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#018) whereas the place from whence
Christ ascended was but a sabbath day's journey from it, which was two
thousand cubits, or about a mile, [Act
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012). This Bethany, therefore, was a
tract of land, so called from the town, which began at the Mount of
Olives, where Bethphage ended; see [Mar
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001) and hither from Jerusalem Christ
led his disciples, in order to ascend to heaven in their sight; and this
was the spot of ground, where he began to ride in triumph to Jerusalem,
and here he ascended in a triumphant manner to heaven; this was the
place he frequently retired to for solemn, and solitary prayer, and
where he had put up many a strong cry to God, and now from hence he
ascended to him; this was the place whither he went after he had ate his
last passover, where he was taken, and from whence he came to suffer and
die for his people:

and he lift up his hands, and blessed them. The lifting up of his hands
was not in order to put them upon his disciples; though the Ethiopic
version adds, "and put them on"; nor was it used as a prayer gesture;
nor was the blessing of them prayer wise, or by praying for a blessing
on them; but as Aaron, his type, lift up his hands towards the people of
Israel, and blessed them, when he had offered the offerings for them,
[Lev 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022) so Christ, as the great high
priest, having offered himself a sacrifice for the sins of his people,
lift up his hands towards his apostles, and blessed them in an
authoritative way, by bestowing blessings upon them: he blessed them
with a larger measure of the Spirit; for though they were to wait some
few days longer for the extraordinary effusion of the Spirit, yet, in
the mean while, they received from him more of it than they had formerly
had; for he breathed upon them, and said, receive the Holy Ghost, [Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022). He blessed them with larger
measures of grace, and with more spiritual light, and understanding into
the Scriptures of truth, and with much inward peace of mind, and with
the fresh discoveries of pardoning love; and which seemed necessary,
since by their conduct towards him, one by denying him, and the rest by
forsaking him, the peace of their minds was broken, and they needed a
fresh application of forgiving grace. The form of blessing the people
used by Aaron, and his sons, the priests, who were types of Christ, is
recorded in [Num 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023) and though our
Lord might not use the same form in blessing his disciples, yet it seems
he used the same gesture, lifting up his hands, as they did. The
Targumists say (d), the blessing of the priests was done by stretching,
or spreading out their hands; but other Jewish writers observe, it was
by lifting them up: concerning which their rule is (e);

"in the province, the priests lift up their hands, as high as their
shoulders, but in the sanctuary, above their heads, except the high
priest, who did not lift up his hands above the plate of gold on his
forehead.''

The reason of this was, because the name Jehovah was written upon it,
and it was not proper his hands should be lifted up above that. The
account Maimonides (f) gives of this affair is;

"how is the lifting up of hands? in the borders, at the time the
messenger of the congregation comes to service, when he has said, who
ever will, &c. all the priests that stand in the synagogue, remove from
their places, and go, and ascend the desk (or pulpit), and stand there
with their faces to the temple, and their backs to the people, and their
fingers closed within their hands, until the messenger of the
congregation has finished the confession, or thanksgiving; and then they
turn their faces to the people, and stretch out their fingers, and lift
up their hands to their shoulders and begin to bless, and the messenger
of the congregation pronounces them (the blessings) word by word, &c.
How is the blessing of the priests in the sanctuary? the priests go up
into the desk (or pulpit), after the priests have finished the morning
daily service, and lift up their hands above, over their heads, except
the high priest, who does not lift up his hands above the plate of gold,
on his forehead; and one pronounces them (the blessings) word for word,
as they do in the borders (in the country), &c.''

And as our Lord used this gesture in blessing, it is very likely he
complied with another rule, by expressing it in the Hebrew tongue; for
the Jews say (g), the blessing of the priests is not said in any place,
but in the holy tongue.

\(d\) Targum Jon. in Num. vi. 23. & Targum in Cant. vii. 7. (e) Misn
Sota, c. 7. sect. 6. Bemidbar Rabba sect. 11. fol. 203. 3. (f) Hilchot
Tephilla, c. 14. sect. 3. 9. (g) Hilchot Tephilla, c. 14. sect. 11. Vid.
Targum Jon. & Rabba, ut supra, & T. Bab. Sota, fol. 38. 1.

[Luke 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 24:51</span></span>

And it came to pass, while he blessed them,.... Just as he was finishing
the words, by which he expressed the blessings he bestowed on them:

he was parted from them; as Elijah was from Elisha: their spiritual and
mystical union by him remained, which is indissoluble; nor was his
gracious presence from them withdrawn; nor was this parting in anger and
resentment, as he sometimes does withdraw from his people, on account of
their sinful conduct, in a little wrath, for a moment, resenting their
unbecoming carriage; but this parting was while he was blessing them,
and was only in body; his heart was still with them; it was a
withdrawing of his corporeal presence from them, and that but for a
while; he will come again a second time from heaven, from whence the
saints expect him, and then they will meet, and never part more: and
carried up into heaven; by his divine power, as God, by virtue of which
he ascended himself, he went up gradually, till he became invisible to
his disciples; or through the agility of his human body; for the bodies
of the saints, when raised, will be like the angels, swift and nimble,
and capable of moving from place to place, and of ascending and
descending; and much more the glorious body of Christ, according to
which, theirs will be conformed; though neither of these deny the use of
means, that might be made, as of a cloud, and of angels; for a cloud
received him out of the sight of the apostles; and there were the twenty
thousand chariots of God, even thousands of angels, which attended him,
when he ascended on high, and in which he may be properly said to be
carried up into heaven, [Act 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009) where
he was received with a welcome, by his Father, by all the glorified
saints, and holy angels, and where he is placed in human nature, at the
right hand of God; is crowned with glory, and honour, and exalted above
all creatures, human or angelic; and where he will remain until the time
of the restitution of all things, and then he will descend to judge the
quick and dead. The Arabic and Ethiopic Versions read both these clauses
actively, "he parted himself", or "he departed from them, and went up
into heaven"; and so reads the Syriac version the last clause.

[Luke 24:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 24:52</span></span>

And they worshipped him,.... Not with a civil worship, as he was
sometimes worshipped by men, in the days of his flesh, who, though they
took him for some extraordinary person, knew him not to be the Son of
God; but with religious worship as God: for by his resurrection from the
dead, Christ was declared to be the Son of God, and both by that, and by
his going to his Father, his ascension to heaven, the disciples were
more confirmed in his proper deity, and divine sonship; and therefore
worshipped him as God; by calling upon his name, ascribing blessings and
honour, and glory, to him; by making him the object of their reverence
and fear; and by trusting in him; and by doing every religious act in
his name, and which they ever after continued to do:

and returned to Jerusalem: as they were ordered, where they were to
tarry and wait for the pouring down of the Spirit: and this they did

with great joy; for though their Lord was parted from them, and was gone
to heaven, this did not cause sorrow, as did his death, but, on the
contrary, joy, even great joy; partly because of the glory he was
entered into, and possessed of; and partly on account of what he was
gone to do for them; to appear in the presence of God for them, to make
intercession for them, to take possession of heaven in their name, and
to prepare a place for them, as well as to receive gifts for them; and
now they return to Jerusalem with great cheerfulness, in full hope and
expectation, yea, assurance of faith, that they should shortly receive
the promise of the Father.

[Luke 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">luk 24:53</span></span>

And were continually in the temple,.... At the time of worship, at the
hours of prayer, or of public service; and perhaps always privately in
an upper room in it, where they, with others, met frequently, and
continued, with one accord, in prayer and supplication; See Gill on [Act
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014), a practice worthy of imitation,
whether in the public or private way:

praising, and blessing God; for his Son Jesus Christ, who had died for
their sins, was risen again for their justification, and was now
ascended into heaven, to be their advocate there; and for all spiritual
bless his Gospel to every creature.

Amen; so let him be praised, and blessed by all the saints, for all that
is contained in this Gospel. In a manuscript copy of Beza's, it is
added,

"the Gospel according to Saint Luke was published fifteen years after
the ascension of Christ;''

See Gill on the title of this Gospel "Lu 1:1".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Introduction](joh000)

</div>
