<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal001)  [Next](mal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO MALACHI 2

This chapter contains a reproof both of priests and people for their
sins. It begins with the priests, [Mal
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001) and threatens, in case they attend
not to glorify the name of the Lord, they and their blessings should be
cursed, their seed corrupted, dung spread upon them, and they took away
with it, [Mal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002) and the end of this
commandment being sent them, of giving glory to the name of God, was
that the covenant might appear to be with Levi, or him that was typified
by him, [Mal 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004) of which covenant
some account is given, with the reason why the blessings of it were
given to him, with whom it was, [Mal
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005) who is described by the true
doctrine he preached; by the purity of his lips; by the peaceableness
and righteousness of his walk and conversation; and by his usefulness
and success in turning many from sin, [Mal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006) and it being part of the priest's
office to preserve true knowledge, and communicate it, it is the duty of
the people to seek to him for it; since he is the messenger of the Lord,
[Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007) but as for the priests of
those times the prophet respects, they were apostates from the way of
the Lord; made others to stumble at the law, and corrupted the covenant;
and therefore became contemptible, base, and mean, in the sight of the
people, [Mal 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008) who are next reproved
for their marrying with those of other nations, idolatrous persons; and
using polygamy and divorces, which were a profanation of the covenant of
their fathers; a piece of perfidy and treachery among themselves; an
abomination to the Lord; a profanation of his holiness; and led to
idolatry, [Mal 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010) wherefore they are
threatened to be cut off from the tabernacles of Jacob, and their
sacrifices to be rejected; insomuch that the altar is represented as
covered with weeping and tears, because disregarded, [Mal
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012). The reason of which was, because
marrying more wives than one, and these strange women, was dealing
treacherously with their lawful wives; was contrary to the first
creation of man, and the end of it; and therefore such practices ought
to be avoided; and the rather, since putting away was hateful to the
Lord, [Mal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014) and the chapter is
concluded with a charge against them, that they wearied the Lord with
their wicked words; affirming that the Lord took delight in the men that
did evil; and that there were no judgment, truth, nor righteousness, in
him, [Mal 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017).

[Malachi 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 2:1</span></span>

And now, O ye priests,.... That despised and profaned the name of the
Lord; that suffered such corrupt and illegal sacrifices to be brought
and offered up:

this commandment is for you: of giving glory to the name of God; of
taking care of his worship; of teaching the people knowledge, and
directing them in the way in which they should walk; as follows:

[Malachi 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 2:2</span></span>

If ye will not hear,.... The commandment enjoined them; or the Gospel
preached to them by Christ, and his apostles:

and if ye will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name, saith the
Lord of hosts; which they had despised and profaned before; if they did
not take care of his worship and service, and honour the Messiah sent
unto them, in whom the name of the Lord was:

I will even send a curse upon you; both upon priests and people; those
that bring the bad offerings, and those that receive them, as Kimchi;
though Abarbinel restrains it to the priests:

and I will curse your blessings, either with which the priests blessed
the people; or with which both they and the people were blessed; namely,
their temporal blessings, such as their corn, and wine, and oil: and
what wicked men have of this world, they have it with a curse, and not a
blessing, as the righteous have; and therefore a little which they have,
is better than much enjoyed by the wicked, [Psa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#016),

yea, I have cursed them already; that is, from the time they began to
despise his name, and not give him the glory due unto him, as Kimchi and
Abarbinel explain it:

because ye do not lay it to heart; to glorify God.

[Malachi 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 2:3</span></span>

Behold, I will corrupt your seed,.... Or, "the seed for you" (r); that
is, for your sake, as Kimchi and Ben Melech explain it; meaning the seed
they cast into the earth, which the Lord threatens to corrupt and
destroy; so that it should not spring up again, and bring forth any
increase: or, "rebuke" (s) it, as the word sometimes signifies; and so
the Targum,

"behold, I will rebuke you in the increase, the fruit (son) of the
seed.''

The sense is the same; corrupting the seed being a rebuke to them; and
rebuking the seed being a corruption of that, or hindering it from
growing up. It is a threatening of a sore famine that should be in the
Jewish nation; and which Cocceius thinks was that which happened in the
days of Claudius Caesar, [Act 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028).
The Septuagint version renders it, "behold, I separate to you the
shoulder"; the Arabic version, "the right hand", or arm; and the Vulgate
Latin is, "behold, I will cast forth to you the arm"; the right shoulder
of the sacrifice, which was given to the priests, and here threatened to
be cast to them with indignation, [Lev
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032) but the former sense is best:

and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts;
that is, the dung of their beasts which were slain for sacrifice at
their solemn feasts: so this word is used for a beast offered for
sacrifice at a festival, [Psa 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027).
The sense is, that their sacrifices and solemn feasts were so far from
being acceptable to God, that he would reject both them and their
persons, and would cast the very dung of the creatures brought for
sacrifice into their faces, and spread it over them: a phrase expressive
of the utmost contempt of them, and of exposing them to the greatest
shame and confusion for their sins. So the Targum,

"I will make manifest the shame of your sins upon your faces; and will
cause to cease the magnificence of your feasts.''

The Septuagint render it, the ventricle, or "maw"; which was given to
the priests, [Deu 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#003) and in which
the dung was contained:

and one shall take you away with it; with the dung spread upon them;
they looking like a heap of dung, being covered with it, and had in no
more account than that: or "to it" (t); that is, as Jarchi explains it,
to the dung of the beasts of your sacrifices they shall carry you; or
you shall be carried to it, that ye may be rejected and despised as
that. Kimchi's note is

"the iniquity (you are guilty of) shall carry you to this contempt;
measure for measure; you have despised me, and ye shall be despised:''

or "with him", or "to himself" (u); meaning he, or it that shall take
them away; either the wind or dung; or the enemy, as Aben Ezra
interprets it; by whom the Romans may be designed, who took them away
out of their own land, and carried them captive. According to the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, this is to be understood of
God, who render the words, "I will take you together", or "with it".

\(r\) "propter vos", Munster, Drusius. (s) "increpabo", Tigurine
version; "increpo", Drusius, Cocceius; "increpans", Burkius. (t) ,
Sept.; "ad istud", so some in Vatablus, De Dieu. (u) "Ad se", Pagninus,
Montanus, Munster, Tigurine version: Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Drusius, Calvin, Burkius.

[Malachi 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 2:4</span></span>

And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you,.... See
Gill on [Mal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001),

that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the Lord of hosts; not that
the ceremonial law might be confirmed and established, on which the
Levitical priesthood was founded; for it was the will of God that that
should be abolished, because of the weakness and unprofitableness of it;
but that the covenant of grace made with Christ, the antitype of Levi,
with whom the true Urim and Thummim are, [Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008), who has a more excellent
ministry and priesthood than his, might take place, be made manifest,
and be exhibited under the Gospel dispensation; of which, and of the
person with whom it is, an account is given in the following verses.

[Malachi 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 2:5</span></span>

My covenant was with him of life and peace,.... Not with Aaron, nor with
Phinehas; nor is it to be understood of a covenant, promising temporal
life and outward prosperity to either of them; Aaron living a hundred
and twenty three years, [Num 33:39](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#039) and
Phinehas, according to some Jewish writers, above three hundred years,
which they gather from [Jdg 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028) but
of the covenant made with Christ from everlasting, called "a covenant of
life", because it was made with Christ the Word of life, who was with
the Father from all eternity, and in time was made manifest in the
flesh; and was made in behalf of persons ordained to eternal life, and
in which that was promised and given to them in him; and in which it was
agreed that he should become man, and lay down his life as such, that
they might enjoy it: and it is called a "covenant of peace", because the
scheme of peace and reconciliation was drawn in it, and agreed unto;
Christ was appointed in it to be the Peacemaker; and in consequence of
which he was sent to procure peace, and he has made it by the blood of
his cross: and this covenant may be said to have been and to be "with
him"; because it was made with him from all eternity, as the head and
representative of his people, and he had all the blessings and promises
of it put into his hands; and it stands fast with him, and will do so
for evermore.

And I gave them to him; namely, the blessings of life and peace; eternal
life is the gift of God; and not only the promise of it, but that
itself, was given to Christ in covenant for his people, and a power to
give it to as many as the Father gave to him, [Psa
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004) [Ti2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001) he gave him also peace to make,
put this work of peacemaking into his hand; and he allows it to be made
by him, and that it is rightly effected; and from his blood and
righteousness peace springs to his people; and they enjoy peace in him
and through him, yea, all prosperity and happiness:

for the fear wherewith he feared me; because of his obedience to the
precept and penalty of the law; because of his righteousness, and
sufferings, and death, by means of which life and peace came to his
people, and in which he showed great fear and reverence of God, [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007) the word "for" is not in the
original text, and may be left out in a version, or supplied with "and";
and the sense be, besides the blessings of life and peace, I also gave
him the fear with which he feared me; which must be understood of the
grace of fear bestowed on him as man: so the Septuagint version, "I gave
unto him in fear to fear me"; and the Vulgate Latin version, "and I gave
him fear, and he feared me": and the Arabic version, "I gave him fear,
that he might fear me": the Targum is,

"I gave him the perfect doctrine of the law, or the doctrine of the
perfect law (see [Jam 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025)) that he
might fear before me.''

And was afraid before my name; frightened, and put into consternation,
as he was when in the garden, and he began to be heavy and sore amazed,
[Mar 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#033) or he was broken and
bruised, as Kimchi interprets the word here used, because of the name of
the Lord, to satisfy his justice, fulfil his law, and glorify all his
perfections.

[Malachi 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 2:6</span></span>

The law of truth was in his mouth,.... The Gospel, the word and doctrine
of truth; which comes from the God of truth; is concerning Christ the
truth and men are guided into it by the Spirit of truth; it contains
most glorious truths, and nothing but truth: and this was in the mouth
of Christ, being put there by his Father, who gave him what he should
say, and what he should speak; and which was preached by him in the most
faithful manner, and so as it never was by any other, for which he was
abundantly qualified:

and iniquity was not found in his lips; there was none in his nature;
nor in his heart; nor in his life; nor in his lips; none could be found
there by men nor devils: there was no falsehood in his doctrines; no
deceit in his promises; no dissimulation in his expressions of love to
men; nothing vain, light, frothy, and unprofitable, dropped from him in
common conversation; no reviling in return to his enemies; nor any
impatient expressions or murmurings at the time of his sufferings and
death, [Pe1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022),

he walked with me in peace and equity: he walked with God, he had
communion with him; though he was sometimes left alone, he was not
alone, God was with him; he was conformable to his will, and walked
according to it, in obedience to his law, moral and ceremonial, and in
the discharge of all religious duties: he walked with God "in peace",
without quarrelling with any of his dispensations towards him; he did
nothing to break the peace that subsisted between them, but always did
the things which pleased his father, and had peace in what he did; and
he walked with him in "equity", or righteousness, fulfilling his
righteous law, and bringing in an everlasting righteousness:

and did turn many away from iniquity; doctrinal and practical; which is
to be understood, not of a bare reformation only in principle and
practice, but of true real conversion; of which there were many
instances under the ministry of his forerunner John the Baptist, and
under his own ministry when in person on earth; and under the ministry
of his apostles, attended with his Spirit and power, both in Judea, and
in the Gentile world.

[Malachi 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mal 2:7</span></span>

For the priest's lips should keep knowledge,.... Or "shall keep
knowledge", as the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions; or "do keep
knowledge", as the Arabic version; and so the Syriac version, "for the
lips of the priest drop knowledge"; all this is true of Christ our great
High Priest; for as it was predicted of him, that his lips should keep
knowledge, so they have kept it, and do keep it; not concealing it, but
preserving it, and communicating it freely and openly; as he did to his
disciples and followers when here on earth, and by them to others; and
still does by his Spirit, giving to men the knowledge of themselves and
state; the knowledge of himself, and the way of salvation by him, and of
the truths of the Gospel:

and they should seek the law at his mouth; not the law of Moses, but the
doctrine of grace, and any wholesome instruction and advice; which he is
greatly qualified to give, being the wonderful Counsellor: it may be
rendered, "they shall seek", or "do seek"; and which has been fulfilled,
especially in the Gentiles, and in the isles that waited for his law or
doctrine, [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010),

for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts; or "angel" (w); he is the
Angel of God's presence, and of the covenant, [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009) [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001) which name he has from being sent,
for he came not of himself, but his Father sent him; he was sent as a
priest to atone for the sins of his people, and to be their Saviour; and
as a prophet, to instruct and teach them; and therefore they should seek
to him for knowledge, and attend his word and ordinances, and implore
his spirit and grace.

\(w\) Sept; "angelus", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Cocceius, Burkius.

[Malachi 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 2:8</span></span>

But ye are departed out of the way,.... Of truth and righteousness, of
life and peace, of eternal salvation and happiness, pointed to by Christ
and his forerunner, and by his apostles and ministers that followed him,
and which was clearly showed in the preaching of the Gospel: this was
the character of the chief priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, in Christ's
time, to which the prophet seems to have respect; who not only failed in
their observance of legal sacrifices, complained of in the former
chapter [Mal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001), but left that way of
atonement and salvation they directed to, and led others out of the way
with them:

ye have caused many to stumble at the law; at the doctrine of
justification by the righteousness of Christ; which was the stumbling
stone they fell at, seeking for righteousness, and directing others to
seek for it, not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law, [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032),

ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of hosts: that
which was foreshadowed by the Levitical priesthood and covenant, namely,
the covenant of grace, dispensed under the Gospel dispensation by the
ministry of the word and ordinances; which they rejected, despised, and
set at nought, and as much as in them lay endeavoured to make void, by
not attending to these things, nor suffering others, but doing all they
could to bring them into disuse, contempt, and disgrace.

[Malachi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mal 2:9</span></span>

Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base,.... When their
city and temple were destroyed by the Romans, and they were carried
captive by them, and became a taunt and a proverb in all places where
they came:

before all the people; the nations of the world, among whom they were
scattered:

according as ye have not kept my ways; neither those which the law
directed to, either moral or ceremonial; nor what the Gospel directed
to, the ordinances and institutions of Christ, particularly baptism,
which the Jews rejected against themselves, [Luk
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030),

but have been partial in the law; in the observance of it, attending to
the lesser, and taking no notice of the weightier matters of it, as the
Jews are charged by Christ, [Mat 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)
and in the interpretation of it, restraining its sense only to outward
actions, for which they are reproved, [Mat
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001) or "received faces", or "accepted
persons in the law" (x); in matters of the law they were concerned in,
they had respect to the persons of men, by giving the sense of it, and
pronouncing judgment, in favour of some, to the prejudice of others,
wrongly.

\(x\) "et accepistis faciem in lege", Pagninus; "assumentes facies",
Montanus; "suscipitis faciem", Piscator; "accipitis faciem", Cocceius;
"et ferentes faciem in lege", Burkius.

[Malachi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 2:10</span></span>

Have we not all one father?.... Whether this is understood of Adam the
first man, of whose blood all nations of the earth are made, and who in
the same sense is the father of all living, as Eve was the mother of all
living; or of Abraham the father of the Jewish people, of whom, as their
father, they used to glory; or of Jacob, as Kimchi and Aben Ezra
interpret it, whom the Jews used to call our father Jacob; or of God,
who is the Father of all men by creation, and of the Jews by national
adoption of them; and who may the rather be thought to be meant, since
it follows,

hath not one God created us? either as men, or formed us as a body
politic; which may serve to explain what is meant by their having one
father: whichever is the sense of these words, the argument from hence
is strong; that there ought to be no partiality used in the law, or any
respect had to persons, in that the rich and the poor have all one
Father and one Creator; see [Jam 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001),

why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother; by
perverting justice, having respect to persons, favouring one to the
prejudice of another, as it follows:

by profaning the covenant of your fathers? the covenant made with them
at Sinai, as Jarchi explains it; the law that was then enjoined them,
particularly such as forbid respect of persons, [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015) some think, as Aben Ezra, that a
new section here begins, and that the prophet proceeds to a new reproof,
and for another sin these people were guilty of, in marrying wives of
another nation, contrary to the law in [Exo
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015) which was dealing treacherously
with one another, and profaning the covenant of their fathers.

[Malachi 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 2:11</span></span>

Judah hath dealt treacherously,.... Not only every man against his
brother, by being partial in the law; or against the women of their
nation, by marrying others; or against their wives, by putting them
away; but against Christ the Son of God by betraying and delivering him
up into the hands of the Gentiles, to be mocked, and scourged, and
crucified:

and an abomination is committed in Israel, and in Jerusalem; which was
the taking of the true Messiah with wicked hands, condemning him and
putting him to death, even the shameful and accursed death of the cross;
which was done in the land of Israel, and in and near the city of
Jerusalem:

for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the Lord, which he loved;
Christ, who is the Lord's Holy One, holiness itself, the most holy, and
holiness to the Lord for his people; and who is his dear Son, the Son of
his love, whom he loved from everlasting, continued to love in time
amidst all his meanness, sorrows, and sufferings, and will love for
evermore; him the Jews profaned by blaspheming him, falsely accusing
him, and condemning him; by spitting upon him, buffeting, scourging, and
crucifying him: some interpret this "holiness" of the soul of Judah,
which was holy before the Lord, and loved, as the Targum; so Jarchi of
Judah himself, or Israel, who was holiness to the Lord; and others of
the holy place, the sanctuary, and all holy things belonging thereto;
and others of the holy state of marriage, since it follows:

and hath married the daughter of a strange god; which the Targum
paraphrases thus,

"and they were pleased to take to them wives, the daughters of the
people;''

the Gentiles, such as Moabites, Ammonites, and the like: and this sense
is followed by most interpreters, though the phrase seems rather to be
expressive of idolatry; and so the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic
versions interpret it of their being intent upon, and serving, strange
gods; and as the Jews rejected the Son of God, and his word, ordinances,
and worship, they had not the true God, nor did they worship him, but
became guilty of idolatry; and besides, as they rejected the King
Messiah from being their King, so they declared they had no king but
Caesar, an idolatrous emperor, and joined with the idolatrous Gentiles
in putting Christ to death, [Joh
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012).

[Malachi 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 2:12</span></span>

The Lord will cut off the man that doeth this,.... That is guilty of
such treachery, wickedness, and idolatry: or "to the man that doeth
this" (y); all that belong to him, his children and substance: it
denotes the utter destruction, not of a single man and his family only,
but of the whole Jewish nation and its polity, civil and ecclesiastical,
as follows:

the master and the scholar out of the tabernacles of Jacob; the Targum
paraphrases it,

"the son, and son's son, out of the cities of Jacob;''

agreeable to which is Kimchi's note,

"it is as if it was said, there shall not be left in his house one
alive; that there shall not be in his house one that answers him, that
calls by name.''

In the Hebrew text it is, "him that is awake, and him that answers" (z);
which the Talmudists (a) explain, the former of the wise men or masters,
and the latter of the disciples of the wise men; to which sense our
version agrees: but by "him that waketh or watcheth", according to
Cocceius, is meant the civil magistrate, who watches for the good of the
commonwealth, and so may design the elders and rulers of the people; and
by him that "answereth", the prophet, who returns answers when he is
consulted in things belonging to the law of God, and such were the
scribes and lawyers.

And him that offereth an offering unto the Lord of hosts; the priests,
that offered sacrifice for the people; so that hereby is threatened an
entire destruction, both of the civil and ecclesiastical polity of the
Jews, that there should be no prince, prophet, and priest among them;
all should be removed out of the tents of Jacob, or cities of Israel;
see [Hos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004).

\(y\) "viro", Drusius, Cocceius, Burkius, De Dieu; "filius et qui
fecerit istud", Piscator. (z) "vigilantem et respondentem", Montanus,
Vatablus, Drusius, Grotius; "vigilantem et responsantem", Junius &
Tremellius; "vigilem et respondentem", Burkius. (a) T. Bab. Sanhedrin,
fol. 82. 1.

[Malachi 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 2:13</span></span>

And this have ye done again,.... Or "in the second" (b) place; to their
rejection and ill treatment of Christ they added their hypocritical
prayers and tears, as follows:

covering the altar of the Lord with tears and weeping, and with crying
out; for the Messiah they vainly expect, pretending great humiliation
for their sins: though some, as Kimchi and Aben Ezra, make the first
evil to be their offering illegal sacrifices on the altar, complained of
in the former chapter [Mal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001); and
this second, their marrying strange wives, on account of which their
lawful wives came into the house of God, and wept over the altar before
the Lord, complaining of the injury that was done them:

insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth it
with good will at your hand; which expresses an utter rejection and
abrogation of legal sacrifices; and which some make to be the reason of
their covering the altar with tears and weeping: or the altar is
represented as weeping, because sacrifice is no more offered upon it;
see [Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027).

\(b\) "secundo", Pagninus, Vatablus, Calvin, Cocceius, Burkius.

[Malachi 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 2:14</span></span>

Yet ye say, Wherefore?.... What is the meaning of the women covering the
altar with tears? as if they knew not what was the reason of it, when
they were so notoriously guilty of breach of covenant with them; which
is an instance of their impudence, as Abarbinel observes: or, "if ye
say, wherefore?" as the Targum and Kimchi interpret the words; should
you say, what is the reason why the Lord will not regard nor receive our
offerings? the answer is ready,

Because the Lord hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy
youth: when espoused together in their youthful days, the Lord was
present at that solemn contract, and saw the obligations they were laid
under to each other, and he was called upon by both parties to be a
witness of the same; and at the present time he was a witness how
agreeably the wives of the Israelites had behaved towards their
husbands, and how treacherously they had acted towards them; he saw and
knew, that, whatever pretensions they made, they did not love them, nor
behave as they should towards them; and therefore had just cause of
complaint against them, and must be a witness for the one, and against
the other: this sin of hating and divorcing their wives, or of marrying
others besides them, which prevailed much in our Lord's time, is
particularly mentioned, though they were guilty of many other sins, as a
reason of the Lord's not accepting their offerings: the aggravations of
it are, that they had broken a contract God was witness to, and dealt
injuriously with wives they had espoused in the days of their youth; see
[Pro 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#017),

against whom thou hast dealt treacherously; by divorce or polygamy: the
Vulgate Latin version renders it, "whom thou hast despised": and the
Septuagint and Arabic versions, "whom thou hast left"; divorced and took
others, which arose from hatred and contempt of their former: other
aggravations follow:

yet is she thy companion; or, "and she is", or "though she is thy
companion" (c): has been so in time past, and ought to be so still, and
so accounted: the wife is a part of a man's self, is one flesh with him;
a partaker of what he has; a partner with him in prosperity and
adversity; a companion in life, civil and religious, and ought to remain
so till death part them; for, whom God has put together, let no man put
asunder:

and the wife of thy covenant; wherefore either to divorce her, or marry
another, was a breach of covenant; for by "covenant" is not meant the
covenant of God made with the people of Israel, in which they both were;
but the covenant of marriage made between them, and which was broken by
such practices.

\(c\) "et ipsa est socia tua", Montanus, Drusius, Burkius; "quum sit
socia tua", Pagninus, Munster, Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Cocceius.

[Malachi 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mal 2:15</span></span>

And did not he make one?.... That is, did not God make one man, and out
of his rib one woman? did he not make man, male and female? did he not
make one pair, one couple, only Adam and Eve, whom he joined together in
marriage? or rather, did he not make one woman only, and brought her to
Adam to be his wife? which shows that his intention and will were, that
one man should have but one wife at a time; the contrary to which was
the then present practice of the Jews:

Yet had he the residue of the spirit; it was not for want of power that
he made but one woman of Adam's rib, and breathed into her the breath of
life, or infused into her a human soul or spirit; he could have made
many women at the same time; and as the Father of spirits, having the
residue of them with him, or a power left to make as many as he pleased,
he could have imparted spirits unto them, and given Adam more wives than
one:

And wherefore one? what is the reason why he made but one woman, when he
could have made ten thousand, or as many as he pleased? the answer is,

That he might seek a godly seed; or "a seed of God" (d); a noble
excellent seed; a legitimate offspring, born in true and lawful wedlock;
see [Co1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#014) a seed suitable to the
dignity of human nature, made after the image of God, and not like that
of brute beasts, promiscuous and uncertain:

Therefore take heed to your spirit; to your affections, that they do not
go after other women, and be led thereby to take them in marriage, and
to despise and divorce the lawful wife, as it follows:

and let none deal treacherously with the wife of his youth; by marrying
another, or divorcing her: these words are differently rendered and
interpreted by some; but the sense given seems to be the true one, and
most agreeable to the scope of the place. Some render the first clause,
"hath not one made?" (e) that is, did not the one God, who is the only
living and true God, make one man or one woman? and then the sense is
the same as before; or did not that one God make, constitute, and
appoint, that the woman should be the man's companion, and the wife of
his covenant, as in the latter part of the preceding verse [Mal
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013)? or, "did not one do?" (f) that
is, so as we have done, take another wife besides the wife of his youth?
and so they are the words of the people to the prophets, justifying
their practice by example; by the example of Abraham, whom some of the
Jewish writers think is intended by the "one", as in [Isa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002). The Targum is,

"was not one Abraham alone, from whom the world was created?''

or propagated. Kimchi gives it as his own sense, in these words;

"Abraham, who was one, and the father of all that follow him in his
faith, did not do as ye have done; for he did not follow his lust, nor
even marry Sarah, but so that he might cause the seed of God to
remain;''

yet he mentions it as his father's sense, that they are the words of the
people to the prophet, expressed in a way of interrogation, saying, did
not our father Abraham, who was one, do as we have done? who left his
wife, and married Hagar his maid, though he had the residue or
excellency of the spirit, and was a prophet; to whom the prophet
replies, and what did that one seek? a godly seed; which is, as if it
was said, when he married Hagar, it was to seek a seed, because he had
no seed of Sarah his wife. A seed was promised him, in which all nations
of the earth were to be blessed; he sought not to gratify his lust, but
to obtain this seed, the Messiah, to whom the promises were made, as the
apostle argues, [Gal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016) "he saith
not, and to seeds as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ"; called here the "godly seed", or the "seed God" (g), as some
choose to render the words; that is, that seed which is God, who is a
divine Person, God and man in one person; or which is of God, of his
immediate production, without the help of a man; which the Jews call the
seed that comes from another place, and which they use as a periphrasis
of the Messiah. So on those words in [Gen
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025), "she called his name Seth, for
God hath appointed me another seed",

"says R. Tanchuma, in the name of R. Samuel, she has respect to that
seed which comes from another place; and what is this? this is the King
Messiah (h).''

And the same Rabbi elsewhere (i) observes, on those words in [Gen
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#032), "that we may preserve seed of
our father",

"it is not written, that we may preserve a son of our father, but that
we may preserve seed of our father; that seed which is he that comes
from another place; and what is this? this is the King Messiah.''

Now as Abraham had the promise of a son, and his wife was barren, he
took the method he did that he might have one, the son of the promise, a
type of the Messiah, and from whom he should spring; and this is
sufficient to justify him in it: besides, he did not deal treacherously
with Sarah his wife, for it was with her good will and by her authority
he did this thing; but do you take heed to your spirit, that no one of
you deal treacherously with the wife of his youth, to leave her, and
marry the daughter of a strange God: and much the same sense Jarchi
takes notice of as the Agadah, or the interpretation of their ancient
Rabbins. Some render the words, "and not one does this"; that is, deals
treacherously with the wife of his youth, that has the residue of the
spirit, or the least spark of the Spirit of God in him; and how should
anyone do it, seeking a godly seed? therefore take heed to your spirit,
&c.; so De Dieu. But according to others the sense is,

"there is not one of you that does according to the law, whose spirit
remains with him that is not mixed with the daughter of a strange god;''

which is Aben Ezra's note. But according to Abarbinel the sense is, not
one only has done this, committed this evil, in marrying more and
strange women; not some only, and the rest have the spirit with them,
and keep it pure from this sin; so that a godly seed cannot be
procreated from you; therefore take heed to your spirit.

\(d\) "semen Dei", Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Cocceius, Burkius. (e) "nonue unus fecit?" V. L. Menochius,
Tirinus. (f) "Et ne unus fecit?" Pagninus, Montanus; "et unus ille
(Abramus) ita egit?" Grotius; "annon unus hoc fecit?" Tigurine version;
so Joseph Kimchi. (g) "semen Deus", Galatin. de Arcan. Cathol. Ver. l.
8. c. 2. p. 550. (h) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 20. 4. Midrash Ruth,
fol. 36. 1. (i) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 51. fol. 46. 1. Midrash Ruth, fol.
35. 4.

[Malachi 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mal 2:16</span></span>

For the Lord the God of Israel saith, that he hateth putting away,....
The divorcing of wives; for though this was suffered because of the
hardness of their hearts, it was not approved of by the Lord; nor was it
from the beginning; and it was disagreeable, and even hateful to him,
[Mat 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008) in the margin of some Bibles
the words are rendered, "if he hate her, put her away"; and so the
Targum,

"but if thou hatest her, put her away;''

to which agree the Vulgate Latin, Septuagint, and Arabic versions; and
this sense made mention of in both Talmuds, and is thought to be
agreeable to the law in [Deu 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#003)
though the law there speaks of a fact that might be, and not of what
ought to be; wherefore the former sense is best; and this other seems to
have been at first calculated to favour the practice of the Jews, who
put away their wives through hatred to them. The Jews were very much
inclined to divorce their wives upon very trivial occasions; if they did
not dress their food well, were not of good behaviour, or not so modest
as became the daughters of Israel; if they did not find favour with
their husbands; and, especially, if they had entertained a hatred of
them: so says R. Judah (k),

"if he hate her, let him put her away:''

but this is by some of them restrained to a second wife; for of the
first they say,

"it is not proper to be hasty to put away a first wife; but a second, if
he hates her, let him put her away (l)''

and R. Eleazer says (m), whoever divorces his first wife, even the altar
sheds tears for him, referring to the words in [Mal
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013) and divorces of this kind they
only reckon lawful among the Israelites, and found it upon this passage;
for so they make God to speak after this manner (n),

"in Israel I have granted divorces; among the nations of the world I
have not granted divorces. R. Chananiah, in the name of R. Phinehas,
observes, that in every other section it is written, "the Lord of
hosts"; but here it is written, "the God of Israel", to teach thee that
the holy blessed God does not put his name to divorces (or allow them)
but in Israel only. R. Chayah Rabba says, the Gentiles have no
divorces.''

But some of them have better understanding of these words, and more
truly give the sense of them thus, as R. Jochanan does, who interprets
them,

"the putting away of the wife is hateful (o);''

it is so to God, and ought not to be done by men but in case of
adultery, as our Lord has taught, [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032) and which was the doctrine of the
school of Shammai in Christ's time, who taught,

"that no man should divorce his wife, unless he found in her
filthiness;''

i.e. that she was guilty of adultery; though this Maimonides restrains
to the first wife, as before: but the house of Hillell, who lived in the
same time, was of a different mind, and taught that

"if she burnt his food;''

either over dressed or over salted it, according to [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001). R. Akiba says, if he found
another more beautiful than her, according to [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001), he might divorce her (p); of the
form of a divorce; see Gill on [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031). Those interpreters among
Christians that go this way do not look upon this as an approbation of
divorce, on account of hatred; but that so to do is better than to
retain them with hatred of them, seeing it was connived at, or than to
take other wives with them.

For one covereth violence with his garment, or "on his garment",

saith the Lord of hosts; as he that puts away his wife does her an open
injury, which though he may cover, pretending the law, which connives at
divorces; yet the violence done to his wife is as manifest as the
garment upon his back: though those who think the former words are an
instruction to put away wives, when hated, consider this as a reason why
they should do so; because, by retaining them, and yet hating them, and
taking other wives to them, is doing them a real injury, whatever cover
or pretence may be used; because, if dismissed, they might be loved by,
and married to, other men. Aben Ezra seems to have hit the sense of
these words, when he makes this to be the object of God's hatred, as
well as the former; his note is,

"the Lord hateth him that putteth away his wife that is pure, and he
hates him that covereth; or God sees his violence which is done in
secret.''

Mr. Pocock proposes a conjecture, which is very ingenious and probable,
that as the words will bear the construction Aben Ezra gives, that God
hates putting away, and hates that one should put violence upon or over
his garment; by "garment" he thinks may be meant a man's lawful wife,
which is as a garment to him; and by "violence" a second wife, or other
wives, taken to the injury, hurt, and vexation of the former; and the
covering, or superinducing violence over the garment, is marrying an
unlawful wife, over or with, or above his lawful one: and the sense is,
that as God hates divorce, so he hates polygamy:

therefore take heed to your spirit, that you deal not treacherously; See
Gill on [Mal 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015).

\(k\) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 90. 2. (l) Maimon. Hilchot Gerushin, c. 10,
21, 22. (m) T. Bab. Gittin, ib. (n) T. Hieros. Kiddushin, c. 1. fol. 58.
3. (o) T. Bab. Gittin, ut supra. (p) Misn. Gittin, c. 9. sect. 10.

[Malachi 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mal 2:17</span></span>

Ye have wearied the Lord with your words,.... As well as with their
actions; see [Isa 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024) this is said
after the manner of men, they saying those things which were displeasing
and provoking to him, and which he could not bear to hear; or otherwise
weariness properly cannot be attributed to God:

Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him? as if they were clear and
innocent; or, as the Targum, "if ye should say"; though they might not
express themselves in words in such an impudent manner; yet should they
say so in their hearts, or supposing they should utter such words with
their lips, out of the abundance of their evil hearts, the answer is
ready:

When ye say, Every one that doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord,
and he delighteth in them; which they concluded from the prosperity of
the wicked, and the afflictions of the righteous; so murmuring at, and
complaining of, the providence of God; he acting as if he delighted in
wicked men, and as if they that did evil were the most grateful and
acceptable to him:

or, if this was not the case,

Where is the God of judgment? why does he not arise and show himself to
be a God that judgeth the earth, by taking vengeance on the wicked, and
granting prosperity to his people? De Dieu takes these last words to be
the words of the prophet, and thinks that is a particle of exclamation,
and should be rendered "O"; and that the prophet expresses his wonder at
the patience and longsuffering of God in bearing such impiety and
blasphemy as before delivered. The Septuagint and Arabic versions are,
"where is the God of righteousness?" either God the Father, who is
righteous in all his ways, and faithful in the fulfilment of all his
promises; or, Christ the Lord our righteousness, who was to come, and is
come into this world for judgment, as well as to bring in an everlasting
righteousness. This may be considered as a scoff of wicked men at the
long delay of the Messiah's coming, when they expected outward
prosperity and happiness; just as the scoffers in the last day will mock
at the promise of his second coming, [Pe2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003) and so the words, with which the
next chapter begins [Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001), are an
answer to these.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 3](mal003)

</div>
