<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal003)  [Next](mat000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO MALACHI 4

This chapter contains an account of the destruction of the wicked Jews,
and the happiness of the righteous by the coming of the Messiah; an
exhortation to regard the law of Moses; and a description of John the
Baptist and his work. The day of Christ's coming, reaching to
Jerusalem's destruction, is compared to a burning oven; the wicked Jews
to stubble, whose ruin would be utter and complete, [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001) the appearance of Christ is
signified by the arising of him, the sun of righteousness; the manner,
with healing in his wings; the effects of which are, going forth in the
exercise of grace, and the discharge of duty, and spiritual growth and
triumph over their enemies, in which will lie the happiness of them that
fear God, [Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002) who are put in mind
of the law of Moses on Horeb, [Mal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)
the sending of John the Baptist under the name of Elijah, before the
coming of Christ is prophesied of, [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005) and his work pointed out, with the
end of it, [Mal 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006).

[Malachi 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 4:1</span></span>

For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven,.... Not the day
of judgment, as Kimchi and other interpreters, both Jewish and
Christian, think; but the day of Christ's coming in his kingdom and
power, to take vengeance on the Jewish nation, which burned like an
oven, both figuratively and literally; when the wrath of God, which is
compared to fire, came upon that people to the uttermost; and when their
city and temple were burnt about their ears, and they were surrounded
with fire, as if they had been in a burning oven: and this being so
terrible, as can hardly be conceived and expressed, the word "behold" is
prefixed to it, not only to excite attention, but horror and terror at
so dreadful a calamity; which though future, when the prophet wrote, was
certain:

and all the proud; yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble; the
proud Pharisees, that boasted of their own righteousness, trusted in
themselves, and despised others; all workers of iniquity, in private or
in public; all rejecters of Christ, contemners of his Gospel and
ordinances, and persecutors of his people; as well as such who were
guilty of the most flagitious crimes, as sedition, robbery, murder, &c.
of which there were notorious instances during the siege of Jerusalem;
these were all like stubble before devouring fire, weak and easily
destroyed:

and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts:
which is repeated, to show the certainty of it, and to apply it to the
persons before described:

that it shall leave them neither root nor branch: which signifies an
entire and complete destruction; the city and temple so utterly
destroyed, that not one stone shall be left on another; both magistrates
and subjects shall perish, priests and people, so that there shall be no
form of government, civil nor ecclesiastical; tribes and families lost,
they and their posterity: and so the Targum,

"which shall not leave them son and nephew:''

and, indeed, the numbers cut off were so many, and the destruction so
general, that it may be wondered at that any remained: it is a
proverbial expression, setting forth the greatness of the calamity; see
[Mat 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010).

[Malachi 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 4:2</span></span>

But unto you that fear my name,.... The few that were of this character
among that wicked nation; See Gill on [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016),

shall the Sun of righteousness arise; not the Holy Ghost, who enlightens
sinners, convinces of righteousness, and gives joy, peace, and comfort
to the saints, but Christ: and thus it is interpreted of him by the
ancient Jews, in one of their Midrashes or expositions (a); they say,
Moses says not they shall be for ever pledged, that is, the clothes of a
neighbour, but until the sun comes, until the Messiah comes, as it is
said, "unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise",
&c.; and Philo the Jew (b) not only observes, that God, figuratively
speaking, is the sun; but the divine "Logos" or Word of God, the image
of the heavenly Being, is called the sun; who, coming to our earthly
system, helps the kindred and followers of virtue, and affords ample
refuge and salvation to them; referring, as it seems; to this passage:
indeed, they generally interpret it of the sun, literally taken, which
they suppose, at the end of the world, will have different effects on
good and bad men; they say (c),

"in the world to come, God will bring the sun out of its sheath, and
burn the wicked; they will be judged by it, and the righteous will be
healed by it:''

for the proof of the former, they produce the words in the first verse
of this chapter, "behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven";
and of the latter these words, "but unto you that fear my name &c."; and
a very ridiculous notion they have, that Abraham their father had a
precious stone or pearl hanging about his neck, and every sick person
that saw it was healed by it immediately; and, when he departed out of
the world, God took it, and fixed it to the orb of the sun; hence the
proverb, the sun rises, and sickness decreases (d); and as it is
elsewhere quoted (e), this passage is added to confirm it, as it is
said, "to you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise
with healing in his wings": unless this fable should be intended to
mean, as Abarbinel (f) interprets it, that Abraham, while he lived,
clearly proved the unity of God and his perfections; and that, after his
death, the same truth was taught by the wonderful motion of the sun:
but, be this as it will, those are undoubtedly in the right who
understand these words figuratively of the Messiah; who is compared to
the "sun", because, as the sun is a luminous body, the light of the
whole world, so is Christ of the world of men, and of the world of
saints; particularly of the Gentiles, often called the world; and of the
New Jerusalem church state, and of the world to come: and as the sun is
the fountain of light, so is Christ the fountain of natural and moral
light, as well as of the light of grace, and of the light of glory: as
the sun communicates light to all the celestial bodies, so Christ to the
moon, the church; to the stars, the ministers of the word; to the
morning stars, the angels: as the sun dispels the darkness of the night,
and makes the day, so Christ dispelled the darkness of the ceremonial
law, and made the Gospel day; and he dispels the darkness of ignorance
and unbelief, and makes the day of grace; and will dispel the darkness
of imperfection, and will make the day of glory; as the sun is a pure,
clear, and lucid body, so is Christ, without the least spot of sin; and
so are his people, as they are clothed with his righteousness: as the
sun is a glorious body, so is Christ both his natures, divine and human;
in his office as Mediator; and will be in his second coming: as the sun
is superior to all the celestial bodies, so is Christ to angels and
saints: as the sun is but one, so there is but one Son of God; one
Mediator between God and man; one Saviour and Redeemer; one Lord and
Head of the church: its properties and effects are many; it lays things
open and manifest, which before were hid; communicates heat as well as
light; make the earth fruitful; is very exhilarating; has its risings
and settings, and of great duration: so Christ declares the mind and
will of his Father, the hidden mysteries of grace; lays open the
thoughts of men's hearts in conversion; and will at the last day bring
to light the hidden things of darkness: he warms the hearts of his
people with his love, and causes them to burn within them, while they
hear his Gospel, and he makes them fervent in spirit while they serve
the Lord; he fills them with the fruits of righteousness, and with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory; but he is not always seen, is sometimes
under a cloud, and withdraws himself; yet his name is as the sun before
the Lord, and wilt abide for ever. He is called "the sun of
righteousness", because of the glory of his essential righteousness as
God; and because of the purity and perfection of his righteousness as
man, which appeared in all his actions, and in the administration of all
his offices; and because of the display of the righteousness of God in
him, in his sufferings and death, in atonement, pardon, and
justification by him; and because he is the author and bringer in of
righteousness to his people, the glory of which outshines all others, is
pure and spotless like the sun, and is everlasting; those who have it
are said to be clothed with the sun, and on such he shines in his beams
of divine love, grace, and mercy, which righteousness sometimes
signifies; and his rays of grace transform men into righteousness and
true holiness. The "arising" of this sun may denote the appearance of
Christ in our nature; under the former dispensation this sun was not
risen, it was then night with the world; John the Baptist was the
morning star, the forerunner of it: Christ the sun is now risen; the
dayspring from on high hath visited mankind, and has spread its light
and heat, its benign influences, by the ministration of the Gospel, the
grace of God, which has appeared and shone out, both in Judea, and in
the Gentile world: it may be accommodated to his spiritual appearance:
this sun is sometimes under a cloud, or seems to be set, which occasions
trouble, and is for wise ends, but will and does arise again to them
that fear the Lord. The manner is,

with healing in his wings; by which are meant its rays and beams, which
are to the sun as wings to a bird, by which it swiftly spreads its light
and heat; so we read of the wings of the morning, [Psa
139:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#009). Christ came as a physician, to
heal the diseases of men; he healed the bodily diseases of the Jews, and
he heals the soul diseases of his people, their sins; which healing he
has procured by his blood and stripes: pardon of sin by the blood of
Christ is meant by healing, which is universal, infallible, and free,
[Psa 103:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003) it may denote all that
preservation, protection, prosperity, and happiness, inward and outward,
which they that feared the Lord enjoyed through Christ, when the
unbelieving Jews were destroyed; and which is further expressed by what
follows:

and ye shall go forth; not out of the world, or out of their graves, as
some think; but either out of Jerusalem, as the Christians did a little
before its destruction, being warned so to do (g), whereby they were
preserved from that calamity; or it intends a going forth with liberty
in the exercise of grace and duty, in the exercise of faith on Christ,
love to him, hope in him, repentance, humility, self-denial, &c.; and in
a cheerful obedience to his will; or else walking on in his ways; having
health and strength, with great pleasure and comfort; and, as Aben Ezra
says, by the light of this sun.

And grow up as calves of the stall; such as are fat, being put up there
for that purpose; see [Amo 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004).
Bochart (h) has proved, from many passages out of the Talmud (i), that
the word which the Targum here makes use of, and answers to that in the
Hebrew text, which is rendered "stall", signifies a yoke or collar, with
which oxen or heifers were bound together, while they were threshing or
treading out of corn; so that the calves or heifers here referred to
were such as were not put up in a stall, but were yoked together, and
employed in treading out the corn; now as there was a law that such
should not be muzzled while they were thus employed, but might eat of
the corn on the floor freely and plentifully, [Deu
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004) these usually grew fat, and so
were the choicest and most desirable, to which the allusion may be here,
and in [Jer 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021) [Amo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004) and are a fit emblem of saints
joined together in holy fellowship, walking together in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord; where they get spiritual food
for their souls, and are in thriving circumstances; where they meet with
the corn of heaven, with that corn which makes the young men cheerful,
and that bread which nourishes up to everlasting life. The apostle
alludes to the custom of oxen yoked together, either in ploughing, or in
treading out the corn, when he says, speaking of church fellowship and
communion in the ordinances of the Gospel, "be ye not unequally yoked
with unbelievers", [Co2 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014) for this
hinders spiritual edification, as well as the promotion of the glory of
God; but where they are equally yoked, and go hand in hand together in
the work and ways of the Lord, they grow and flourish; they are
comfortable in their souls, and lively in the exercise of grace; and
they are the most thriving Christians, generally speaking, who are in
church communion, and most constantly attend the means of grace, and
keep closest to the word and ordinances: for the metaphor here used is
designed to express a spiritual increase in all grace, and in the
knowledge of Christ, and a growing up into him in all things, through
the use of means, the word and ordinances; whereby saints become fat and
flourishing, being fed with the milk of the word, and the breasts of
ordinances, and having fellowship with one another; and, above all, this
spiritual growth is owing to the dews of the grace of God, the shining
of the Sun of righteousness, and the comfortable gales of the south wind
of the Spirit of God, which cause the spices to flow out. The Septuagint
version, and those that follow it, render it, "ye shall leap" or "skip
as calves loosed from bonds"; as such creatures well fed do when at
liberty; and may denote the spiritual joy of the saints upon their being
healed, or because of their secure, safe, and prosperous estate: and so
the word is explained in the Talmud (k), they shall delight themselves
in it; and where the Rabbins interpret this and the preceding verse [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001) of the natural sun in the
firmament, which will be the hell (l) in the world to come, and which
will burn the wicked, and heal the righteous.

\(a\) Shemot Rabba, sect. 31. fol. 134. 2. (b) De Somniis, p. 578. (c)
T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 8. 2. & Avoda Zara, fol. 3. 2. (d) T. Bab. Bava
Bathra, fol. 16. 2. (e) Apud Yalkut in loc. (f) Comment. in Mal. i. 11.
(g) Euseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. (h) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 31. col.
303. (i) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 53. 1. Bava Metzia, fol. 30. 1. Pesachim,
fol. 26. 1. Eruvin, fol. 17. 2. (k) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 4. 1.
Nedarim, fol. 8. 2. (l) A notion they elsewhere frequently inculcate,
and is not improbable; and which has been of late advanced and defended
by a very learned man of our own country, Mr. Tobias Swinden, in a
Treatise called "An Inquirer into the Nature and Place of Hell."

[Malachi 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 4:3</span></span>

And ye shall tread down the wicked,.... As grapes in the winepress, as
Christ did before them, [Isa 63:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#002) and
they by virtue of him; who makes them more than conquerors through
himself, over all their enemies, spiritual and temporal:

for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet; this refers to the
burning of them, [Mal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001) and may be
literally understood of their being burnt with the city and temple; when
afterwards, as Grotius observes, the city of Jerusalem being in some
measure rebuilt, and called Aelia, there was a Christian church in it,
governed by bishops, who were converted Jews; and so might be literally
said to trample upon the ashes of the wicked, who had persecuted them in
times past, they being upon the very spot where these men were destroyed
by fire:

in the day that I shall do this, saith the Lord of hosts: or "in the day
which I make" (m); that is, by the rising of the sun of righteousness,
the Gospel day. The Talmud (n) interprets this verse of the bodies of
the wicked in hell, which after twelve months will be consumed, and the
wind will scatter them under the soles of the feet of the righteous.

\(m\) "eo die, quem ego facio", Cocceius. (n) T. Bab. Roshhashanah, fol.
17. 1.

[Malachi 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 4:4</span></span>

Remember ye the law of Moses my servant,.... Who was faithful as such in
the house of God, in delivering the law to the children of Israel, which
was given him; and who are called upon to remember it, its precepts and
its penalties, which they were apt to forget: and particularly this
exhortation is given now, because no other prophet after Malachi would
be sent unto them, this is what they should have and use as their rule
and directory; and because that Christ, now prophesied of, would be the
end of this law; and this, and the prophets, were to be until the days
of John the Baptist, spoken of in the next verse [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005); and the rather, because in this
period of time, between Malachi and the coming of Christ, the traditions
of the elders were invented and obtained, which greatly set aside the
law, and made it of no effect:

which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel; for though the law
came by Moses, and is therefore called his, yet God was the author and
efficient cause of it; Moses was only a servant and minister; and this
was given in Horeb, the same with Sinai: these are names of one and the
same mountain, at least of the parts of it; one part of it was called
Horeb, from its being a dry desert and desolate place; and the other
Sinai, from its bushes and brambles. So Jerom (o) says,

"Horeb, the mountain of God, is in the land of Midian, by Mount Sinai,
above Arabia in the wilderness, to which are joined the mountain and
wilderness of the Saracens, called Pharan; but to me it seems the same
mountain is called by two names, sometimes Sinai, and sometimes Horeb;''

see [Exo 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018). Agreeably to which
Josephus (p) calls Horeb, where Moses fed his flock, and saw the vision
of the burning bush, Mount Sinai; and says, it was the highest of the
mountains in those parts, very convenient for pasture, and abounded with
excellent herbage. Some say (q) the eastern part of it was called Sinai,
and the western part Horeb; it is very likely they joined together at
the bottom of the mountain, and were the two tops of it. This being
mentioned shows, that the law, strictly taken, and not the prophets, is
here designed, for no other was commanded, ordered, or delivered in
Horeb; and that was for all the children of Israel in successive ages,
until the coming of the Messiah, and for them only, as to the
ministration of it by Moses.

With the statutes and judgments; the laws ceremonial and judicial, which
were given to Moses, at the same time the law of the decalogue was, to
be observed by the children of Israel, and which were shadows of things
to come; namely, those of them that were of a ceremonial nature, and
therefore to be remembered and attended to as leading to Christ, and the
things of the Gospel.

\(o\) De locis Hebr. fol. 92. E. (p) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 12. (q) Vid.
Adrichomii Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, p. 122. Well's Geography of the Old
Testament, vol. 2. p. 118.

[Malachi 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 4:5</span></span>

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet,.... Not the Tishbite, as the
Septuagint version wrongly inserts instead of prophet; not Elijah in
person, who lived in the times of Ahab; but John the Baptist, who was to
come in the power and spirit of Elijah, [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017) between whom there was a great
likeness in their temper and disposition; in their manner of clothing,
and austere way of living; in their courage and integrity in reproving
vice; and in their zeal and usefulness in the cause of God and true
religion; and in their famous piety and holiness of life; and in being
both prophets; see [Mat 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011) and that
he is intended is clear from [Mat
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010). It is a notion of the Jews, as
Kimchi and others, that the very Elijah, the same that lived in the days
of Ahab, shall come in person before the coming of their Messiah they
vainly expect, and often speak of difficult things to be left till
Elijah comes and solves them; but for such a notion there is no
foundation, either in this text or elsewhere. And as groundless is that
of some of the ancient Christian fathers, and of the Papists, as Lyra
and others, that Elijah with Enoch will come before the day of judgment,
and restore the church of God ruined by antichrist, which they suppose
is meant in the next clause.

Before the coming of the great and, dreadful day of the Lord; that is,
before the coming of Christ the son of David, as the Jews (r) themselves
own; and which is to be understood, not of the second coming of Christ
to judgment, though that is sometimes called the great day, and will be
dreadful to Christless sinners; but of the first coming of Christ,
reaching to the destruction of Jerusalem: John the Baptist, his
forerunner, the Elijah here spoken of, came proclaiming wrath and terror
to impenitent sinners; Christ foretold and denounced ruin and
destruction to the Jewish nation, city, and temple; and the time of
Jerusalem's destruction was a dreadful day indeed, such a time of
affliction as had not been from the creation, [Mat
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021) and the Talmud interprets (s)
this of the sorrows of the Messiah, or which shall be in the days of the
Messiah.

\(r\) T. Bab. Eruvin, fol. 43. 2. & Gloss. in ib. (s) T. Bab. Sabbat,
fol 118. 1.

[Malachi 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 4:6</span></span>

And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children,.... Or
"with" the children, as Kimchi; and Ben Melech observes, that is put for
and so in the next clause:

and the heart of the children to their fathers; or "with" their fathers;
that is, both fathers and children: the meaning is, that John the
Baptist should be an instrument of converting many of the Jews, both
fathers and children, and bringing them to the knowledge and faith of
the true Messiah; and reconcile them together who were divided by the
schools of Hillell and Shammai, and by the sects of the Sadducees and
Pharisees, and bring them to be of one mind, judgment, and faith, and to
have a hearty love to one another, and the Lord Christ; see [Mat
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#005); see Gill on [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017). The Talmudists (t) interpret
this of composing differences, and making peace.

Lest I come and smite the earth with a curse; the land of Judea; which,
because the greater part of the inhabitants of it were not converted to
the Lord, did not believe in the Messiah, but rejected him,
notwithstanding the preaching and testimony of John the Baptist, and the
ministry and miracles of Christ, it was smitten with a curse, was made
desolate, and destroyed by the Roman emperors, Vespasian and Adrian, as
instruments doing what God here threatened he would do; for not the
whole earth is intended, as the Targum and Abarbinel suggest; but only
that land, and the people of it, are intended, to whom the law of Moses
was given; and to whom Elias, or John the Baptist, was to be sent; and
to whom he was sent, and did come; and by whom he was rejected, and also
the Messiah he pointed at; for which that country was smitten with a
curse, and remains under it to this day.

\(t\) Massachet Ediot, c. 8. sect. 7.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Introduction](mat000)

</div>
