<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar002)  [Next](mar004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001)

[Mark 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 3:1</span></span>

And he entered again into the synagogue,.... Perhaps in Capernaum, where
he had before cast out the unclean spirit; but not on the same day, nor
on that day he had had the debate with the Pharisees, about his
disciples plucking the ears of corn on the sabbath day; but on another
sabbath, perhaps the next; see [Luk
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006).

And there was a man there which had a withered hand; who came there
either for a cure, knowing Christ to be in the synagogue, or for the
sake of worship; See Gill on [Mat
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010).

[Mark 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 3:2</span></span>

And they watched him,.... The ruler of the synagogue, and the principal
men in it; particularly the Scribes and Pharisees, who followed him
wherever he went; they observed him diligently, and kept their eyes upon
him; this lame man being in the synagogue, to see

whether he would heal him on the sabbath day; which, knowing his
readiness to do good, they might expect he would:

that they might accuse him; as they had accused his disciples before, of
the violation of the sabbath: according to the Evangelist Matthew, they
put a question to him, whether it was lawful to heal on the sabbath day?
with this view, that they might, one way or another, have something to
accuse him of, either to the people, or to the sanhedrim; See Gill on
[Mat 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010).

[Mark 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 3:3</span></span>

And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand,.... After he had
reasoned with them from the lesser to the greater, upon their own
principles and practices, in relieving and taking out a sheep fallen
into a ditch, on a sabbath day, [Mat
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010), and knowing "their thoughts",
as Luke says, [Luk 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#008), their
reasonings and designs; and as the Persic version here, from thence
"understanding their conspiracy", turns himself to the lame man, and
bids him

stand forth: or, as in Luke, "rise up and stand forth in the midst",
[Luk 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#008). He bid him rise up from his
seat, and stand forth in the midst of the synagogue: this he said,
partly to raise the attention of the people to the following miracle;
and partly to move commiseration upon the sight of the object; and to
aggravate the hard heartedness of the Pharisees; as also, that it might
be manifest to all, that the man's hand was really withered; and that
there was no fraud in the following cure.

[Mark 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 3:4</span></span>

And he saith unto them,.... Either to the whole multitude, to all the
assembly in the synagogue; and so the Persic version renders it, "again
he said to the multitude"; or rather, to the Scribes and Pharisees, who
were watching him, and had put a question to him, which he answers by
another:

is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil, to save
life, or to kill? The Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Persic versions
read, or "to destroy", as in [Luk 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#009),
To do evil, kill, or destroy, are not lawful at any time; and to do
good, and to save life, must be right at all times: our Lord has a
particular view to the Scribes and Pharisees, and the question is put
home to their own consciences; whose hearts and thoughts, designs and
views, were all open to Christ; and who were now watching to do evil to
him, and even to destroy and take away his life: for the violation of
the sabbath was death by the law, and this was what they sought to
accuse him of: now he puts the question to them, and makes them judges
which must appear most right and just in the sight of God and men, for
him to heal this poor man of his withered hand, though on the sabbath
day; which would be doing a good and beneficent action to him, whereby
his life would be saved, and preserved with comfort and usefulness, and
he would be in a capacity of getting his livelihood; or for them to
cherish an evil intention against him, to seek to bring mischief on him;
and not only destroy his character and usefulness as much as in them
lay, but even take away his very life also: he leaves it with them to
consider of which was most agreeable to the law of God, the nature of a
sabbath, and the good of mankind;

but they held their peace; or "were silent", not being able to return an
answer, but what must have been in his favour, and to their own
confusion, and therefore chose to say nothing.

[Mark 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 3:5</span></span>

And when he had looked round about on them,.... In the several parts of
the synagogue; for there were many of them on every side of him; which
he might do, to observe their countenances, which might justly fall,
upon such a close question put to them, and what answer they would
return to him: and his look upon them was

with anger, with a stern countenance, which showed indignation at them,
though without sin, or any desire of revenge, for the evil they were
meditating against him; for at the same time he had pity and compassion
for them,

being grieved for the hardness of their hearts: or "the blindness of
their hearts", as the Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions
render it; being troubled in his human soul, both at their inhumanity
and cruelty to a miserable object, whose cure, in their opinion, would
have been a breach of the sabbath; and to himself, having a malicious
design against him, should he perform it; and at their stupidity and
ignorance of the law of God, the nature and design of the sabbath, and
of their duty to God, and their fellow creatures: wherefore as one not
to be intimidated by their evil designs against him, or prevented
thereby from doing good,

he saith unto the man, stretch forth thine hand; that is, the lame one;
and such power went along with his words, as at once effected a cure:

and he stretched it out, and his hand was restored whole as the other.
This last clause, "whole as the other", is not in the Vulgate Latin, nor
in the Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic versions; and may be added
from [Mat 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013); see the note there;
since it is wanting in the Alexandrian copy, and in Beza's most ancient
copy, and in others.

[Mark 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 3:6</span></span>

And the Pharisees went forth,.... Out of the synagogue, being dreadfully
galled with the reasonings of Christ, at the silence and confusion they
were put to, and with the miracle he wrought, to the exposing of them,
and establishing his own credit:

and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him: See Gill on
[Mat 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016).

How they might destroy him: persisting still in their evil intentions,
though Christ had so fully and clearly exposed the wickedness of them:
and it is to be observed, that those men who thought it was not lawful
to heal a lame man on the sabbath day, yet make no scruple of meeting
and consulting together on that day, and even with profane men, what
measures and methods were best to take, to destroy the life of an
innocent person.

[Mark 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 3:7</span></span>

But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea,.... Knowing
their evil designs against him, he departed out of the synagogue, and
city of Capernaum; and taking his disciples with him, he went to the
shore of the sea of Galilee; not out of fear, but because his time was
not yet come, and he had more work to do:

and a great multitude from Galilee: from the several parts of it, in
which country he now was:

and from Judea: that part of the land of Israel, which was particularly
so called, and belonged to the tribe of Judah.

[Mark 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 3:8</span></span>

And from Jerusalem,.... The metropolis of the country of Judea;

and from Idumea, or Edom, as the Syriac version reads it; a country that
lay on the south of Judea, formerly inhabited by the sons of Edom, but
now by Jews; or at least the inhabitants of it were proselytes to the
Jewish religion. Mention is made of the plains of Idumea, along with
Gazera, Azotus, and Jamnia, as in 1 Maccabees:

"Howbeit all the hindmost of them were slain with the sword: for they
pursued them unto Gazera, and unto the plains of Idumea, and Azotus, and
Jamnia, so that there were slain of them upon a three thousand men.'' (1
Maccabees 4:15)

Pliny (t) speaks of Idumea and Judea together, as a part of Syria; and
Ptolemy says (u), this country lies on the west of the river Jordan; and
it is here added,

and from beyond Jordan; the country of Peraea, on the east of Jordan:

and they about Tyre and Sidon; either the inhabitants of these places,
as the Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic versions favour, reading "a
great company from Tyre and Sidon"; or those that lived near the
borders, and upon the confines of these cities of Phoenicia:

a great multitude; when all met together, from these several parts; who

when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him: for his
fame went through all the countries, for the miracles he wrought; which
drew this vast concourse of people after him; and who, inquiring where
he was, came to him at the sea of Galilee.

\(t\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 12. (u) Geograph. l. 5. c. 16.

[Mark 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mar 3:9</span></span>

And he spake unto his disciples,.... In an authoritative way; he ordered
and commanded them,

that a small ship should wait on him: that a boat should be got ready,
be near at hand, and attend him, who was on shore; that he might go into
it, should there be any occasion for it; and from thence preach to the
people:

because of the multitude; which came from the above parts, and all
together made a very numerous body of people:

lest they should throng him; crowd, press, afflict, and distress, and
make him uneasy, that he could not be able to stand conveniently, and
preach to them: so that should this be the case, as it was very likely
it would, having a small vessel near the shore, he could go into it, and
free himself from such an inconvenience.

[Mark 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 3:10</span></span>

For he had healed many,.... Of various diseases, and the fame of this
brought more still to him:

insomuch that they pressed upon him; or pushed upon him, with great
eagerness and violence. The Arabic version renders it, "they rushed upon
him, so that they fell": they pushed on, and pressed so hard to get to
him, that they fell upon one another, and on him: the Persic version
renders it, "they cast themselves on him, for the sake of touching him";
which must be very troublesome indeed. Though some think the phrase
signifies no more, than that they fell down before him at his feet, in a
submissive and petitionary way, entreating they might have the favour

for to touch him; either any part of his body, or his garments, even the
hem of them: and so the Ethiopic version translates the words; "they
prayed him that they might touch him"; see [Mar
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#056).

As many as had plagues; of leprosy, and other diseases, which were
inflicted on them by God, as scourges and chastisements for their sins,
as the word signifies, and which answers to "Negaim"; concerning which,
there is a whole treatise in the Misna; and which bears that name, and
particularly regards the plagues of leprosy. Some versions join this
with the beginning of the next verse. The Syriac version reads thus,
"who had plagues of unclean spirits"; as if these plagues were their
being possessed by unclean spirits. The Persic version thus, "having
plagues from unclean spirits"; as if these plagues were inflicted upon
them by them, and which was sometimes the case. The Arabic version after
this manner, "who had diseases and unclean spirits"; both the one and
the other.

[Mark 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 3:11</span></span>

And unclean spirits, when they saw him,.... That is, as the Syriac and
Arabic versions read, "they who had unclean spirits": or, as the
Ethiopic, "they that were possessed with unclean spirits"; as soon as
ever they beheld Christ, though they had never seen him before, and he
was an entire stranger to them, yet

fell down before him: the unclean spirits being said to do that, which
they that were possessed with them did; and which, notwithstanding their
possession of them, they could not prevent, but were obliged to admit of
it, as a token of their subjection to Christ:

and even the devils themselves in the men,

cried, saying, thou art the Son of God; a divine person, equal with God;
and such his power over them, and his healing all manner of diseases, by
a word, or touch, showed him to be.

[Mark 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 3:12</span></span>

And he straitly charged them,.... Or vehemently rebuked them, as the
Syriac and Arabic versions render it; or threatened them much and
vehemently, as the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic. The Persic version
renders it, "threatened many"; both the devils that confessed him, and
the many that were healed of their diseases: he gave them a strict and
severe charge,

that they should not make him known; or "his work", as the Arabic, his
miracles: he sought not vain glory and popular applause, nor did he need
the testimony of men or devils; and especially did not choose the
latter, lest his enemies should traduce him, as having familiarity with
them, as they did.

[Mark 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 3:13</span></span>

And he goeth up into a mountain,.... Near Capernaum, being solitary, and
a place of recess and retirement, "to pray", as Luke says, [Luk
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012), who adds, "and continued all
night in prayer to God", notwithstanding the great fatigue of the day
past. His prayer, as is very probable, was chiefly concerning the great
and important work, which was upon his mind, and he was about to do; the
making and constituting twelve of his disciples, as his apostles, to
preach in his name, and work miracles:

and calleth unto him whom he would; that is, "when it was day", as the
above evangelist observes; when he called his disciples, such as had
been for some time followers of him, as many of them as he thought fit:
for it seems by the same evangelist, that others were called to him
besides the twelve; and out of them he chose them: the phrase "whom he
would", is in the Arabic version rendered, "whom he loved"; and it is a
common observation of expositors, that the choice and call of the
apostles to office, were not according to their will, works and merits,
but according to the sovereign will and grace of Christ, who chose them,
and not they him: but to me there seems no foundation for such a remark
here, though it is a truth; because this regards not the call of the
twelve only, and much less of them to office, but a call of many of the
followers of Christ to come to him on the mountain:

and they came unto him; as many as he called out of the multitude; and
from among these he made the following choice.

[Mark 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 3:14</span></span>

And he ordained twelve,.... Or made, constituted, and appointed twelve
men, out of those he called to him. The Arabic version adds, "and called
them apostles"; which seems to be taken out of [Luk
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013).

That they should be with him; constantly, in private and in public; be
taken into his family, and reckoned such; be his familiars, and privy to
all his affairs; hear all his discourses, and see his miracles; that so
they might be trained up and fitted for the great work he designed them
for:

and that he might send them forth to preach; the Gospel in Judea first,
and then in all the world: for he did not at this time send them to
preach, only chose; called, and appointed them; and after they had been
with him some time, and were better qualified for such service, he sent
them forth, as in [Mat 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001), for this
constitution of them was before that mission, and was in order to it.

[Mark 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 3:15</span></span>

And to have power to heal sicknesses,.... All manner of corporeal
diseases that attend men and women:

and to cast out devils; from such who were possessed with them: that is,
he chose and appointed them to be his apostles, with a view of
conferring such powers upon them hereafter; for as yet, they were not
vested with them, nor sent out to exercise them; no, not till near
twelve months after.

[Mark 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 3:16</span></span>

And Simon he surnamed Peter. Or Cephas, which signifies a rock, or
stone, because of his courage and constancy, his strength and fortitude,
steadiness and firmness of mind: this name was imposed upon him, not at
the time of his mission as an apostle; nor when he made that noble
confession of his faith in Christ, as the Son of the living God, at
which time this name was taken notice of; but when Christ first called
him to be his disciple and apostle; see [Joh
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042).

[Mark 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 3:17</span></span>

And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James,.... These
are mentioned next, as being first called after Peter and Andrew:

and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder: either
because of their loud and sonorous voice; or their warm zeal for Christ,
and fervency in their ministry: or for their courage in opposing the
enemies of Christ, and the power that went along with their words; which
either put to confusion and silence, or issued in conviction and
conversion. The Syriac version reads, "Benai Regesh", and the Persic,
"Beni Reg'sch". The Jews, as our learned countryman Mr. Broughton has
observed (w), sometimes pronounce "Scheva" by on, as Noabyim", for
"Nebyim"; so here, "Boanerges" for Benereges", or "Benerges". There is a
city which was in the tribe of Dan, mentioned in [Jos
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#045), which is called "Bene-berak,
the sons of lightning"; and is spoken of in the Jewish (x) writings, as
a place where several of the Rabbins met, and conversed together: the
reason of this name may be inquired after.

\(w\) Broughton's Requ. of Consent, in his Works, p. 620. (x) Haggada
Shel Pesach. p. 6. Ed. Rittangel. & in Seder Tephillot, Ed. Basil, fol.
243. 1. Juchasin, fol. 36. 1.

[Mark 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 3:18</span></span>

And Andrew,.... The brother of Peter;

and Philip, who was of Bethsaida;

and Bartholomew, whom Dr. Lightfoot thinks is the same with Nathaniel:
the name may be the same with , "Bar Talmion", with the Jews (y); See
Gill on [Mat 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003). See Gill on [Joh
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041).

and Matthew, the publican, who was called Levi;

and Thomas, who was called Didymus, from his being a twin;

and James, the son of Alphaeus, to distinguish him from the other James,
the son of Zebedee, and who is sometimes called "the less";

and Thaddaeus, whose name was also Lebbaeus, and likewise Jude, the
author of the Epistle that bears that name;

and Simon the Canaanite, or Zelotes; of these men, and their several
names; see Gill on [Mat 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002). See Gill
on [Mat 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003). See Gill on [Mat
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004).

\(y\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 6. fol. 151. 1.

[Mark 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 3:19</span></span>

And Judas Iscariot,.... So called to distinguish him from the other
Judas; and is mentioned last for the following reason:

which also betrayed him; and which action of his will ever render his
name infamous among men. This man, with the rest, our Lord chose to be
an apostle of his, though he knew he would betray him; in order to
fulfil the purposes of God, the prophecies of the Old Testament, and
bring on the work of man's redemption he came into the world to perform.

And they went into an house at Capernaum; the house of Simon and Andrew,
where Jesus used to be when there: they went home with him from the
mountain; and from that time became his domestics, and were looked upon
by him as his family, and were admitted to the greatest nearness and
intimacy with him.

[Mark 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mar 3:20</span></span>

And the multitude coming together again,.... Either the multitude that
were about the door of this house; insomuch that there was no room
about, nor any coming near it, [Mar
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#002), or the multitude that came from
different parts, and had thronged about him at the sea side, before he
went up into the mountain: these understanding that he was come down
from thence, and was returned to Capernaum, and was at Simon's house,
flocked thither, in great numbers, to see his person, hear his
doctrines, and observe his miracles;

so that they could not so much as eat bread; the press was so great, and
their importunities so urgent, either to hear him preach, or have their
sick healed, that Christ, and his disciples, had neither room nor
opportunity to eat some food for the refreshment of nature; though it
was very necessary, and high time they had, especially Christ, who had
been up all night, which he had spent in prayer; and had been very busy
that morning in calling and appointing his apostles, and instructing
them what they should do.

[Mark 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 3:21</span></span>

When his friends heard of it,.... Not his spiritual friends, his
disciples and followers, that believed in him; but his kinsmen, as the
Syriac and Ethiopic versions render the words, who were so according to
the flesh; when they heard where he was, and what a crowd was about him,
so that he could not so much as take the necessaries of life for his
refreshment and support,

they went out to lay hold on him: either out of their houses at
Capernaum, or they went forth from Nazareth, where they dwelt, to
Capernaum, to take him from this house, where he was thronged and
pressed, along with them; where he might have some refreshment without
being incommoded, and take some rest, which seemed very necessary: so
that this was done in kindness to him, and does not design any violent
action upon him, in order to take him home with them, and to confine him
as a madman; though the following words seem to incline to such a sense;

for they said, he is beside himself: some render it, "he is gone out":
that is, out of doors, to preach again to the people, which they might
fear would be greatly detrimental to his health, since, he had had no
sleep the night before; had been much fatigued all that morning, and for
the throng of the people could take no food; so that for this reason
they came to take him with them, to their own habitations, to prevent
the ill consequences of such constant exercise without refreshment.
Moreover, though this may not be the sense of the word, yet it is not to
be understood of downright madness and distraction, but of some
perturbation of mind, which they imagined, or heard, he was under; and
answers to a phrase frequently used by the Jews, that such an one, ,
"his knowledge is snatched away", or his mind is disturbed; which was
sometimes occasioned by disorder of body: so it is said (z),

"a deaf woman, or one that is foolish, or blind, or "whose mind is
disturbed"; and if there are any wise women, they prepare themselves,
and eat of the oblation.''

On that phrase, "whose mind is disturbed", the note of Maimonides is,

"it means a sick person, whose understanding is disturbed through the
force of the disease:''

and was sometimes the case of a person when near death (a): and it was
usual to give a person that was condemned to die, and going to be
executed, a grain of frankincense in a cup of wine, "that so his
knowledge may be snatched away", or his mind disturbed (b), and: be
intoxicated; that so he might not be sensible of his pain, or feel his
misery; in all which cases, there was nothing of proper madness: and so
the kinsmen and friends of Christ, having heard of the situation that he
was in, said one to another, he is in a transport and excess of mind;
his zeal carries him beyond due bounds; he has certainly forgotten
himself; his understanding is disturbed; he is unmindful of himself;
takes no care of his health; he will certainly greatly impair it, if he
goes on at this rate, praying all night, and preaching all day, without
taking any rest or food: wherefore they came out, in order to dissuade
him from such excessive labours, and engage him to go with them, where
he might have rest and refreshment, and be composed, and retire.

\(z\) Misn. Nidda, c. 9. sect. 1. (a) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 63. 1. (b)
Ib. fol. 43. 1. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 10, fol. 198. 4.

[Mark 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 3:22</span></span>

And the Scribes which came down from Jerusalem,.... Or, "but the
Scribes", &c. who had an aversion to Christ, and a different opinion of
him: these were they, who having heard much of the doctrine and miracles
of Christ, came down from Jerusalem, which lay in the upper, and higher
part of the land of Israel, into Galilee, a low country, to make their
observations upon him; and take every advantage they could against him,
being men, in their way, letter learned, and artful, and cunning: these

said, he hath Beelzebub: or, as the Syriac and Persic versions render
it, "Beelzebub is in him": sometimes they call him Beelzebub; sometimes
say that he cast out devils by him; and here, that he had him, or was in
him; Beelzebub possessed him, and assisted him, and there was a
confederacy and familiarity between them:

and by the prince of devils casteth he out devils; for so they reckoned
Beelzebub to be; See Gill on [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025), [Mat
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024).

[Mark 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 3:23</span></span>

And he called them unto him,.... The Jerusalem Scribes, to come nearer
to him, and attend to what he had to say in defence of his character and
miracles:

and said unto them in parables: similitudes, and proverbial expressions,
as the following seem to be,

how can Satan cast out Satan? or one devil cast out another? how
unreasonable is it to suppose it? can it ever be thought that such,
whose interest it is to unite, would ever oppose and dispossess one
another? if therefore, as if he should say, I am Beelzebub, or have him,
and he is in me, and I am in confederacy with him; was this the case,
can any think I should ever cast him out of others, as I do?

[Mark 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 3:24</span></span>

And if a kingdom be divided against itself,.... Any of the kingdoms of
this world, and the kingdom of "Satan":

that kingdom cannot stand: not long; its internal broils and divisions
will, soon bring it to desolation; See Gill on [Mat
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025).

[Mark 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 3:25</span></span>

And if a house be divided against itself,.... Any family, small or
great,

that house cannot stand; its contentions and discords will soon bring it
down from a comfortable and flourishing situation, to a very distressed
one; See Gill on [Mat 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025).

[Mark 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 3:26</span></span>

And if Satan rise up against himself,.... As he must do in such a case
as this, if devils are cast out by Beelzebub, the prince of devils:

and be divided; one devil against another, as the above calumny
supposes;

he cannot stand, but hath an end: his kingdom cannot stand long, but
must soon come to an end; his power and authority will soon be
destroyed, both over his own species, and among men; See Gill on [Mat
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#026).

[Mark 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 3:27</span></span>

No man can enter into a strong man's house,.... This is properly a
parable; the other seem to be proverbs, or sayings, that were commonly
used to show the ill consequences of discords, factions, and divisions,
as is explained in the note on See Gill on [Mat
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029).

[Mark 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 3:28</span></span>

Verily I say unto you,.... The Scribes and Pharisees, who had not only
blasphemed him, but the Spirit of God also:

all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies
wherewith soever they shall blaspheme; God; or the Son of God, angels,
and men, and that through the blood of Christ, and when brought to a
sense of the evil of them; for though pardon is procured before, it is
not applied till then; See Gill on [Mat
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031).

[Mark 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 3:29</span></span>

But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost,.... Against his
person, and the works performed by him, by ascribing them to diabolical
power and influence, as the Scribes did,

hath never forgiveness: there is no pardon provided in the covenant of
grace, nor obtained by the blood of Christ for such persons, or ever
applied to them by the Spirit;

but is in danger of eternal damnation. The Vulgate Latin reads it, and
so it is read in an ancient copy of Beza's, guilty of an eternal sin; a
sin which can never be blotted out, and will never be forgiven, but will
be punished with everlasting destruction; See Gill on [Mat
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032).

[Mark 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 3:30</span></span>

Because they, said, he hath an, unclean spirit. They charged Christ with
having a devil, and his miracles with being wrought by the help of the
devil; when, at the same time, they knew in their own consciences they
were works which were wrought by the finger and Spirit of God, and so
were guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost; the unpardonable sin, for
which there is no remission: and this is mentioned as a reason why our
Lord said what he did concerning that sin; because they had been guilty
of it, and so were liable to everlasting punishment on account of it.

[Mark 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 3:31</span></span>

There came then his brethren and his mother,.... At the same time he was
speaking to the Scribes, who seem to be different persons from his
friends and kinsmen, [Mar 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#021),

and standing without; for Christ was within, in the house, talking with
the Scribes and Pharisees, and preaching to the people; and the crowd
being so great, that they could not get into the house; they

sent unto him, calling him: they not only sent one in to let him know
who they were, and that they were without doors, desirous to speak with
him; but also, with a voice as loud as they could, called to him
themselves; See Gill on [Mat 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046).

[Mark 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 3:32</span></span>

And the multitude sat about him,.... In a circle, all around him, to
hear him preach; so that there was no such thing as the messenger coming
near him; but the message being whispered from one to another, it came
to those who sat nearest him:

and they said unto him, behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek
for thee: in five of Beza's ancient copies, and in his most ancient one,
are added, and thy sisters: agreeably, Christ hereafter makes mention of
sister, as well as mother and brother; See Gill on [Mat
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#047), and so it is read in the
Alexandrian copy.

[Mark 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 3:33</span></span>

And he answered them,.... The multitude that sat about him, and informed
him of his mother and brethren being without, and desirous of speaking
with him:

saying, who is my mother, or my brethren? which is said not through
ignorance or contempt, but either, as displeased with the interruption
given him; or with a view to take an opportunity from hence of
expressing his superior value to his spiritual relations; which looks
with no favourable aspect on the superstitious notions, and veneration
of the virgin Mary among the papists; See Gill on [Mat
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048).

[Mark 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 3:34</span></span>

And he looked round about on them which sat about him,.... To find out
his disciples among them, and point them out particularly, by stretching
forth his hand towards them: and said,

behold my mother and my brethren: not in a natural, but in a spiritual
sense; his mother, because, in regeneration, he was formed in them; his
brethren, because, by adoption, his God was their God, his Father their
Father; See Gill on [Mat 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#049).

[Mark 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 3:35</span></span>

For whosoever shall do the will of God,.... By believing in Christ,
receiving him as a Saviour and Redeemer, and submitting to him in all
his ordinances, as King of saints:

the same is my brother, and my sister, and my mother: such are openly,
and manifestly related to Christ in a spiritual sense; and are as dear
to him, and more so, than such persons are who stand in such a relation
to others, or did to him according to the flesh. And this shows not only
the near relation, and strong affection which Christ has for his people,
but that he is not ashamed of them; and it may be concluded, that he
will resent, in the keenest manner, every injury that is done them; See
Gill on [Mat 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#050).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 4](mar004)

</div>
