<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar005)  [Next](mar007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

[Mark 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 6:1</span></span>

And he went out from thence,.... From Capernaum;

and came into his own country; or "city", as the Syriac, Arabic, Persic,
and Ethiopic versions read, the city of Nazareth; so called because it
was the place where Christ was conceived, and where he was educated; for
which he had a regard, and was willing it should partake of the benefit
of his doctrine and miracles:

and his disciples follow him; as they did wherever he went; and which is
a true characteristic of a disciple of Jesus.

[Mark 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 6:2</span></span>

And when the sabbath day was come,.... For it seems that it was on a
weekday, or on one of the common days of the week, that he entered into
the city, where he remained without making himself known, till the
sabbath day came: and then

he began to teach in the synagogue; that is, at Nazareth; where he
expounded the law and the prophets, and preached the Gospel:

and many hearing him were astonished. The Vulgate Latin adds, "at his
doctrine"; and so it is read in Beza's most ancient copy:

saying, from whence hath this man these things? This skill of explaining
Scripture, this doctrine which he teaches, and these miracles he is said
to work? This question they the rather put, because they had known him
from the beginning: he had lived long among them, and they knew he had
not learnt of men, and therefore wondered how he came by such things as
these:

and what wisdom is this which is given to him, that even such mighty
works are wrought by his hands? which were but the other day employed in
servile work, and mechanical operations.

[Mark 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 6:3</span></span>

Is not this the carpenter?.... Some copies read, "the carpenter's son",
as in [Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055) and so the Arabic and
Ethiopic versions; but all the ancient copies, Vulgate Latin, Syriac,
and Persic versions, read "the carpenter": such may Christ be reasonably
thought to be, since his father was; and which business he might follow,
partly through the meanness and poverty of his parents; and partly that
he might set an example of industry and diligence; and chiefly to bear
that part of the first Adam's curse, which was to eat his bread with the
sweat of his brow: nor ought this to have been objected to him by the
Jews, with whom it was usual for their greatest doctors and Rabbins to
be of some trade or secular employment; so R. Jochanan was a shoemaker
(z) R. Isaac was a blacksmith (a), R. Juda was a tailor (b), Abba Saul
and R. Jochanan, were undertakers for funerals (c); R. Simeon was a
seller of cotton (d), R. Nehemiah was a ditcher (e), R. Jose bar
Chelphetha was a skinner (f); and others of them were of other trades,
and some exceeding mean: the famous R. Hillell was a hewer of wood, and
Carna, a judge in Israel, was a drawer of water (g); and so Maimonides
says,

"the great wise men of Israel were some of them hewers of wood and
drawers of water (h).''

They say,

"a man is obliged to learn his son an honest and easy trade (i):''

there are some businesses they except against (k), but this of a
carpenter is not one; yea, they say,

"if a man does not teach his son a trade, it is all one as if he taught
him thievery (l).''

Nor did they think it at all inconsistent with learning; for they have a
saying (m), that

"beautiful is the learning of the law, along with a trade.''

The Jews ought not to have flouted Christ with this trade of a
carpenter, since, according to them, it was necessary that a carpenter,
in some cases, should be a regular priest; as in repairing of the
temple, especially the holy of holies. So says Maimonides (n);

"there was a trap door, or an open place in the floor of the chamber,
open to the holy of holies, that workmen might enter thereby into the
holy of holies, when there was a necessity of repairing any thing; and
since we make mention of workmen, it may be observed here, when there is
need of building in the midst of the temple, great care should be taken,
, "that the workman, or carpenter, be a right priest".''

Yea, they expressly say, that the Messiah is one of the four carpenters
in [Zac 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#020). "And the Lord showed me
four carpenters"; they ask (o),

""who are the four carpenters?" Says R. Chana bar Bizna, says R. Simeon
the saint, Messiah the son of David, Messiah the son of Joseph, and
Elijah, and a priest of righteousness.''

This is with some variation elsewhere expressed thus (p),

""and the Lord showed me four carpenters"; and these are they, Elijah,
and the king Messiah, and Melchizedek and the anointed for war.''

And one of their commentators (q) on the same text says,

"our Rabbins of blessed memory, explain this verse of the days of the
Messiah;''

and then cites the above passage out of the Talmud; and another (r)
refers unto it; See Gill on [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055). The inhabitants of Nazareth go
on, in order to reproach Jesus, calling him

the son of Mary; a poor woman of their town, and perhaps now a widow,
since no mention is made of Joseph:

the brother of James and Joses, and of Juda and Simon? who were all of
them the sons of Alphaeus or Cleophas, who was himself brother, or his
wife sister, to Joseph or Mary; so that Christ was the near kinsman of
these his sons: and it was usual with the Jews to call such an one a
brother, and even indeed a more distant relation. The Vulgate Latin, and
Ethiopic versions, instead of Joses, read Joseph:

and are not sisters here with us? And they were offended at him: either
at the manner he came by his wisdom, with which he delivered such
doctrine he did; and by his power, through which he wrought his mighty
works, or miracles; they suspecting he came by them in an unlawful way,
through familiarity with the devil, which they sometimes charged him
with having: or at the meanness of his trade and employment; they could
by no means think of him as the Messiah, who made so contemptible a
figure, and was brought up in such a low way of life; and the rather,
since one of their kings in common, was not be a mechanic, or at least
of any mean occupation: of their canons runs thus (s);

"they do not appoint to be a king, or an high priest, one that has been
a butcher, or a barber, or a bath keeper, or a tanner; not because they
were unfit, but because their business was mean, and the people would
always despise them.''

Other trades are elsewhere (t) mentioned, from among whom a king, or an
high priest, were never taken; as founders, combers, borers of
handmills, druggists, weavers, notaries, fullers, a letter of blood, or
a surgeon, &c. particularly such as related to women's business. Now, as
it was not usual to choose any one to be a king that wrought at a trade,
they could not bear that the king Messiah should be of one; and because
Jesus was, they were offended at him, and rejected him as the Messiah.
Or they were offended at the meanness of his extraction and descent, his
father, and mother, and brethren, and sisters, being all persons in low
circumstances of life; whereas they expected the Messiah would be born
and brought up as a temporal prince, in great grandeur and splendour;
See Gill on [Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055), [Mat
13:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056), [Mat
13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057).

\(z\) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 11. T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 104. 2. Cetubot,
fol. 34. 1. & 58. 2. Bava Kama, fol. 71. 1. (a) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol.
24. 1. Sanhedrin, fol. 96. 1. Bava Bathra, fol. 170. 1. (b) T. Bab. Bava
Bathra, fol. 164. 2. (c) T. Bab. Nidda, fol. 24. 2. (d) T. Bab. Beracot,
fol. 28. 2. Megilla, fol. 17. 1. & 18. 2. (e) Caphtor, fol. 75. 2. (f)
Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 30. 1. (g) Maimon. in Pirke Abot, c. 4.
sect. 5. (h) Ib. Hilch. Talmud Tora, c. 1. sect. 9. (i) Misn. Kiddush.
c. 4. sect. 14. T. Bab. Kiddush. fol. 82. 1. & Beracot, fol. 63. 1. (k)
T. Kiddush. ib. (l) Ib. fol. 30. 2. (m) Pirke Abot, c. 2. sect. 9. (n)
In Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 5. (o) T. Bab. Succa. (p) Shirhashirim
Rabba, fol. 11. 4. (q) R. David Kimchi in Zech. i. 20. (r) R. Sol.
Jarchi in ib. (s) Maimon. Hilch. Melachim, c. 1, sect. 6. (t) T. Bab.
Kiddushin, fol. 82. 1.

[Mark 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 6:4</span></span>

But Jesus said unto them,.... The following proverb;

a prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his
own kin, and in his own house; the same as in [Mat
13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057); See Gill on [Mat
13:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#057). Only the phrase, "among his own
kin", is here added: very probably some of those that made these
reflections, were some distant relations of Joseph, or Mary; for as
Jesus was now in his own country and city, and in his own native place,
so among his kindred and relations; who envied his gifts and
attainments, and objected to him his rise from that branch of their
family, which was the most mean and abject.

[Mark 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 6:5</span></span>

And he could there do no mighty work,.... Or miracle; not that Christ
had no power in himself to work miracles, though their unbelief and
contempt of him were very great; but it was not fit and proper that he
should do any there, since such were their prejudices against him: it is
an usual way of speaking with the Hebrews, when either it is not "fit"
and proper that a thing should be done, or they "will" not do it, to say
it cannot be done; see [Gen 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#022); and
even it is said of God himself, "So that the Lord could no longer bear,
because of your evil doings", [Jer
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022). Not but that he could if he
would, but he would not; nor was it fit and proper that he should; the
same is the sense here: besides, in [Mat
13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058) it is said, "he did not many
mighty works there"; and so the Arabic version here, "and he did not
many mighty works there"; he did not think it proper to do any of any
great consequence, nor did he. Wherefore the Jew (u) has no reason to
object this to the divinity of Christ, as if there was a want of power
in him. Christ is omnipotent, and he has given proof of his almighty
power, by the miracles which he has wrought; and though he wrought no
mighty work "there", yet he wrought many elsewhere, which sufficiently
attest the truth of his proper deity: the emphasis lies upon the word
there; though he did not work any considerable miracle in that place, he
did in others; which shows, that it was not a defect of power in him,
that was the reason of it, but something else; and Matthew gives the
reason of it, and says, it was "because of their unbelief": not that
their unbelief was an over match for his power; he could have removed
that, if he had thought fit, but he did not do it; he, who is the author
and finisher of faith, could have took away their unbelief, as the man
that brought his dumb child to Christ, concluded he could; and therefore
said to him, "Lord, help my unbelief", [Mar
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024). Christ sometimes required of the
persons he was about to heal, faith in him, that he could heal them; and
so did his apostles, [Mat 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#028). Not
that faith contributed any thing to the cure, but it was the way and
means in which Christ was pleased to communicate his healing virtue:
besides, when persons applied to him for healing, and expressed their
faith in him, it gave him an opportunity of working a miracle for that
purpose; but now these people did not so much as ask such a favour of
him, and so gave him no occasion of doing any mighty work; for which
reason it may be said, he could not, no opportunity offering: and
moreover, seeing they disbelieved him, and rejected him as the Messiah,
they were unworthy of having any wrought among them; and it was but just
and right, to do none: nay, it was rather an instance of kindness not to
do any among them; since had he, and they had remained impenitent and
unbelieving, as he knew they would, these would have been aggravations
of their condemnation.

Save that he laid his hands upon a sick folk, and healed them. There
were some few sick people that had faith in him, and came to him,
beseeching him to heal them; and accordingly he did lay his hands on
them, and cured them, which was a way he sometimes used: and these cures
he wrought, to show his power, what he could do, and what benefits they
might have enjoyed by him, and to leave them inexcusable.

\(u\) MS. Lusit. N. 83. apud Kidder, Demonstr. of the Messiah, par. 2.
p. 59.

[Mark 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 6:6</span></span>

And he marvelled because of their unbelief,.... Which was the reason, as
Matthew says, [Mat 13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058), why he did
not many mighty works there, because they continued their prejudices
against him, and their unbelief in him, notwithstanding what he did do,
which was matter of admiration to him; wherefore he took his leave of
them, as an ungrateful and unworthy people; and it is never after
observed, that he returned there any more. It was a surprise to Christ,
as man, that his country men should not believe in him, but reject him
as the Messiah, on account of the above things: since they knew his
parentage and education, and mean employ among them, even almost to that
time; and yet such were his ministry and miracles, and such were his
wisdom and power he was possessed of, that they could not account for;
they might at least have concluded, seeing it was clear to them he had
not them from men, that he had a mission and commission from God, and
was qualified by him for such service and work; though they might have
carried their reasonings further, and it was marvellous they should not,
and have believed him to be more than a man, to have been a divine
person, and the true Messiah; the proofs of Christ's deity and
Messiahship are so plain and incontestable, that it is amazing that
there should be any, who have read them or heard of them, that should be
deists, or continue unbelievers. Such unbelief must be owing to a
wretched stupidity, and judicial blindness of mind.

And he went round about the villages teaching: he took a circuit
throughout all the little towns and villages round about Nazareth,
instructing the ignorant country people, in the things concerning the
kingdom of God.

[Mark 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 6:7</span></span>

And he called unto him the twelve,.... "His twelve disciples", as some
copies read; whom he had before called by his grace, and had appointed
and ordained them his apostles, but had not yet publicly sent forth; in
order to which, he now called them to him, and gave them their
commission, qualifications, and instructions:

and began to send them forth by two and two: he first sent forth one
couple, and then another; the reason of his sending them by pairs, was
partly for the sake of company, and that they might be useful and
assisting to one another; and partly to show their agreement in
doctrine; and that they might be proper and sufficient witnesses of it,
whereby it might be established; and the rather, being thus sent by
pairs into different parts, their message would be the sooner
dispatched, than if they had all went together:

and gave them power over unclean spirits; that is, to cast them out; as
it is expressed in Mat\_. 10:1; see Gill on [Mat
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001); and which is here added in the
Syriac and Persic versions. Many things are omitted by this evangelist,
which are mentioned by Matthew: he does not give us the names of the
twelve apostles; the reason of that indeed may be, because they are
related by him in [Mar 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#016), and he
did not choose to repeat them here: nor does he take any notice of the
places where the apostles were to go, and where not; nor of the persons
to whom, or not; as not into the way of the Gentiles, nor into any of
the cities of the Samaritans, but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: nor does he say any thing of the subject matter of their
ministry or what they had in charge to publish; as that the kingdom of
heaven is at hand, or the Gospel dispensation: nor does he observe the
several things they were to do in confirmation of their doctrine and
mission; as healing the sick, cleansing lepers, raising the dead, and
casting out devils: he only relates the directions given them with
respect to their journey, in the following verses; the reason of all
which seems to be, because he refers not to the same time as Matthew
does, to their appointment and ordination; but to the time they were
sent out, and proceeded on their journey.

[Mark 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 6:8</span></span>

And commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey,....
To accommodate them in it, except those things after directed to:

save a staff only; a single one, for staves in the plural number are
forbidden; see Gill on [Mat 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010);

no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse. Travellers used to put
their bread, or any other sort of food into their scrips, and their
money in their girdles; but the disciples were not allowed to carry
either, because provision was to be made for them wherever they came at
free cost, it being what their labour was worthy of; See Gill on [Mat
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009), [Mat
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010).

[Mark 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mar 6:9</span></span>

But be shod with sandals,.... Which were different from shoes, and more
fit to travel with, and therefore allowed when shoes were forbidden; See
Gill on [Mat 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010), though some think
there was no difference between shoes and sandals, and that Christ, in
[Mat 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010), does not forbid the taking
of shoes, but two pair of shoes; as not two coats, nor two staves, but
one of a sort only. And

not put on two coats; that is, at a time; an inner and an outward one,
or one at one time, and another at another: they were forbid change of
raiment; the reasons for it See Gill on [Mat
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010). From all which it appears, that
as a minister of the Gospel ought not to be a worldly minded man, that
minds earth and earthly things, and seeks to amass wealth and riches to
himself, and preaches for filthy lucre's sake; nor to be a sensual and
voluptuous man, serving his own belly, and not the Lord Jesus Christ,
feeding himself, and not the flock; so neither should he be filled with
worldly cares, overwhelmed in worldly business, and entangled with the
affairs of this life: he ought to have his mind free from all solicitude
and anxious concern, about a subsistence for himself and his, that so he
may with greater and more close application attend to his ministry, to
preparations for it, and the performance of it; and give up himself
entirely to the word and prayer, and not have his mind distracted with
other things: upon which account it is highly necessary, that the people
to whom he ministers should take care, that a sufficient provision be
made for him; that he may live without any anxious care and thought
about such things, and his mind be more intent about the work he is
called unto: and which is what our Lord chiefly designs by all this, who
has ordained that they that preach the Gospel, should be comfortably
provided for, and live of it; and which, as it makes for the peace of
their minds that minister, it issues in the advantage of those who are
ministered to.

[Mark 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 6:10</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... He continued giving orders and directions to
them, saying,

in what place soever you enter into an house, there abide till ye depart
from that place: that is, in whatsoever city or town they should come
to, the first house they went into, they should continue in, during
their stay in that city or town, and not shift from house to house; See
Gill on [Mat 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011).

[Mark 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 6:11</span></span>

And, whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you,.... Who would
neither take them into their houses, nor hear what they had to say to
them:

when ye depart thence; from the house or the city, or town, in which it
is,

shake off the dust under your feet, for a testimony against them; that
they had been with them, and attempted to preach the Gospel to them, but
they despised and rejected it; wherefore they departed from them as an
unworthy people, against whom the dust of their feet would rise as a
testimony, in the day of judgment; See Gill on [Mat
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014).

Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. This clause is
omitted in some copies, and so it is in the Vulgate Latin version, and
may perhaps be transcribed from Mat\_. 10:15; see Gill on [Mat
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015); though it is in most copies,
and is read in the Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic versions. It is
certain that there will be a day of judgment; it is fixed, God has
appointed it, though it is not known by men or angels: this will be
universal; all must appear in it before God, the judge of all, Jews and
Gentiles; such who have lived in the earlier ages of time, as well as
those that will live nearer that day; such who have only had the dim
light of nature to guide them, and also who have been favoured with the
Gospel revelation: the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha, though they
have had the judgments of God upon them in this world, they will not
escape the righteous judgment of God hereafter; things are not over with
them, there is still a reckoning to be made, an account to pass with
them; their full punishment is not yet executed, even though they have
been suffering the vengeance of eternal fire; their bodies must be
raised, and they must receive for the things which they have done in
them, and which they have so dreadfully and unnaturally abused; and yet,
as vile sinners as they have been, and as sore a punishment as they are
worthy of, their punishment will be milder and more tolerable, than that
of the inhabitants of such places, where the Gospel has been preached,
and they have despised and rejected it. May the inhabitants of our land,
especially of some parts of it, as of London, and others, consider this!

[Mark 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 6:12</span></span>

And they went out,.... From that part of the country where they then
were, some one way, and some another, two by two, with these
instructions, and according to these directions; in order to preach the
word, and work miracles, in the several parts where they were sent:

and preached that men should repent; both of the evil practices which
they were guilty of, and of the bad principles they had imbibed, and
change both their sentiments and their conduct: this, they exhorted them
to, as John the Baptist, and Christ, had done before, who set out in
their ministry the same way; and these, as they did also, preached the
Gospel, and the things appertaining to the kingdom of God, and Gospel
dispensation, and called upon men to believe them. For faith and
repentance went together in Christ's ministry, [Mar
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#015), and so they did in the ministry
of John, the Baptist, [Act 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004), and
in the ministry of the apostles, [Act
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#021). When they preached that men
should repent, it does not from hence follow, that they have a power to
repent of themselves: for such is the condition of men by nature, that
they neither see their need of repentance, and their hearts are so hard
and obdurate, that they cannot work themselves up to it, or work it in
them, and exercise it; this requires the powerful and efficacious grace
of God to produce it, and it is a gift of his grace; and if he gives the
means, and not the grace of repentance itself, it will never appear: but
the apostles preaching that men should repent, shows that they were in
such a state as to need it; and how necessary it was for them to have
it, seeing without it they must all perish: and such a ministration is
proper, to awaken the minds of men to a sense of the need of it, and to
direct them to Christ the Saviour, who is exalted to give it, as well as
the remission of sins.

[Mark 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 6:13</span></span>

And they cast out many devils,.... Which they had power given them to
do; and this they did, in confirmation of their mission and doctrine,
and for the benefit of miserable creatures, who were possessed by them;
and to show their power over the devils, and as a prelude of what they
were to be the instruments of, in casting Satan out of the souls of men,
both Jews and Gentiles; and especially, in the ejection of him out of
the Gentile world:

and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them. This they
were doubtless directed to by Christ, as an outward sign of healing; but
not as a medicine; otherwise there would have been no miracle in the
cure: though it is certain, the Jews used anointing with oil medicinally
in many cases, as the means of healing; but they did not always succeed,
as the apostles did: on the day of atonement (w),

"it was not lawful to "anoint" part of the body, as the whole body; but
if a man was sick, or had ulcers on his head, he might anoint according
to his usual way, and no notice was taken of it.''

Again (x),

"a man may not anoint with wine, or vinegar, but he may anoint with oil:
he that has a pain in his head, or has ulcers upon him, , "he may anoint
with oil", but he may not anoint with wine and vinegar: wine of the
second tithe, which they mix, is forbidden to anoint with; oil of the
second tithe, which they mix, is lawful to anoint with.''

And it is elsewhere said (y), that

"R. Meir allowed of the mixing of oil and wine, , "to anoint the sick"
on a sabbath; but when he was sick, and we sought to do so to him, he
would not suffer us.''

But that oil was used by the apostles as a medicine for the healing of
diseases, cannot well be thought; since oil, though it may be useful in
some cases, it is not an universal medicine, which is proper to all; nor
were the apostles instructed by Christ in the art of physic, but were
possessed by him with extraordinary gifts, to cure the disorders of the
body, for the confirmation of the Gospel, which they preached; and it is
easy to observe, that healing the sick by anointing with oil, is joined
with the extraordinary power of casting out devils; and it was the same
power by which they performed the one, as the other; see [Luk
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001). Hence it appears, that this
passage gives no countenance to the use of such a practice in our days;
since these were apostles only, who used it, who were extraordinary
persons, and whose office in the church was an extraordinary one, and is
now ceased; and healing in this way, was by an extraordinary power
bestowed upon them, which has ceased; and therefore the rite, or
ceremony of anointing with oil, for such a purpose, should be of course
discontinued; however, it cannot be supported by this instance, whatever
countenance it may seem to have from [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014), for it must be owned, there is
some difference in the passages: the persons that anointed here were
apostles, there the elders of the church; the persons anointed there,
were good people, the members of the church, but here any sort of
persons, and chiefly, if not altogether unbelievers; the healing of them
is ascribed to the prayer of faith in James, but here to the
extraordinary power of the apostles, by anointing with oil; though it
may be, the healing was equally miraculous in the one, as the other: but
be this as it will, nothing can be concluded from hence, in favour of
the sacrament of extreme unction, used by the Papists; who administer
that to persons, just at the point of death, and that for the remission
of their sins, and the saving of their souls; whereas oil was used by
the apostles to sick persons, and for the recovery of their bodily
health. But since these were extraordinary cures which they performed
this way, why did they make use of oil at all, seeing the virtue of
healing did not come from that, and they could as well have healed
sicknesses without it, as with it? To which it may be replied, that they
did not always make use of it; sometimes only words were expressed,
sometimes only hands were laid on the sick, and sometimes the sick
persons were healed by handkerchiefs and aprons taken from them; which
show, that the "healing" virtue was not in the means, nor was it tied to
any: moreover, this was only used as an outward sign of healing, and
might have some spiritual significancy in it; it might show, that they
were sent forth by Christ the anointed one, who is anointed with the oil
of gladness above his fellows; it might be symbolical of the grace of
the Spirit, which is often compared to oil, which they themselves were
possessed of in a large measure, and which is communicated through the
ministration of the Gospel; and it might be significative of the Gospel
itself, which brings light and joy, health and comfort along with it, to
the souls of men, which they were the happy messengers of.

\(w\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 77. 2. Maimon. Hikh. Shebitat Ashur, c. 3.
sect. 9. (x) T. Hieros. Maaser Sheni, fol. 53. 2. (y) Ib. Betacot, fol.
3. 1. & Sabbat, fol. 14. 3.

[Mark 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 6:14</span></span>

And king Herod heard of him,.... "Of Jesus", as the Syriac version
supplies it; or "the miracles of Jesus", as the Persic version. This
Herod here called a king, as he might be by his courtiers, and the
common people, is the same with the Tetrarch in [Mat
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001), for he was only Tetrarch of
Galilee. This was Herod Antipater, the son of Herod the Great; the fame
of Jesus reached his ears, he being governor of those parts, which were
mostly visited by Christ:

for his name was spread abroad; by means of his ministry and miracles,
and through those of his disciples, whom he had sent two by two into all
parts of the country:

and he said that John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore
mighty works do show forth themselves in him; for Herod had some time
before put John to death; and hearing of these wonderful things that
were done by Christ, his conscience smote him for the murder of John;
and such a thought struck into his mind, that he was risen from the
dead, and did these miracles: and the more he thought of it, the more
strongly he was persuaded of it; and told it to his courtiers with a
great deal of assurance, that it was certainly he; See Gill on [Mat
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002).

[Mark 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 6:15</span></span>

Others said that it is Elias,.... This was the opinion, either of many
of the Jews, who expected that Elias the Tishbite would come in person,
before the coming of the Messiah; and thought by the appearance and
wonderful works of Jesus, that he was now come: or of Herod's courtiers,
who said this to divert him from his notion of John the Baptist, which
they might perceive was very distressing to him; though the former seems
rather to be the sense:

others said, that it is a prophet: or "the prophet", that was to come,
whom Moses had spoken of, and the Jews expected; this was the opinion of
others of them: or

as one of the prophets. The word "or", is left out in some copies; and
so it is in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic
versions; and then the sense is, this new prophet lately raised up, is
as one of the old prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others; or one of them
had risen up.

[Mark 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 6:16</span></span>

But when Herod heard thereof,.... Either of Christ, or rather of the
different opinions about him,

he said, it is John, whom I have beheaded: the thought stuck close to
him, and continued with him; he could not get rid of it, nor persuade
himself to the contrary; nor could any of his servants get him off of
it, but he affirmed it with the greatest assurance imaginable. These
different sentiments of the people concerning Jesus, greatly perplexed
the mind of Herod, as appears from [Luk
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#007), for it was first given out by
others, and not by Herod, that John the Baptist was

risen from the dead; which he hearing of, gave him great uneasiness: he
thoroughly considered the matter; he called to mind how he had used him,
imprisoned him, and put him to death. At first he could not receive it,
that since he was beheaded by him, he should be restored to life; but
hearing of the miracles that were done by him, his conscience accused
him, his fancy worked, and at length he firmly believed it, that he must
be risen: and this sentiment, which he himself gave into at last,
distressed him above all the rest, because of his concern in his death,
fearing he was come to life to take vengeance on him: it might not sit
very easy upon his mind, to bear that Elias had appeared the forerunner
of the Messiah, the king of the Jews; who himself might be quickly
expected, and who, he might fear, would seize upon, and take away that
part of the kingdom which he was possessed of: and even to be told, that
one of the prophets was risen from the dead, might be shocking to him;
imagining that something of considerable moment was to be done, some
revolution to be made; that the people would be stirred up by him, to
attempt a change of government: but the first of these made the greatest
impression on him, and what he could not get off, but fully gave into,
as a thing unquestionable. He owns he beheaded John; he was conscious to
himself of the sin, and confesses it; he does not lay it to the charge
of Herodias and her daughter, though they requested it; the guilt of it
lay upon his conscience, and he dreaded this appearance of John, as he
fancied. And if he was a Sadducee before, as he has been thought to be,
he now changed his mind, and believed a resurrection from the dead. So
men may be convinced of sin, and entertain other and better notions of
religion, and yet not be converted persons.

[Mark 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 6:17</span></span>

For Herod himself had sent forth,.... Some of his guard, a detachment of
soldiers,

and laid hold upon John; who seized upon him, and took him up:

and bound him in prison; in the castle of Machaerus:

for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife, for he had married her;
whilst his brother was living, and who had had children by her; See Gill
on [Mat 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003).

[Mark 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 6:18</span></span>

For John had said unto Herod,.... He had been personally with him, and
had plainly and freely told him of his sin, and faithfully reproved him
for it; alleging what he had done was contrary to the law of God:

it is not lawful, for thee to have thy brother's wife: See Gill on [Mat
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#004).

[Mark 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 6:19</span></span>

Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him,.... Was angry with him,
conceived wrath, and laid up hatred against him, and was an adversary to
him; which is the sense of the Oriental versions. She bore him an inward
grudge, and lay in wait to take the first opportunity of dispatching
him:

and would have killed him, but she could not; being hindered by Herod,
who as yet would not suffer it; partly through fear of the people, and
partly through the respect he had for John.

[Mark 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mar 6:20</span></span>

For Herod feared John,.... Had him in great respect; he had a great
veneration for him; which was the reason that Herodias could not as yet
accomplish her design against him, and vent her rage upon him. Though
some understand this not of his reverence, but of his dread of him: he
knew as follows, that he was a man exemplary for justice and holiness,
which gained him great esteem among the people; wherefore, though Herod,
as well as Herodias, could very willingly have put him to death, yet, as
Matthew says, "he feared the multitude", [Mat
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#005), who, in general, had an high
opinion of John as a prophet, and a holy good man: he feared therefore
to take away his life, lest they should rise and rebel against him; nor
would he suffer Herodias to do it, for the same reason.

Knowing that he was a just man, and an holy; by what he had heard of
him, by his own conversation with him, and the observation he had made
upon his tenets and conduct. He was a "just", or "righteous" man, in a
civil, legal, and evangelical sense: he did that which was just, between
man and man; he did to others, as he would be done by himself; he was
outwardly righteous before men, he lived soberly and righteously; nor
was he chargeable with any notorious breach of the law; his conversation
was strictly moral: and he was just or righteous before God, through the
righteousness of Christ imputed to him; in whom he believed, and to whom
he looked as the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin of the world: but
it was in the former sense, that he was known by Herod to be a just man;
who only could pass such a judgment upon him, by his outward conduct and
manner of life: and so as he had true principles of internal holiness
wrought in him by the Spirit of God, with which he was filled from his
mother's womb; he was externally holy in his walk and conversation,
which was visible to others, and was taken notice of by this wicked
prince: the former of these characters may regard his justice,
uprightness, and integrity among men; the latter, his piety and devotion
unto God: and the whole agrees with the account the Jewish historian (z)
gives of him, that he was

"an excellent good man, who stirred up the Jews to the study of virtue,
and especially piety and justice.''

These were epithets, which used to be given to men, famous for religion
and piety; so we read of Simeon, "the just" (a), and of R. Simeon, "the
Holy One" (b):

and observed him: or "kept him" in custody, in prison, as the Vulgate
Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic render it; and did not put him to death, but
preserved him from the designs of Herodias against him. Or he observed
and took notice of what he had heard him say in his ministry; he laid it
up, and kept it in his mind, and memory; the remembrance of which kept
him in awe, and he durst not, and could not for the present, give heed
to the solicitations of Herodias, or suffer her to take away his life:
and he also observed his exemplary life and conversation, which was so
just and upright, that his conscience would not admit him to give him up
to her will and pleasure.

And when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly: when he
heard John explain the law and the prophets, open the writings of the
Old Testament, preach the doctrine of repentance towards God, and faith
in the Messiah to come; set forth the evil, danger, and punishment of
sin, and exhorted to a holy life and conversation; taught the doctrine
of baptism for the remission of sin by Christ, and spoke of the glories
and happiness of a future state, and of the nature of the Gospel
dispensation, just now ushering in; Herod, like one of the stony ground
hearers, received the word with joy, was pleased with it, and in some
things outwardly reformed: but the word did not take root in his heart,
and therefore what external effects it produced, came to nothing; nor
was he able to withstand the lusts and corruptions of his heart. The
sense seems to be, that while he was hearing John, his natural
affections were moved, and he had a kind of pleasure in the things he
delivered; just as the Jews for a season rejoiced in his light, [Joh
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035), his natural conscience dictating
to him, that the things which were spoken, were right, and just, and
good; and they were delivered in such a solemn and striking manner, as
commanded attention and awe; and were things of such a nature and
importance, that from a principle of self-love, he could not but wish
himself an interest in: and so far they had such an influence upon him,
as to engage him to do many things in an external way, which had the
appearance of good, at least of moral good: so that it is manifest from
hence, that persons may have a natural affection for the ministry of the
word, and seem delighted with it for a while; yea, may do a great many
good actions, which seem to be such; and yet the word come in word only,
and not in power: there may be all this, and yet true grace may not be
wrought, and the word not be the engrafted word, which is able to save.
In one of Beza's copies, and so in one of Stephens's, and in the Coptic
version, instead of "he did many things", it is read, "he hesitated
much": he was perplexed and distressed, he did not know what to do with
himself; his conscience was uneasy, some things were pleasing to him,
and others greatly afflicted him; his mind was distracted, he could not
tell what to think, say, or do: however, it had such an effect upon him,
that he had some respect for John; a veneration of him; at least, some
fear and dread of him, which kept him from taking away his life, or
suffering any others to do it.

\(z\) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 18. c. 7. (a) Pirke Abot, c. 1. sect. 9. (b) T.
Bab. Succah, fol. 52. 2.

[Mark 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 6:21</span></span>

And when a convenient day was come,.... For Herodias; who had long
sought and watched for an opportunity of avenging herself on John, and
such a time Herod's birthday proved; though some think, that this phrase
is the same with , "a good day"; often used by the Jews for a festival,
any one of their feast days; there is a tract in their Misna which bears
this name; and that such a day was this. But not one of the festivals of
the Jews was this, as either their passover, or pentecost, or feast of
tabernacles, which Herod had no regard to; but his own birthday, which
he kept as a festival, in eating, and drinking, and dancing; and so was
a very opportune and seasonable time for Herodias to take the advantage
of Herod when in a good humour, amidst his company, and in his cups, to
solicit that, which she had often done without success: and so it was
now,

that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, high captains,
and chief estates of Galilee: this birthday, was either the day of his
natural, or civil birth; the day when he was born into the world, or of
his accession to the throne; See Gill on [Mat
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006), when he made a grand
entertainment in the evening for his nobles, and the officers of the
army, the captains of thousands, and the principal men, those of the
first rank and quality in Galilee, of which he was Tetrarch.

[Mark 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 6:22</span></span>

And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in,.... To the hall,
where Herod and his guests were, after supper was over; or rather,
whilst at it: she is called the daughter of Herodias, and not of Herod;
she having had her not by him, but by his brother Philip: her name is
thought to be Salome; See Gill on [Mat
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006),

and danced and pleased Herod, and them that were with him; at supper,
his lords, captains, and principal men in his dominions; See Gill on
[Mat 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006).

The king said unto the damsel, ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I
will give it thee; which shows how exceedingly pleased he was; and the
more, in that she gave such general pleasure to his whole company.

[Mark 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 6:23</span></span>

And he sware unto her,.... He added an oath to what he had before said,
the more to confirm it, and to encourage her in her request, and which
he repeated in stronger language:

whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of
my kingdom; See Gill on [Mat 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#007).

[Mark 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 6:24</span></span>

And she went forth and said unto her mother,.... The king having made
such a promise to her, and annexed his oath to it, she thought proper
before she asked any thing of him, to withdraw from the hall and
company, and consider with herself, and consult with her mother, who was
not at the entertainment; it being not usual in those eastern countries,
for women to sit at table, at any grand festival: to whom she reported
the offer the king had made, and desired she would be pleased to direct
her, what request to make saying,

what shall I ask? To which her mother made answer, without taking any
further time to think of it, being prepared for it, and determined in
her mind, whenever she had an opportunity of asking a favour of the
king, what it should be:

and she said, the head of John the Baptist. So sweet is revenge, that to
have her will on that great and good man, was more to her, than to have
half the king's dominions.

[Mark 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 6:25</span></span>

And she came in straightway with haste unto the, king,.... Having had
her mother's advice, and being hastened by her, she immediately returned
to the hall, where the king and his guests were, with much Concern,
eagerness, and diligence:

and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger, the
head of John the Baptist: her petition proceeding upon a promise with an
oath, is presented by way of demand; insisting upon it, that in a very
little time, "this hour", as the Syriac version renders it, within an
hour's time, or less; and "here", as Matthew has it, [Mat
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#008), in that very place, and whilst
the company was there; that orders should be given to cut off the head
of John the Baptist, and that that should be brought, in a large dish,
unto her; and this was what she had to ask, and insisted upon the
immediate and punctual performance of it; See Gill on [Mat
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#008).

[Mark 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 6:26</span></span>

And the king was exceeding sorry,.... See Gill on [Mat
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009).

yet for his oath's sake, and for their sakes which sat with him; as
Matthew adds, "at meat", [Mat 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009);
for it seems as if supper was not over, when all this was transacting.

He would not reject her; deny her her request, or send her away without
granting it which could not be without grieving her, and treating her
with contempt, and defrauding her of the promise; all which ideas are
expressed by some versions.

[Mark 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 6:27</span></span>

And immediately the king sent an executioner,.... See Gill on [Mat
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#010).

and commanded his head to be brought; ordered him to cut off his head in
prison, and bring it away forthwith in a charger to him:

and he went and beheaded him in the prison; according to his orders.

[Mark 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 6:28</span></span>

And brought his head in a charger,.... In a large dish, to Herod, who

gave it to the damsel; the daughter of Herodias, as she had requested:

and the damsel gave it to her mother; who had instigated her to it; See
Gill on [Mat 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#011).

[Mark 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 6:29</span></span>

And when his disciples heard of it,.... That is, when the disciples of
John heard of this barbarous execution of their master,

they came; to the prison in the castle of Machaerus,

and took up his corpse; the trunk of his body; for his head was carried
away, to glut the revenge of Herodias;

and laid it in a tomb; See Gill on [Mat
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#012).

[Mark 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 6:30</span></span>

And the apostles gathered themselves together,.... The twelve apostles
of Christ, whom he had sent out, two by two, into different parts,
having gone through them, and finished the embassy, they were sent
about, met together in one place, and came in a body together,

unto Jesus; their Lord and master, who had sent them, and to whom they
were accountable, as all the ministers of the Gospel are:

and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had
taught; they gave him an exact and full account of what miracles were
wrought by them, what diseases they had cured, and what a number of
devils they had cast out; and also what doctrines they had preached, and
what success in all they had had: so every Gospel minister must give an
account of his ministrations to Christ.

[Mark 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 6:31</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... After he had heard their account, was
satisfied with it, and approved of what they had said and done:

come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: where
they might be free from noise and hurry, and take some rest and
refreshment, after their wearisome journey, hard labours, and great
fatigue in preaching and working miracles; which shows the great
compassion, tenderness, and care of Christ, for his disciples:

for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as
to eat; the people were continually going to and fro; as soon as one
company was gone, who came with their sick and diseased to be healed, or
upon one account or another, another came: so that there was no
opportunity of private meditation and prayer, nor of spiritual converse
together: nor even so much as to eat a meal's meat for the refreshment
of nature.

[Mark 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 6:32</span></span>

And they departed into a desert place,.... Which belonged to the city of
Bethsaida, [Luk 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010),

by ship, privately; over some part of the sea of Tiberias, this place
lying on a more remote side of it.

[Mark 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 6:33</span></span>

And the people saw them departing,.... The multitude that came to and
fro, saw Christ and his disciples taking ship, and launching off; for
though they were as private as could be, and intended to have gone in a
very private manner, yet the people observed them:

and many knew him: Jesus; some copies read, "them"; and so do the Syriac
and Ethiopic versions; they knew both Christ and his disciples, though
they were in the ship, and at some distance:

and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and out went them, and came
together unto him; they went on foot, as they might from Capernaum,
Nazareth, and the parts adjacent, over the bridge at Chammath of Gadara,
to this place, that belonged to Bethsaida; whither they perceived they
steered, and made such haste, that they got thither before them; and the
people that flocked from several cities met together, and came to Jesus,
to hear his doctrine, and see his miracles,

[Mark 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 6:34</span></span>

And Jesus, when he came out,.... Of the ship, and was got ashore,

saw much people; who came partly from the places where he came from, and
partly from the cities and towns adjacent:

and was moved with compassion towards them; See Gill on [Mat
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#014), the reason follows,

because they were as sheep, not having a shepherd. Christ observed, that
they were hungering and thirsting after the word of righteousness, and
had no faithful, spiritual pastors to feed them with knowledge and
understanding; for the Scribes and Pharisees were blind guides, and
shepherds that could not understand; so that the people were ready to
perish for lack of knowledge, not having any spiritual comfort and
refreshment under their ministry: hence they followed Christ, wherever
he went, with great zeal and fervency, earnestly desiring the bread of
life: this moved his compassion, so that though his view in coming to
this place was retirement, and that his disciples might have some rest
and refreshment, and might solace themselves in private conversation
with him, and each other; yet postponing private advantage to public
good, instead of reproving them for giving him this fresh trouble,
kindly and tenderly received them:

and he began to teach them many things; relating to the kingdom of God,
the Gospel dispensation, the doctrines and ordinances of it; things
relating to their spiritual and eternal welfare, the comfort, and
salvation of their immortal souls: and he dwelt long upon these
subjects, because he found they were very ignorant, and needed
instruction, and were very desirous of it; as well as healed all such of
bodily diseases that stood in need thereof; of which Matthew only takes
notice, [Mat 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#014); as Mark only of
doctrine; but Luke mentions both doctrine and miracles of healing, [Luk
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#011).

[Mark 6:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 6:35</span></span>

And when the day was now far spent,.... Or "much time was gone", in
teaching the people, and healing the sick:

his disciples came unto him; nearer to him, as he was preaching, or
healing the sick;

and said, this is a desert place, and now the time is far passed; See
Gill on [Mat 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015).

[Mark 6:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mar 6:36</span></span>

Send them away,.... Leave off preaching, dismiss the assembly; see [Mat
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015);

that they may go into the country round about; or "into the fields";
that is, to the odd houses; which were here and there in the fields; See
Gill on [Mar 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#014);

and into the villages; the little country towns that were near at hand:

and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat; they brought no
provisions with them, and there were none to be had in that desert
place; and it was high time they had some refreshment; for the usual
time of dining was past, the first evening was come, the day was on the
decline, and was far spent.

[Mark 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 6:37</span></span>

He answered and said unto them, give ye them to eat,.... This he said to
try their faith, and make way for the following miracle:

and they say unto him, shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of
bread, and give them to eat? This might be just the sum of money they
now had in the bag, as Grotius, and others conjecture; and the sense be,
shall we lay out the two hundred pence, which is all we have in hand, to
buy bread for this multitude? is it proper we should? is it thy will
that so it should be? and if we should do so, as Philip suggests, [Joh
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#007), it would not be enough to give
every one a little: wherefore they say this, as amazed that he should
propose such a thing unto them: or the reason of mentioning such a sum,
as Dr. Lightfoot observes, might be, because that this was a noted and
celebrated sum among the Jews, and frequently mentioned by them. A
virgin's dowry, upon marriage, was "two hundred pence" (c); and so was a
widow's; and one that was divorced (d), if she insisted on it, and could
make good her claim: this was the fine of an adult man, that lay with
one under age; and of a male under age, that lay with a female adult
(e); and of one man that gave another a slap of the face (f). This sum
answered to six pounds and five shillings of our money.

\(c\) Misn. Cetubot, c. 1. sect. 2. & 4. 7. & 5. 1. (d) Ib. c. 2. sect.
1. & 11. 4. (e) Ib. c. 1. sect. 3. (f) Misn. Bava Kama, c. 6. sect. 8.

[Mark 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 6:38</span></span>

And he saith unto them, how many loaves have ye?.... This he said, not
as ignorant, but as willing to try their faith yet more, and that the
after miracle might be more manifest and illustrious:

go and see; meaning, either that they should examine their own store, if
they had any; or rather go and see what was to be had upon the spot,
among the company, for money;

and when they knew, they say five loaves and two fishes: when they had
made inquiry what provisions there were, and the most that could be got
at any rate, they tell him, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, particularly,
that there was a boy among the multitude that had five barley loaves,
and two small fishes; and, at the same time, suggests, that they were
nothing for so great a company.

[Mark 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mar 6:39</span></span>

And he commanded them to make all sit down,.... Christ ordered his
disciples, without any more ado, to cause the whole multitude, men,
women, and children, to sit, or lie down, as they used to do at table
when about to take a meal: and as they had no table before them, nor
beds, or couches to sit, or lie down upon, he directed them to place
them

by companies upon the green grass; that there might be some order among
them, as at a meal; and that their number might be the more easily
known; and that all of them might more plainly see the miracle that was
to be wrought: and the provision be more orderly distributed to them.

[Mark 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 6:40</span></span>

And they sat down in ranks,.... Or "beds": in such form as little beds
are placed in a garden, or as rows of vines in a vineyard, in which form
the scholars of the wise men sat in their schools: it is said (g),

"R. Eliezer ben Azariah expounded before the wise men in the vineyard
(i.e. the university) of Jabneh: though was there a vineyard there? but
these are the disciples of the wise men, who are made, or placed, ,
"rows, rows", or "in ranks", as a vineyard.''

By hundreds, and by fifties; that is, an hundred in "each" bed, or row,
and fifty in "each" bed, or row, as the word signifies: each distinct
bed, or row, had either a hundred, or fifty in it.

\(g\) T. Hieros. Beraeot, fol. 7. 4. Vid. Gloss. in T. Bab. Yebamot,
fol. 42. 2.

[Mark 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 6:41</span></span>

And when he had taken the five loaves and two fishes,.... Out of the
hands of those that brought them into his own:

he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves: See Gill on
[Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019),

and gave them to his disciples to set before them; the multitude, in
order to eat of them:

and the two fishes divided he among them all; that every one might have
a part. The Syriac and Persic versions read, they divided; that is, the
apostles.

[Mark 6:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 6:42</span></span>

And they did all eat, and were filled. See Gill on [Mat
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#020).

[Mark 6:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 6:43</span></span>

And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments,.... Of the broken
pieces of bread, after all had eaten, and were satisfied:

and of the fishes; what remained of them:, for though there was but one
loaf for a thousand persons and more, and two small fishes to be divided
among five thousand and more: yet, through the wonderful power of Christ
increasing both, as they were distributing and eating, there was enough
of both for them all, and such a quantity of each left as filled twelve
baskets.

[Mark 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mar 6:44</span></span>

And they that did eat of the loaves,.... And also of the fishes; for
they all ate of both;

were about five thousand men; the word "about", is omitted in the
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, Persic and Ethiopic versions, reading
five thousand men certain. The Evangelist Matthew adds, "beside children
and women", [Mat 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#021).

[Mark 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mar 6:45</span></span>

And straightway he constrained his disciples,.... The reasons of this is
See Gill on [Mat 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022),

to get into the ship; in which they came to this place, and which was
waiting for them:

and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida; or rather "to go to
the other side over against Bethsaida"; for they were now in a desert
belonging to that city, wherefore they were ordered to go, and did go to
the other side of the sea of Tiberias, or Galilee, even to Capernaum, as
appears from [Joh 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#017);

while he sent away the people; See Gill on [Mat
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022).

[Mark 6:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mar 6:46</span></span>

And when he had sent them away,.... Either his disciples, or rather the
multitude:

he departed into a mountain to pray: after his disciples were gone, and
he had dismissed the people, he went from the desert where he had been,
up into a mountain; being a retired place, to spend some time in private
prayer to God; See Gill on [Mat 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023).

[Mark 6:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mar 6:47</span></span>

And when even was come,.... The second evening, and it was properly
night:

the ship was in the midst of the sea; of Galilee, about twenty five or
thirty furlongs from the shore; see [Joh
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#019);

and he alone on the land; upon the mountain. This is observed, partly to
show what distress the disciples were in, in the midst of the sea,
having a hard gale of wind, and their master not with them; and partly
to show that there was no way, humanly speaking, of Christ's getting to
the ship, in order to go over; and is an illustration of the following
miracle, of walking so many furlongs, as he must, upon the water, in a
stormy, blustering night, to get to it.

[Mark 6:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mar 6:48</span></span>

And he saw them toiling in rowing,.... He saw them either with his
bodily eyes from the mountain on which he was; or he perceived in his
Spirit, he knew, by virtue of his omniscience as God, what distress his
disciples were in; being tossed about with the waves of the sea, and
were labouring with all their might and main against the wind: and were
vexed and tortured, as the word signifies; they were in the utmost pain
and uneasiness of mind, as well as fatigue of body, assisting the men in
rowing; for the ship they were in was no other than a vessel managed by
oars; and hard work it was to keep it from being overset:

for the wind was contrary unto them; it blew from the other side they
were making to, full in their face, hard against them; so that it was
with great toil and difficulty, that they got any thing forward:

and about the fourth watch of the night; or three o'clock in the
morning: so that it is very likely, that as the evening when they took
to the vessel was sun setting, or about six o'clock, they had been nine
hours at sea, and had got but twenty five or thirty furlongs from shore;
See Gill on [Mat 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025);

he cometh unto them walking upon the sea: being in this distress, Christ
came down from the mountain to the sea side; and then, by his divine
power, as the mighty God, that treadeth on the waves of the sea, he
walked upon the surface of the waters of it; "as on dry land", as the
Persic version adds:

and would have passed by them; that is, he made as though he would; see
[Luk 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#028). By the course he steered,
by the swiftness of his motion, and his seeming negligence of them, it
looked as though he intended to have gone by them, and said nothing to
them, though this was far from his real design.

[Mark 6:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mar 6:49</span></span>

But when they saw him walking on the sea,.... See Gill on [Mat
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026);

they supposed it had been a spirit; a phantom, a spectre, an apparition,
a nocturnal demon:

and cried out; as men affrighted at the sight, and fearing they should
be hurt by it, or that it portended some evil to them; See Gill on [Mat
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026).

[Mark 6:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mar 6:50</span></span>

For they all saw him, and were troubled,.... Had it been only seen by
one, it might have been thought a fancy, and the effect of mere
imagination; but as every one saw it, it was out of all doubt that so it
was, and which gave them the greater concern:

and immediately he talked with them; as soon as they saw him, "that very
moment", as the Syriac renders it; that so by hearing his voice their
fears might be allayed:

and saith unto them, be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid; See Gill
on [Mat 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#027).

[Mark 6:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mar 6:51</span></span>

And he went up unto them in the ship,.... That is, after Peter had
desired he might be bid to come to him upon the water, and having got
leave, made an essay; but the wind being boisterous, and beginning to
sink, he cried out for help; when Christ stretched out his hand, and
saved him; and then he, together with Peter, went up into the ship to
the rest of the disciples, as is related by Matthew, [Mat
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028), though omitted by this
evangelist:

and the wind ceased; from blowing; it was laid at once, as soon as ever
Christ entered the ship:

and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered.
The Ethiopic version adds, "at him"; they were astonished, when they
found it was Christ, and not a spirit; and they were more amazed at his
walking upon the sea; and they marvelled still more abundantly, when
they observed that the wind ceased upon his coming into the ship; their
amazement was beyond expression, and therefore many words are made use
of to signify it by.

[Mark 6:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mar 6:52</span></span>

For they considered not the miracle of the loaves,.... Which they had
seen but the day before; they did not attend to it, nor learn from it,
as they might, the wonderful glory of Christ, and the greatness of his
power; which was as much an act of omnipotence, as either his walking
upon the water, or causing the wind to cease, or more so.

For their heart was hardened; or "blinded"; not by sin, or against
Christ, much less in a judicial way: but there was a great deal of
dulness and stupidity, and want of attention in them. The glory of
Christ, which he manifested, and showed forth in his miracles, was not
so clearly and fully discerned, attended to, and acknowledged by them,
at it might reasonably be thought it would; for notwithstanding these
miracles, which they daily saw, they stood in need of divine
illuminations, that the darkness of their minds being removed, they
might behold the glory of Christ, as the glory of the only begotten of
the Father.

[Mark 6:53](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mar 6:53</span></span>

And when they had passed over,.... The lake of Gennesaret, or sea of
"Galilee",

they came into the land of Gennesaret; See Gill on [Mat
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034); to Capernaum, as appears from
[Joh 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#017) for Capernaum was in the
land of Gennesaret; to which agrees what Josephus says, that the land of
Gennesaret was watered with a very excellent spring, which the
inhabitants of that place called Capernaum (h):

and drew to the shore: this is omitted in the Syriac and Persic
versions: and the Arabic reads, "and they cast anchors".

\(h\) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 35.

[Mark 6:54](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mar 6:54</span></span>

And when they were come out of the ship,.... Christ and his disciples,
and were ashore,

straightway they knew him; that is, the men of that place, as in Mat\_.
14:35; see Gill on [Mat 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#035); and so
the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic versions read here, "the inhabitants of
that country", the country of Gennesaret; they knew him, having seen and
heard him before.

[Mark 6:55](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mar 6:55</span></span>

And ran through that whole region round about,.... That is, the
inhabitants of that part of the country where Christ landed, ran many of
them themselves, and others sent messengers into all parts of it, on
every side:

and began to carry about in beds those that were sick; or lame, or so
disordered that they could not walk, or bear any other way of being
carried: these they brought to him,

where they heard he was: in whatsoever part of the country they could
learn he was in; for he went about from place to place doing good.

[Mark 6:56](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">mar 6:56</span></span>

And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country,....
Whether in smaller towns, or larger cities, or the fields, where were
houses, here and there one:

they laid the sick in the streets; or "markets", in any public places:

and besought him that they but might touch the border of his garment; if
they might not be admitted to touch his person, or he did not choose to
lay his hands on them:

and as many as touched him; or "it", the border of his garment, as they
desired:

were made whole; of whatsoever sickness, or disease, they were afflicted
with; See Gill on [Mat 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#036).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 7](mar007)

</div>
