<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat011)  [Next](mat013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001)

[Matthew 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 12:1</span></span>

At that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn,.... That
is, the corn fields, as the other evangelists express it. It being on a
sabbath day, it is very probable, that Christ and his disciples were
going to some public place of worship, the way to which lay through some
fields of corn, which were now ripe: for Luke says, it was on the
"second sabbath after the first", or rather "the first sabbath after the
second"; that is, the first sabbath after the second day of the
passover, when the sheaf of the first fruit was offered, and harvest was
begun.

And his disciples were an hungered; it being in the morning before they
had broke their fast; and this circumstance is mentioned to show the
reason of the following action, and to excuse it: at which the Pharisees
were so much offended, and of which they accused them, as having done
what was very criminal:

and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat; Luke adds, "rubbing
them in their hands"; and so here in the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic
versions, it is rendered, "they began to rub": as they passed along,
they plucked off the ears of corn, either barley or wheat, and rubbed
them in their hands, to get the grain clear of the husk, or beard, and
eat them; contenting themselves with such mean and unprepared food, when
the Jews on that day fed on the best of dainties (e).

\(e\) Vid. Maimon. Hilch. Sabbat, c. 30. sect. 7, 8, 9, 10.

[Matthew 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 12:2</span></span>

But when the Pharisees saw it,.... Who went along with him, or followed
him, being employed to make observation on his words and actions,

they said unto him; Luke says, "unto them", the disciples: it seems,
they took notice of this action both to Christ and his disciples, and
first spoke of it to the one, and then to the other, or to both
together:

behold thy disciples do that which it is not lawful to do upon the
sabbath day! they mention it with astonishment, and indignation. What
they refer to, is not their walking on the sabbath day: this they might
do, according to their canons, provided they did not exceed two thousand
cubits, which were a sabbath day's journey (f) nor was it their passing
through the corn fields; though, according to them (g),

"it was not lawful for a man to visit his gardens, "or his fields", on
the sabbath day, to see what they want, or how the fruits grow; for such
walking is to do his own pleasure.''

But this they knew was not the case of Christ, and his disciples, who
were not proprietors of these fields: nor was it merely their plucking
the ears of corn, and rubbing and eating them, which were not their own,
but another man's; for this, according to the law, in [Deu
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#025) was lawful to be done: but what
offended the Pharisees was, that it was done on a sabbath day, it being,
as they interpret it, a servile work, and all one as reaping; though, in
the law just mentioned, it is manifestly distinguished from it. Their
rule is (h).

"he that reaps (on the sabbath day) ever so little, is guilty (of
stoning), , and "plucking of ears of corn is a derivative of reaping";''

and is all one as its primitive, and punishable with the same kind of
death, if done presumptuously: so Philo the Jew observes (i), that the
rest of the sabbath not only reached to men, bond and free, and to
beasts, but even to trees, and plants; and that ' , "it was not lawful
to cut a plant, or branch, or so much as a leaf", on a sabbath day: and
it may be what might make this offence of the disciples the more heinous
was, that they plucked these ears, and ate them, and so broke their fast
before morning prayer; for a man might not eat any thing on a sabbath
day until morning prayers were ended in the synagogue, nor indeed on any
other day; for they used not to eat bread till after they had offered
the daily sacrifice, which was about the third hour of the day, or nine
o'clock in the morning; nor did they eat till the fourth hour, or ten
o'clock (k).

\(f\) Ib. c. 27. sect. 1. (g) R. Moses Kotzensis Mitzvot Tora prec. neg.
65. (h) Maimon. Hilch. Sabbat, c. 8. sect. 3. & 7. 1. (i) De Vita Mosis,
1. 2. p. 657. (k) Vid. Targum in Eccl. x. 17. Maimon. Hilch. Tephilla,
c. 6. sect. 4.

[Matthew 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 12:3</span></span>

But he said unto them, have ye not read,.... If they had not read the
Scriptures, they were very unfit persons either to be teachers, or
censurers of others, and must have been very slothful and negligent; and
if they had, they could not but have observed the case of David, which
Christ produces in vindication of his disciples:

what David did when he was an hungred; which was the case of the
disciples, and is therefore mentioned; it being also the circumstance
which could, and did excuse what was done by David and his men: and the
Jews themselves own, that in case of hunger the showbread might be
eaten, by those that were not priests; not only that which was removed
from the table, but that which was upon it; yea, even when there was
none to put in its room (l); and that David was in the utmost distress,
and therefore desired it, and it was granted him on that account. They
represent him as thus saying to the priest (m),

"when he found there was none but showbread, give it me, that we may not
die with hunger; , "for danger of life drives away the sabbath";''

which perfectly agrees with our Lord's argument, and justifies the
apostles conduct: and this was not a single fact of David's, but of
others also;

and they that were with him; for though in [Sa1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001) he is said to be "alone, and no
man with him"; yet this must be understood either comparatively, having
but very few with him, and which were as none, considering his dignity;
or thus, though none came with him to Ahimelech, pretending to the
priest he had a secret affair of the king's to transact; and therefore
had left his servants in a certain place, and desires bread for himself
and them; concerning whom the priest and he discourses, as may be seen
in the place referred to: so that though no man was with him at the
priest's house, yet there were some with him, and who partook with him
in eating of the showbread.

\(l\) R. David Kimchi in 1 Sam. xxi. 5. (m) Laniado Cli Jaker, fol. 227.
2.

[Matthew 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 12:4</span></span>

How he entered into the house of God,.... Not the temple, which was not
then built; but the tabernacle, which was then at Nob, the city of the
priests, and which probably adjoined to Abimelech's house:

and did eat the shewbread; for that this is meant by the hallowed bread,
in [Sa1 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006) is certain; though R.
Joseph Kimchi (n) thinks it was the bread of the thank offering; to
which R. Levi ben Getsom (o) seems to incline: but the general sense of
the Jewish doctors (p) is, that it was the showbread; and which is very
clear from that text, and is rightly affirmed by Christ;

which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with
him, but only for the priests: see [Lev
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005) and so the Jews say that this
bread , "is forbidden to strangers" (q); that is, to any but the
priests, which, after the burning of the frankincense, was divided
equally among them: that course of priests that came into the service
had six cakes, and that which went out six; though the high priest had a
right to half himself, but he did not use to take it, it being judged
not to his honour to do so (r). No hint is here given, nor in the
history, in [Sa1 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001) that it was on
the sabbath day that David came to Ahimelech, and ate the showbread; but
this is observed, and disputed, by the Jewish writers. Some indeed are
in a doubt about it; but others (s) readily give into it, that it was on
the sabbath day, which he chose to flee in, for the greater safety and
preservation of his life: and indeed it seems reasonable it should be on
that day; since on that day only the showbread was removed from the
table, and other loaves put in the room. One of their writers (t) says,

"that showbread was not to be eaten, but on the day, and night of the
sabbath day; and on the going out of the sabbath day; and on the going
out of the sabbath David came there.''

Now our Lord's argument stands thus, that if David, a holy, good man,
and, the men that were with him, who were men of religion and
conscience, when in great distress, through hunger, ate of the
showbread, which was unlawful for any to eat of but priests, the high
priest himself assenting to it; then it could not be criminal in his
disciples, when an hungred, to pluck, rub, and eat a few ears of corn,
which were lawful for any man to eat, even though it was on the sabbath
day: and for the further vindication of them, he adds,

\(n\) Apud R. David Kimchi in 1 Sam. xxi. 6. (o) In ib. (p) T. Bab.
Menachot, fol. 95. 2. R. David Kimchi, Abarbinel & Laniado in 1 Sam.
xxi. 6. (q) Laniado & Abarbinel in ib. (r) Maimon. Hilch. Tamidin, c. 4.
sect. 12. 14. (s) Bemidbar Rabba Parash. 23. fol. 231. 9. Laniado Cli
Jaker, fol. 226. 4. & 227. 2, 3, 4. & Jelammedenu in ib. (t) R. Isaiah
in 1 Sam. xxi. 5.

[Matthew 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 12:5</span></span>

Or have ye not read in the law,.... [Num
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009) by which law the priests were
obliged, every sabbath day, to offer up two lambs for a burnt offering;
to which were annexed many servile works, as killing the sacrifice,
flaying it, cutting it in pieces, and laying it on the altar, cutting of
wood, and putting that in order, and kindling the fire: from all which,
it might be observed,

how that on the sabbath days, the priests in the temple profane the
sabbath, and are blameless. There were many things, which, according to
the Jewish canons, the priests might do on the sabbath day; particularly
they might slay the sacrifice: it was a rule with them, , "that slaying
drives away the sabbath" (u). They might also knead, make, and bake the
showbread on the sabbath day: their general rule was, as R. Akiba says,
that what was possible to be done on the evening of the sabbath, did not
drive away the sabbath; but what was not possible to be done on the
sabbath eve, did drive away the sabbath (w): so they might kill the
passover, sprinkle its blood, wipe its inwards, and burn the fat on the
sabbath day (x), with many other things. What exculpated these men was,
that what they did was done in the temple, and for the service of it,
upon which an emphasis is put; and agrees with their canons, which say,
that there is no prohibition in the sanctuary; , "that which is
forbidden to be done on the sabbath, is lawful to be done in the
sanctuary" (y): and whereas, it might be objected to the disciples of
Christ, that they were not priests; and what they did was not in the
temple, but in the fields; to this it is replied, in the following
words:

\(u\) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 72. 2. (w) Misn. Menachot, c. 11. sect. 3.
(x) Misn. Pesachim, c. 6. sect. 1. Maimon. Pesach. c. 1. sect. 18. (y)
lb. sect. 16. & Hilchot Sabbat, c. 21. sect. 27.

[Matthew 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 12:6</span></span>

But I say unto you,.... Who Christ knew would be ready to object, as
above, and therefore prevents them, by saying,

that in this place is one greater than the temple; meaning himself, who
was the Lord and Proprietor of the temple, and in his human nature the
antitype of it; see [Joh 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019) and was
infinitely more sacred than that. Some copies read "something greater";
referring either to the human nature of Christ, in which the Godhead
dwells bodily, and so infinitely greater than the temple; or to the
health of his disciples, which was in danger, through hunger: or to the
ministry of the apostles, which, by satisfying nature, they were more
capable of performing; either of which was of more moment than the
sacrifices and service of the temple. Christ's argument is, that if the
temple, and the service of it, excused the priests from blame, in doing
things in it on the sabbath day, which otherwise might not be done; then
much more might his presence, who was greater than the temple, excuse
his disciples from blame in this action of rubbing and eating the ears
of corn; which was done to satisfy hunger, and to render them the more
capable of performing their ministerial function; and which was of more
importance than the service of the priests.

[Matthew 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 12:7</span></span>

But if ye had known what this meaneth, The passage of Scripture in [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; of the sense of which, see Gill on
[Mat 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013).

ye would not have condemned the guiltless. Our Lord taxes the Pharisees
both with ignorance of the Scriptures, in which they pretended to be
very knowing, and took upon them to be the interpreters of; and with
inhumanity, for condemning innocent persons, the apostles, for rubbing a
few ears of corn, for the refreshment of nature; which they would never
have done, had they understood the word, and will of God; who prefers
acts of humanity, compassion, and mercy, to the observance of rites and
ceremonies; or had they the common affections of human nature, and those
bowels of compassion which one man ought to show to another.

[Matthew 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 12:8</span></span>

For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day. By "the Son of man"
is meant, not any man, as some have thought; for no mere man is lord of
any law, moral or ritual, natural or positive; or has a power of
disposing of it, and dispensing with it at pleasure; but Christ himself;
which is the constant sense of this phrase in the New Testament, and is
a character of the Messiah in the old, [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013) who, as he was the institutor of
the sabbath among the Jews, that being a ritual, and of mere positive
institution, could dispense with it, and even abrogate it at his
pleasure. The Jews so far agree to this, that he that commanded the law
of the sabbath, could dispense with it; they say (z), that

"the day on which Jericho was taken was the sabbath day; and that though
they slew and burnt on the sabbath day, , "he that commanded the
observation of the sabbath, commanded the profanation of it".''

And since Christ is greater than the temple, and has all the perfections
of the divine nature in him, is equal to the Father in power and glory;
and even as mediator, has all power in heaven and earth given him; so as
he is Lord of all other things, he is of the sabbath, and has a power of
dispensing with it, and even of abolishing it; see [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016) and since the Lord of the sabbath
had a power of dispensing with it, and made use of it in the cases of
David and his men, and of the priests in the temple formerly; the
Pharisees ought not to think it strange, that the Son of man, who is
equally Lord of the sabbath, dispensed with it in his disciples now.

\(z\) R. David Kimchi in Josh. vi. 11.

[Matthew 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 12:9</span></span>

And when he was departed thence,.... From the corn fields, where the
disciples had plucked the ears of corn, and this conversation passed
between Christ and the Pharisees about the violation of the sabbath, he
went into their synagogue; not on the same sabbath day, as one might be
led to conclude from the account of this evangelist, but on another
sabbath, as Luke expresses it, [Luk
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006). He might indeed directly go into
one of their synagogues the same day, where he and his disciples seem to
have been going, and stay in the city the week following; and then, as
it is said in [Mar 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001) he entered
again into the synagogue; not being afraid of the Pharisees, who sought
an advantage against him; nor deterred by them from doing good to men;
and willing to take another opportunity of exposing their ignorance and
malice.

[Matthew 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 12:10</span></span>

And behold, there was a man which had his hand withered,.... Or dry; the
juices were dried up, the nerves and sinews contracted, so that it was
of no manner of use to him: Luke says, it was his right hand, which was
so much the worse; and means not only his hand, but the whole arm. Such
a case is mentioned in the Talmud (a), "it happened to one, "wewrz
hvbyv, that his arm was dry, or withered. Jerom says (b), in the Gospel
which the Nazarenes and Hebionites used, this man is said to be a
plasterer, and so might possibly come by his misfortune through his
business; and being a man that got his bread by his hand labour, the
case was the more affecting. This account is introduced with a "behold!"
it being remarkable that such a case should offer so opportunely, of
showing his divine power in healing such a disorder; and of his
authority, as the Son of man, over the sabbath; and of putting to
silence his enemies, the Pharisees: and who, upon seeing such an object,
put the following question to him;

and they asked him, saying, is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? and
which was put, not for information sake, as willing to be instructed in
this point; for their determinations were, that healing was not lawful
on such a day; nor were any means to be made use of for that purpose: if
a man received a cure accidentally, it was very well; but no methods
were to be taken with intention: as for instance (c);

"if a man had an ailment in his throat, he might not gargle it with oil,
but he might swallow a large quantity of oil, "and "if he was healed, he
was healed" (i.e. it was very well, it was no breach of the sabbath);
they may not chew mastic, nor rub the teeth with spice, on the sabbath
day, , "when it is intended "for healing"; but if it is intended for the
savour of his mouth, it is free.''

There are several things they allowed might be done on the sabbath; but
then they did not reckon them to come under the notion of healing.

"Three (d) things R. Ishmael bar Jose said he had heard from R. Matthia
ben Charash; they might let blood for the stranguary on the sabbath day;
one that was bit by a mad dog, they might give him hog's liver to eat;
and he that had an ailment in his mouth, they might put spice to it on
the sabbath day: but the wise men say of these, that there is not in
them , anything of medicine.''

Indeed, in case of extreme danger of life they did admit of the use of
medicine, by the prescription of a physician (e).

"Danger of life drives away the sabbath; wherefore, if there is any
danger in a sick person, it is lawful to kindle a fire for him, &c. and
they may kill, and bake, and boil: and though there may be no apparent
danger, only a doubt of danger; as when one physician says there is a
necessity, and another physician says there is none, they may profane
the sabbath for him.''

Hence it is very clear with what view the Pharisees asked Christ this
question; and that it was, as the evangelist says, that they might
accuse him: either of cruelty and weakness, should he answer in the
negative, that either he was not able to heal the poor man before him,
or wanted compassion; or should he answer in the affirmative, as they
expected, and act upon it, then they might have wherewith to charge him
before the sanhedrim as a violator of the sabbath, and of their canons
concerning it.

\(a\) T. Hieros. Yoma, fol. 40. 1. (b) In loc. (c) Maimon. Hilchot
Sabbat, c. 21. sect. 24. (d) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 84. 1. Vid. Misn. Yoma,
e. 8. sect. 7. (e) Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora pr. neg. 65. Maimon. in Misn.
Sabbat, c. 18. sect. 3.

[Matthew 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 12:11</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... Well knowing their intentions, and also their
usages and customs, which he was able to produce and object to them; in
which, through covetousness, they showed more regard to their beasts,
than they did humanity to their fellow creatures:

what man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it
fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift
it out? Christ appeals to them in a case which was usually done among
them, and which, without delay, no man would scruple to do; though their
present rule of direction, in such a case, is this (f):

"if a beast fall into a ditch, or a pool of water, if food can be given
it, where it is, they feed it till the going out of the sabbath; but if
not, bolsters and pillows may be brought, and put under it, and if it
can come out: it may come out:''

and which is elsewhere (g) a little differently expressed;

"if a beast fall into a ditch, or pool of water, it is forbidden a man
to bring it out with his hand; but if he can give it food where it is,
it may be fed till the going out of the sabbath:''

which seems to have been made since the times of Christ, and in
opposition to this observation of his.

\(f\) Maimon. Hilchot Sabbat, c. 25. sect. 26. (g) Kotsensis Mitzvot
Tora pr. neg. 65.

[Matthew 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 12:12</span></span>

How much then is a man better than a sheep?.... As a rational creature
must be better, and more excellent, than an irrational one, more care is
to be taken of, and more mercy shown unto, the one, than the other: even
the health of a man is preferable to the life of a beast; and if it is
lawful to give food to a beast, and make use of means for its relief,
and for the lifting it up out of a ditch, when fallen into it on the
sabbath day, "wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days", to
men; to do acts of beneficence and humanity to them, among which must be
reckoned healing of diseases and infirmities: and particularly, if it is
lawful to take a sheep out of a ditch on the sabbath day, it must be
right to restore to a man the use of his hand on such a day; and
especially to one that gets his bread by his hand labour, as it is very
likely this man did. This was such a strong way of arguing, that the
Jews could not well object to it; and it appears, that they were
confounded and put to silence; for, as Mark observes, "they held their
peace": and indeed they allow of everything to be done where life is in
danger, though not otherwise: they say (h),

"they may take care of the preservation of life on the sabbath; and if
he is prepared for it, lo! this is praiseworthy, and there is no need to
take a licence from the sanhedrim: as when a man sees a child fallen
into the sea, he may spread a net, and bring him out; and if he is
prepared for it, lo! this is praiseworthy, and there is no need to take
a licence from the sanhedrim, though he was fishing: if he sees a child
fallen into a ditch, he may rake into the mud and bring him out; and if
he is prepared for it, lo! this is praiseworthy, and there is no need to
take a licence from the sanhedrim, though he had set a ladder ready.''

It is said of Hillell (i), that

"he sat by a window to hear the words of the living God, from the mouth
of Shemaia and Abtalion; and they say that that day was the evening of
the sabbath, and the winter solstice, and the snow descended from
heaven; and when the pillar of the morning ascended, (when it was
daylight,) Shemaia said to Abtalion, brother Abtalion, all other days
the house is light, but today it is dark, perhaps it is a cloudy day:
they lift up their eyes, and saw the form of a man at the window; they
went up, and found upon him snow the height of three cubits; they broke
through and delivered him; and they washed him, and anointed him, and
set him over against his dwelling, and said, very worthy is this man ,
"to profane the sabbath for him".''

And if it was lawful to dig a man out of the snow, and do these several
things for him on the sabbath day, why not cure a man of a withered
hand, and especially when done by a word speaking, and without any
labour?

\(h\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 84. 2. (i) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 35. 2.

[Matthew 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 12:13</span></span>

Then saith he to the man,.... That is, after he had looked round about
upon them, to observe their countenances; and what answer they would
make to his arguments; and with anger for their inhumanity and cruelty;
being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, i.e. their
unmercifulness to their fellow creatures, and the stupidity and
blindness of their minds, being ignorant of the Scriptures, and of the
sabbath, the nature, use, and Lord of it; which things are observed by
the Evangelist Mark; then, in a commanding authoritative way, almighty
power going along with his word, he says to the man who stood forth
before him, and the Pharisees,

stretch forth thine hand, which was before contracted and shrivelled up;

and he stretched it forth with all the ease imaginable, and was, not
only able to do this, but to make use of it any way;

for it was restored whole like as the other; his left hand, which had
never been damaged. This was an instance of Christ's power; a proof of
the lawfulness of healing on the sabbath day; and a rebuke to the
Pharisees for their cruelty and uncharitableness. This man was an emblem
of the inability of men to do anything that is spiritually good, and of
the power and efficacy of divine grace to enable persons to stretch out
their hands, and do things which they of themselves are not equal to.

[Matthew 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 12:14</span></span>

Then the Pharisees went out,.... Of the synagogue, being, as Luke says,
filled with madness, at the unanswerableness of his arguments; and
because of the violation of the sabbath, as they thought; and most of
all, because of the miracle wrought by him; and which was so glaringly a
proof of his being Lord of the sabbath, and could not fail of creating
him esteem among the people: and held a council against him, how they
might destroy him. Mark says, the council was held by them with the
Herodians; of whom, See Gill on [Mat
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016) who, though they differed from
them both in religion and politics, yet might be thought very proper
persons to advise with about this matter; and especially, as they might
have a greater interest at court, than they had. Nor did they scruple to
enter into such a consultation, though on the sabbath day, and about the
taking away of the life of an innocent person; which shows what scared
consciences, and hard hearts they had, and how full of hypocrisy they
were.

[Matthew 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 12:15</span></span>

But when Jesus knew it,.... Their consultation against him, as he did,
not by any discovery made to him by men, but as the omniscient God; he
withdrew himself from thence; from the synagogue and city, where he was,
to the sea of Galilee, and his disciples with him, as Mark observes; not
through fear, but because his time was not yet come, that he must suffer
and die for his people; he had some other work to do first, and
therefore rightly and wisely provides for his safety. And great
multitudes followed him; from Galilee, Judea, Jerusalem, Idumea, and
from beyond Jordan; and were joined by another multitude of people, who
came from about Tyre and Sidon, as Mark relates: so that his departure
was not so very private; nor was he forsaken by the common people,
though the Pharisees were so offended with him. And he healed them all;
that stood in need of healing, as many as had plagues and unclean
spirits; practising agreeably to his doctrine, that it was lawful to do
good on the sabbath day, and to heal the bodies as well as the souls of
men.

[Matthew 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 12:16</span></span>

And charged them that they should not make him known. This charge was
given, either to the multitude that followed him, and were healed by
him, that when they returned to the respective places from whence they
came, they would not make it known to his enemies where he was, and what
he had done to them; being neither desirous of popular applause and
glory, nor willing to provoke them more, nor to fall into their hands as
yet; or else, as Mark seems to intimate, to the unclean spirits, that
they would not declare who he was, the Son of God, they confessed him to
be: and very likely it was given to both, and that they should neither
tell where he was, nor who he was; and this charge was a very severe
one; for the word signifies a charge with threatenings, should they not
observe his orders.

[Matthew 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 12:17</span></span>

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying. [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001) not that Christ gave
the above charge with this view, that this passage in Isaiah might have
its accomplishment: but this is an observation of the evangelist, that
what was now done by Christ, by his private departure from the
Pharisees, being unwilling to irritate them more; by his preaching to
the Idumeans, Tyrians, and Sidonians; by healing their diseases, and
shunning all ostentation and popular applause; and prohibiting to tell
who and where he was, was a fulfilling of this prophecy; in which the
Holy Spirit foreknowing the disposition and actions of Christ, predicted
them: which, when considered, must be looked upon as a very large proof
of the truth of his being the Messiah. For that this prophecy belongs to
the Messiah, is owned by the Jews themselves (k).

\(k\) Targum & Kimchi in loc. Abarbinel Mashmia Jeshua, fol. 9. 1, 2. &
10. 1, 2. & 21. 2. & in Is. fol 64. 3, 4. R. Isaac Chizzuk Emuna, p.
299.

[Matthew 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 12:18</span></span>

Behold, my servant whom I have chosen,.... These are the words of God
the Father, speaking to the church, concerning Christ, as mediator; who,
as such, is God's servant, employed by him, and obedient to him, in the
work of man's salvation; and is a righteous, faithful, prudent, and
diligent one; whom he, from all eternity, had chosen to this service,
and in the fulness of time sent him to do it, and supported and upheld
him in it; for it is whom I uphold, in the Hebrew text. My beloved, in
whom my soul is well pleased; who always was the object of his love, not
only as his own and only begotten Son, but as in his office capacity, as
mediator; in regard to which he was his elect, as it is in Isaiah; and,
as such, he was always delighted in his person, well pleased with his
office, and the discharge of it, and which he declared more than once by
a voice from heaven, as at his baptism, and at his transfiguration on
the mount: I will put my Spirit upon him; as he did without measure,
whereby he was abundantly qualified for his whole work, and particularly
for preaching the Gospel, being richly anointed with gifts and graces,
above his fellows; of which the descent of the Holy Spirit upon him, as
a dove at his baptism, which immediately preceded his public ministry,
was a symbol. And he shall show judgment unto the Gentiles; meaning, not
the general judgment, at the last day, which is committed to him; nor
the laws of Justice and equity; but the Gospel, which is the produce of
the God of judgment; best informs the judgment of men about the business
of salvation; gives an account of the righteous procedure of God in
justifying sinners, by the righteousness of his Son; and teaches men to
live soberly, righteously, and godly: this Christ brought forth, and
showed, at this time, to the Heathens, the Idumeans, Tyrians, and
Sidonians; who flocked unto him; whereby this part of the prophecy had
its fulfilment: in the Hebrew it is, "he shall bring forth"; that is,
out of his heart and mouth, and is the same as "show" here.

[Matthew 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 12:19</span></span>

He shall not strive,.... Or contend in a wrangling way, as the disputers
of this world do about words to no profit, and for the sake of victory
only, and popular applause, but shall choose rather to withdraw, than to
carry on a controversy to a great length, to little purpose; or, as men
litigate a point in a court of judicature, where one is plaintiff, and
the other defendant. In the Hebrew text it is, "he shall not cry"; he
shall not act the part of a plaintiff; he shall not complain, or bring
in any charge, or accusation against any, but choose rather to suffer
wrong, than to contend: thus signifies such a cry, as is a complaint of
injustice, [Isa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007) and a plaintiff,
one that brings an action against another (l): but Christ did not so, he
would not accuse to the Father, nor complain against his most implacable
enemies, but left that to Moses, in whom they trusted; "nor cry", or, as
in the Hebrew text, lift up; that is, his voice, in a clamorous way,
using reviling and opprobrious language, or menaces and threatenings;
but, on the contrary, he silently put up all abuses, and patiently bore
every affront, and behaved peaceably, quietly, committing himself and
cause to a righteous God.

Neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets; or, as in the
Hebrew text, "nor cause his voice to be heard in the street": the sense
is the same, and the meaning is, that he sought not worldly honour,
popular applause, and to be seen of men; he did nothing in an
ostentatious way, said nothing in his own commendation, was never heard
to praise himself, and chose that others should be silent concerning
him: for this does not so much regard the lowness of his voice, as if
that was not so sonorous as to be heard without doors, when he preached
within, as his modest mein and suitable deportment; nor the places where
he usually ministered, which was sometimes in the street, as well as in
an house, or on a mountain, or by the sea side, or in the temple, and
the synagogues. The Ethiopic version here is very wrong, "no man shall
hear his voice in the synagogues"; for his voice was often heard there.

\(l\) Vid. Cocc. Heb. Lex. in rad.

[Matthew 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 12:20</span></span>

A bruised reed shall he not break,.... Various are the thoughts of
interpreters, about what is meant by this, and by

the smoking flax shall he not quench. Some think the Scribes and
Pharisees are designed, whose power Christ could easily crush, and their
wrath and fury restrain, but would not, till the time of his vengeance
was come. Others that the publicans and sinners are intended, of whose
conversion and salvation there were more hope than of the Scribes and
Pharisees; and which Christ greatly sought after, and therefore
cherished and encouraged them in his ministry and conversation. Some are
of opinion, that such who have fallen into sin, and are under great
decays of grace, are meant, whom Christ has compassion on, succours, and
restores: but rather young converts, such as are under first awakenings,
are here pointed at; who, like to a "bruised reed", or "broken" one, one
that is in some measure broke, near being broken to pieces, are wounded
in their spirits, have their hearts broken and contrite, under a sense
of their sinfulness, vileness, weakness, and unworthiness; whom Christ
is so far from breaking and destroying, that he binds up their broken
hearts, heals their wounds, and restores comforts to them: and who are
like to "smoking flax", or, as the Syriac reads it, , "a smoking lamp";
to which the Arabic and Persic versions agree; meaning the wick of the
lamp, which being just lighted, seems ready to go out, having scarce any
light, only a little fire in it, which makes it smoke: so these have but
little light of knowledge, faith, and comfort, and a great deal of
darkness and infirmity; only there is some warmth in their affections,
which go upwards "like pillars of smoke, perfumed with frankincense";
and such Christ is so far from neglecting, and putting out, that he
blows up the sparks of grace into a flame, and never utterly leaves the
work,

till he sends forth judgment into victory; that is, till he sends forth
the Gospel into their hearts, accompanied with his mighty power, in the
light and comfort of it; which informs their judgments, enlightens their
understandings, bows their wills, raises their affections, sanctifies
their souls, works effectually in them, under the influence of his
Spirit and grace, to the carrying on of the work of grace in them to the
end; and making them victorious over all their enemies, and more than
conquerors, through him that has loved them. The Targum of Jonathan
paraphrases the words thus;

"the meek, who are as a bruised reed, he will not break; and the poor,
who are as an obscure lamp, he will not quench.''

[Matthew 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 12:21</span></span>

And in his name shall the Gentiles trust. The former part of the text is
omitted, "he shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set
judgment in the earth"; but is inserted in Munster's Hebrew Gospel; and
which some understand of the bruised reed, and smoking flax, and others
of Christ; the latter sense is to be preferred. The passage, here cited,
is somewhat different in Isaiah: for there it is, "and the isles shall
wait for his law"; but the difference, at least, in sense, is not so
great as it may appear at first sight: for, as Grotius observes, does
not always signify "islands", but nations, and countries, that are upon
the continent, [Gen 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005) and so might
be rightly rendered here, the Gentiles, or "nations"; and by "the name"
of Christ is meant his Gospel: see [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015) which Isaiah calls his "law":
that is, his doctrine, the doctrine of righteousness, life, and
salvation by him, which is the ground and foundation of hope, and trust
in him; and they that wait for it, may be truly said to hope, or trust
in it. This began to have its accomplishment in the Idumeans, Tyrians,
and Sidonians, now attending on the ministry of Christ; and has had a
greater accomplishment since: the Gospel having been preached in the
Gentile world, both upon the main land, and in the isles afar off;
whereby multitudes have been brought to hope, and believe in Christ, as
their Saviour and Redeemer.

[Matthew 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 12:22</span></span>

Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil,.... About this
time, or some little time after, when he was returned from the sea of
Galilee, and was come into a certain house; see [Mar
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#019) some persons brought him a
demoniac, in compassion to the possessed man, and being persuaded of the
power of Christ to heal him by the late cures he had performed. A like
instance we have in [Mat 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032), which
had a like effect upon the people, and cavilled at by the Pharisees in
much the same way; and which cavils were answered in much the same
words; and yet the case is not the same; for that man was only dumb, but
this both

blind and dumb; not by birth, or through the defect of nature, or by any
natural distemper that had attended him, but through the malice of
Satan, by divine permission; his blindness, and dumbness, were the
effects of his being possessed with a devil, who had deprived him of his
sight, and speech. The word rendered "dumb", signifies both deaf and
dumb, and answers to the Hebrew word which sometimes (m) is used of a
deaf man only, who can speak, but not hear; and often of one that can
neither speak, nor hear; which is the case of such as are born deaf: it
seems as if this man could hear, though he could not speak; since no
mention is made of his want of hearing, or of Christ's restoring it to
him; for it follows,

and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb, both spake and saw.
This he did, not by making use of medicines, but by a word speaking,
dispossessing Satan; so that the cause of blindness and dumbness being
removed, the effects ceased, and the man was restored to his sight, and
speech, as before. He had his sight to behold his Saviour, and a tongue
to praise his name: so when men are turned from Satan unto God, and are
delivered from his thraldom and bondage, they are brought into
marvellous light, and put into a capacity of showing forth the praises
of God.

\(m\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Trumot, c. 1. sect. 2.

[Matthew 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 12:23</span></span>

And all the people were amazed,.... At the cure; it was such an instance
of divine power, and so glaring a proof, that the person who wrought it
was more than a man, and must be the Messiah. This is to be understood
of the greater part of the people, not of every individual, and of the
common people only; for it had a different effect upon the Pharisees, as
hereafter appears; but in these it not only produced admiration, but
conviction, faith, and confession:

and said, is not this the son of David? or the Messiah; for , "the son
of David", is a character of the Messiah, well known among the Jews; See
Gill on [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001) because he was
promised to David, was to be raised up of his seed, and to spring from
his loins. This question they put, not as doubting of it, but as
inclining, at least, to believe it, if not as expressing their certainty
of it: and is, as if they had said, who can this person be but the true
Messiah, that has wrought such a miracle as this? for from his miracles
they rightly concluded who he was; though the Jews since, in order to
deprive Jesus of this true characteristic of the Messiah, deny that
miracles are to be performed by him (n).

\(n\) Maimon. Hilch. Melacim, c. 11. sect. 3.

[Matthew 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 12:24</span></span>

But when the Pharisees heard it,.... Very probably not the same that
went out, and held a council against Christ to destroy him, [Mat
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014) but others that were come from
Judea and Jerusalem, and were with him in the house, and saw the
miracle: these, when they heard what the people said, and how ready they
were to believe, and own Jesus to be the Messiah, in order to prevent
it, being filled with envy and malice,

they said, this fellow doth not cast out devils but by Beelzebub, the
prince of devils. They could not deny the miracle, or that it was one;
but to deprive him of the glory of it, and even reproach him for it, and
to bring him into contempt with the people, they not only speak of him
in a scornful manner, "this" sorry man, "this" vile fellow; but ascribe
the miracle he wrought to familiarity with the devil, to diabolical
influence and skill in magic art: they pretended he was in confederacy
with Satan, and was carrying on his interest: and therefore, that he
might gain credit and reputation, the prince of devils suffered the
inferior ones to remove at his word: and of these their ancestors, the
Jews have learnt to fix this vile imputation, and blasphemous piece of
slander upon Christ; who, they say (o), brought enchantments, or
witchcrafts, out of Egypt, in the cuttings of his flesh, whereby he
performed the things he did. Concerning Beelzebub; see Gill on [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025) here called "the prince of
devils"; it being a prevailing notion among the Jews, that there is one
devil who is the head of all the rest, and who is by them sometimes
called Asmodeus: they say (p), when Solomon sinned against the Lord, he
sent to him , "Asmodeus the king of the devils", and drove him from his
throne, and so elsewhere (q): and sometimes Samael, who is styled (r)
Samael the prince, , "the king of devils"; and the angel Samael, the
wicked, , "the head of all the Satans", or devils (s): and we often read
(t) of , "the prince of hell"; by whom the same is meant, as here, by
Beelzebub; for if anyone devil is more wicked, odious, and execrable
than the rest, the chief of them may be thought to be so; for which
reason he is here mentioned.

\(o\) T. Hieros. Sabbat, fol. 13. 4. T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 104. 2. (p)
Targum in Eccl. i. 12. (q) T. Bab. Pesach, fol. 110. 1. Gittin, fol. 68.
1. & Raziel, fol. 41. 2. (r) Zohar in Deut. fol. 120. 3. (s) Debarim
Rabba, fol. 245. 3. (t) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 52. 1. Imre Binah in
Zohar in Gen. fol. 22. 3.

[Matthew 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 12:25</span></span>

And Jesus knew their thoughts,.... He not only heard their blasphemous
words, but was privy to their secret thoughts; he knew their vile
malicious intentions and designs, with what view they expressed
themselves in this manner, on purpose to reproach him, and set the
people against him, contrary to the inward light of their minds, and
dictates of their consciences; who must, and did know the contrary of
what they said: and regarding the inward frame of their minds, as well
as their words, and which is a proof of his omniscience, and so of his
deity, and consequently of his Messiahship,

said unto them the following parables, as Mark calls them, [Mar
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#023) or proverbial expressions:

every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; a
government, in which there is a disagreement between the chiefs of it,
and the body of the people, or where one part is opposed to the other,
or in which a civil and intestine war is begun and prosecuted, cannot
continue in any comfortable situation, and flourishing state, but must
come to nothing: this is a maxim that has been so often fatally
verified, that no one will doubt the truth of it; and the same holds
true of lesser communities, of cities, and families:

and every city, or house, divided against itself, shall not stand. If
citizens fall out with their magistrates, or one with another, and turn
out, and disfranchise each other; and if the heads of families, and the
respective branches thereof, quarrel with, and divide from one another,
a dissolution of the whole must ensue; and the same may be said of the
kingdom and government of Satan. These, it is very likely, were common
sayings among the Jews, and they might be very easily understood by
them; and are very appropriately produced by Christ to illustrate the
present case, and confute the vile and blasphemous suggestions of the
Pharisees: a proverbial expression, much like to these, is to be read in
the writings of the Jews, , "every house, in which there is a division,
at the end shall come to desolation" (u).

\(u\) Derech Eretz, c. 5.

[Matthew 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 12:26</span></span>

And if Satan cast out Satan,.... That is, if Satan, the same with
Beelzebub, casts out the rest of the Satans, or other devils, of which
he is the prince and head,

he is divided against himself; he acts contrary to his own interest,
which is to keep possession of the bodies and souls of men; and
consequently it must, in course, be subversive of his power and
dominion:

how shall then his kingdom stand? he will never be able to maintain his
authority, and keep up the show of a government, as he does: for these
words suggest, that there is a form of government among the devils, who
are united in one body, under one head; and whose unity and concord are
their greatest strength, as in all other governments. Our Lord's
argument, and which is his first, for others follow, is, that since
Satan, who is so cunning and crafty, can never be thought to act such an
opposite part to himself, subversive of his kingdom and government; and
which would give so much credit to Christ, and serve so much to
strengthen his interest, as to assist him in the casting out of devils;
the weakness, and maliciousness of such a suggestion, must be clear and
evident to all.

[Matthew 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 12:27</span></span>

And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils,.... As the Pharisees asserted,
and would have the people believe; for this is not allowed, only for
argument sake supposed:

by whom do your children cast them out? meaning not the apostles and
disciples of Christ, the children of the Jews, to whom Christ gave power
of casting out devils, and who had exercised it in his name; and
therefore argues, if they in his name cast out devils, why could he not
do it himself, without the help of Satan? wherefore these would be
judges against them: but, no doubt, the Pharisees had no better opinion
of the disciples, and of their ejection of devils, than of Christ;
wherefore, it is not likely, that our Lord should argue with them from
hence: but rather, he means, some among themselves, who pretended to
have a power of exorcising and ejecting of devils, either in the name of
Jesus, as some of them did, [Mar 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#038)
or in the name of their kings, righteous men, prophets and patriarchs,
as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (w); and which practice, perhaps, they took
up and made pretensions to, in imitation of Christ and his apostles; so
as Christ healed men possessed of devils, they also affected to do the
same. A story is reported (x),

"concerning Ben Talmion, that a miracle was wrought by R. Eleazar bar
Jose, who healed a king's daughter at Rome, in whose body the devil
entered, whose name was Ben Talmion; and they brought him (the Jew) to
the king's treasury, to take what he would, but he would take nothing
from thence, but letters, in which were written the decrees they had
decreed against Israel; and when he found them, he tore them to pieces,
and there he saw the vessels of the house of the sanctuary, in the
treasury.''

Now since the Jews pretended to do these things, Christ asks them, by
whom they cast out devils? Whether by the Spirit of God, or by
Beelzebub? They would doubtless say by the former, and not the latter,
which would show their great partiality; for admitting that the like
actions were done by them, as by him, why not by the same power? Why
should their ejection of devils be ascribed to God, and his to
Beelzebub?

Therefore they shall be your judges; who will rise up against you, and
condemn you one day, for this unequal judgment you now pass; and which
was just the reverse of the true state of the case: for he cast out
devils by the Spirit of God, which they imputed to the assistance of
Beelzebub; their children cast out devils, or pretended to do so, and it
was by the help of Satan; and yet they ascribed it to a divine power,
even though they made use of the name of Satan, under that of Beelzebub,
or Asmodeus, their exorcising, of which take the following form (y).

"By the authority of the glorious and fearful name, I adjure thee
Asmodeus, "king of the devils", and all thy company, &c. that ye hurt
not, nor put in fear, nor trouble such an one, the son of such an one,
but that ye help him, and sustain him (or deliver him) out of every
distress and anguish, and from every evil thing, and from all diseases,
that enter into the two hundred and forty eight members, &c.''

\(w\) Justin Martyr, adv. Tryphon. p. 311. (x) In Gloss. in T. Bab.
Yoma, fol. 57. 1. Meilah, fol. 17. 2. (y) Raziel, fol. 41. 2.

[Matthew 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 12:28</span></span>

But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God,.... As it was certain he
did, from the nature, use, and design of such miracles; and it could not
be reasonably thought, that Satan would assist in what was so very
opposite to his kingdom and interest, and was so serviceable to the
cause and glory of Christ. All the three persons had an hand in the
miracles of the Messiah; they were done by Christ, in his Father's name,
and by the power of the Spirit of God; from which the following
inference may be justly deduced,

then the kingdom of God is come unto you: meaning, either the Messiah
himself; or rather, his kingdom, the Gospel dispensation, which both
Christ and John had declared to be at hand; of which the performing of
miracles, particularly the casting out of devils, whereby the kingdom of
Satan was so much weakened, was a clear proof.

[Matthew 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 12:29</span></span>

Or else, how can anyone enter into a strong man's house,.... This is
another argument of Christ's proving that his casting out of devils
could not be by Satan, but by the Spirit of God; for if he did not act
by any superior power to Satan's, and such by which he was able to
master, overcome, and bind him, he could never

spoil his goods, as he did; or dispossess devils out of the bodies or
souls of men: just as if a man should enter into another man's house,
who is strong and robust, with a design to spoil his goods, who would
never make use of the man himself to do it, and can never be thought to
effect it, unless he has a power superior to his, and uses it;

except he first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his house:
by the "strong man", is meant the devil, see [Isa
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#024) who is powerful and mighty, as
appears from his nature, being an angel, though a fallen one, excelling
in strength human creatures; from his names, such as the roaring lion,
the great red dragon, leviathan, &c. from the extent of his dominion,
here called "his house"; which reaches to the whole posse of devils, and
world of men; whence he is called the prince of the power of the air,
and the prince of this world, and the god of it; and from his works and
actions, in and over the bodies and estates of men, by divine
permission; which might be exemplified in the case of Job, and the
demoniacs in the time of Christ; and in and over the souls of men, not
only over wicked men, but men under a show of religion, as antichrist
and his followers; yea, saints themselves, and even over Adam in a state
of innocence; but Christ is stronger than he, and attacked him, and
dispossessed him of the bodies of men; and restraining him from doing
them any hurt, enters into the souls of men, dethrone him, and leads him
captive, who led others; and keeps him from doing them any damage; as he
will in the latter day "bind" him and shut him up in prison a thousand
years; and also "spoils his goods", or "vessels", and "his house"; the
palace of Satan, by taking bodies and souls out of his possession; by
awakening the conscience, enlightening the mind, working upon the
affections, subduing the will, and implanting principles of grace and
holiness in the heart; and so making it a fit habitation for God, which
spoils it for the devil: in all which, Satan can never be thought to
have any hand; and therefore the suggestion that Christ casts out devils
by his assistance, even out of the bodies of men, has no show of reason
in it.

[Matthew 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 12:30</span></span>

He that is not with me, is against me,.... These words chiefly refer to
Satan, and are a further proof, that Christ did not cast out devils by
him; since they two are as much opposites, as can possibly be; Satan is
not on the side of Christ, but an adversary to him; there is an
original, and implacable enmity, between the serpent and the seed of the
woman; there is an open war between them, and therefore one cannot be
thought to lend assistance to the other. They were concerned in
different things, had different views and interests, and so took
different methods;

and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth: Christ is the good
shepherd, that gathers his sheep to himself, and into his fold, by the
external ministry of the word, and internal efficacy of his grace; Satan
is the wolf, that catches and scatters the sheep, and seeks to kill and
destroy them: and since there is such an open war proclaimed and carried
on between Christ and the devil, none ought to be neutral; whoever is
not on the side of Christ, is reckoned as an enemy; and whoever is not
concerned by prayer or preaching, or other means to gather souls to his
word and ordinances, and to his church, and to himself, is deemed by him
a scatterer of them.

[Matthew 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 12:31</span></span>

Wherefore I say unto you,.... This shows, that what follows is
occasioned by what the Pharisees had said, concerning the miracles of
Christ; imputing them to diabolical influence and assistance, when they
were done by the Spirit of God, of which they themselves were conscious;

all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: not unto all
men, for there are some, who, as they are never truly convinced of sin,
and brought to repentance for it, so they never have the remission of
it; but to such to whom God of his free grace has promised, and for whom
he has provided this blessing, in the covenant of his grace; for whom
the blood of Christ was shed, for the remission of their sins; and who,
by the Spirit of God, are made sensible of them, and have repentance
unto life given them, and faith in Christ, by which they receive the
forgiveness of them: the sense is, that all kind of sin, whether
committed more immediately against God, or man, the first or second
table of the law, or against any of the divine precepts; be they sins
small or great, secret or open, sins of heart, lip, or life, or attended
with whatsoever aggravating circumstances; and all kind of blasphemy, or
evil speaking of men, or of angels, or of the name of God, but what is
hereafter excepted, there is forgiveness of in the grace of God, through
the blood of Christ, even for all sorts of men and sinners whatever. The
Jews have a saying (z), that God pardons all sins,

, "except lasciviousness".''

But this is not excepted by Christ, only what follows,

but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven unto
men: by which is meant, not every ignorant denial of, and opposition to
his deity and personality; nor all resistance of him in the external
ministry of the word; nor every sin that is knowingly and wilfully
committed; but it is a despiteful usage of the Spirit of grace, an
opposing, contradicting, and denying the operations wrought, or
doctrines revealed by him, against a man's own light and conscience, out
of wilful and obstinate malice, on purpose to lessen the glory of God,
and gratify his own lusts: such was the sin of the Scribes and
Pharisees; who, though they knew the miracles of Christ were wrought by
the Spirit of God, yet maliciously and obstinately imputed them to the
devil, with a view to obscure the glory of Christ, and indulge their own
wicked passions and resentments against him; which sin was unpardonable
at that present time, as well as under that dispensation then to come,
when the Spirit of God was poured down in a more plenteous manner.

\(z\) Tanchuma apud Buxtorf. Heb. Florileg. p. 126.

[Matthew 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 12:32</span></span>

And whosoever speaketh a word against the son of man,.... By whom is
meant, not any man, as Grotius thought, but the Lord Jesus Christ, so
often called "the son of man", on account of his human nature, in which
he appeared in great meanness and obscurity. Now many might, through
ignorance of him, thinking him to be a mere man, and taking up with
common fame, speak evil of him, deny him to be the Messiah, reproach him
for the meanness of his parentage and education, and for the freedom of
his conversation with publicans and sinners; and do many things contrary
to his name, as Saul, whilst a Pharisee did, and thought he ought to do;
and yet be afterwards convinced of their mistakes, and be brought to a
sense and acknowledgment of them, and obtain pardoning grace and mercy,
as Saul did, though a blasphemer; and who is an instance of what is here
promised,

it shall be forgiven him through the grace of God, the blood and
mediation of Christ, under the application of the blessed Spirit.

But whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, in the sense before
declared,

it shall not be forgiven him: not because the Holy Ghost is greater than
Christ; or for want of efficacy in the blood of Christ; or because God
cannot pardon it; but because such persons wilfully, maliciously, and
obstinately oppose the Spirit of God, without whom there can be no
application of pardon made; and remain in hardness of heart, are given
up to a reprobate mind, and die in impenitence and unbelief, and so
there is no forgiveness for them,

neither in this world, nor in the world to come; that is; they shall
never be forgiven, see [Mar 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029). The
distinction here used, does not refer to a common one among the Jews, of
the Jewish state and the times of the Messiah; but to the present state
of life, and that which will be after, or upon death: and it does not
suppose there may be forgiveness of other sins, though not of this, in
the other world; but strikes at a notion the Jews had, that there are
some sins, which repentance and the day of atonement expiate in this
life; but there are others, which repentance and the day of atonement do
not expiate; and these a man's death expiates, or makes atonement for
(a). The form of confession used by sick persons is the following (b);

"I confess before thee, O Lord our God, and the God of our fathers, that
my cure is in thy hands, and my death is in thy hands; if it be thy good
pleasure, heal me with a perfect healing: but if I die, , "let my death
be for the pardon", forgiveness, and atonement of all the sins,
iniquities, and transgressions, which I have sinned, acted perversely
in, and transgressed before thee; and give me my portion in paradise,
and justify me "in the world to come", which is hidden for the
righteous.''

But the sin against the Holy Ghost is such, as is not forgiven, neither
before, nor at, nor after death, nor by it: all sins that are forgiven,
are forgiven in this world, and that perfectly and at once; and all that
are forgiven in this world, there will be a manifestation and
declaration of the pardon of them in another; but such sins as are not
forgiven here, there will be no declaration of the pardon of them
hereafter. In short, the sense is, that the sin against the Holy Ghost
never has forgiveness; it is not pardoned now, and consequently there
will be no declaration of the pardon of it hereafter. The Jews use the
phrase in the same sense (c); a certain sick man said to his son,

"give me water, and such certain food; but if not, I will not "forgive
thee, neither in this world, nor in the world to come".''

That is, I will never forgive thee.

\(a\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 86. 1. (b) Seder Tephillot, fol. 333. 2. Ed.
Basil. Vid. T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 60. 1. (c) Sepher Chasidim: num. 234.

[Matthew 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 12:33</span></span>

Either make the tree good, and his fruit good,.... That is, either
assert them both good, or

else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: say they are both
evil, for the contrary cannot be affirmed with any consistency and
propriety: the matter is easy to be determined,

for the tree is known by his fruit; fruit will discover what a tree is,
and accordingly judgment may be made. No man will say a tree is good,
and its fruit corrupt; or say, that a tree is corrupt, and its fruit
good: these are glaring contradictions, and can never be reconciled. The
case Christ here puts, is a very easy and familiar one, and is obvious
to common sense: the application of it may be made, either to the
foregoing instance of Christ's casting out devils, which the Jews
ascribed to the help of Satan; and then the sense is, either say I am a
good man, and do good works, or that I am an evil man, and do evil
works: to say that I do good works, as the casting out of devils must be
allowed to be, and yet am an evil man, and do this under satanical
influence, is as great an inconsistency, as to say that a corrupt tree
brings forth good fruit; either therefore condemn these miracles as evil
actions, done by confederacy with Satan; or if you will allow them to be
good ones, as you do, ascribe them to the Spirit of God; for these
things may as easily be determined, as the cause by its effect, or as a
tree is known by its fruit: or else this may be applied unto the
Pharisees, who, though wicked men, pretended to do good works; and
though they set up for men of religion and holiness, yet did evil
things, as their words and actions testified; particularly the blasphemy
just now uttered by them, charging the miracles of Christ as done by the
assistance of the devil, which discovered the malignity and rottenness
of their hearts: and the meaning of Christ is, that they would either
both say, and do, that which is right and good; or relinquish their
pretensions to the character of good and religious men: nothing can be
concluded from hence in favour of free will, or a power in the creature
to make himself good; for the word "make", here signifies to "say,
affirm, assert", and the like; see [Joh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018). Though it may be fairly inferred
from hence, that a man must first be a good man, ever he can perform
good works, truly and properly so called; and that these are fruits and
evidences of the inward real goodness of a man; which must be understood
not of a few single actions, but of the common, constant series and
course of life.

[Matthew 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 12:34</span></span>

O generation of vipers,.... Though they boasted of their being the seed
of Abraham, yet their immediate ancestors were no other than vipers,
deceitful, hurtful, poisonous creatures; and they were exactly like
them: for though they made a fair show in the flesh, and outwardly
appeared righteous, yet were inwardly full of the poison of wickedness,
envy and malice; and which their pestilential breath, their blasphemy
against the Spirit, fully discovered; and gave just cause and reason for
so severe a reproof, and such resentment, as here made by Christ.

How can ye, being evil, speak good things? This is not to be expected,
nor is it commonly and constantly done; an evil man may sometimes speak
good things, or which seem to be so; but these are not his common talk;
as he is, so, for the most part, is his language; his speech betrays
him: and since these men were by nature evil, were destitute of the
Spirit and grace of God, had no good thing in them, how should any good
thing come out of them? And since they were so full of wickedness, spite
and malice, it is no wonder that they belched out such blasphemous
expressions concerning the miracles of Christ;

for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh: a phrase much
like this is used by the Septuagint, in [Ecc
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#015). "I spoke abundance", or "much in
my heart"; "for the fool out of his abundance speaketh": as there is
abundance of folly in him, there is much delivered out by him; and where
there is abundance of wickedness in the heart, if the grace of God is
wanting to restrain it, much of it will come out by the lips; as is a
man's heart, ordinarily is his language.

[Matthew 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 12:35</span></span>

A good man, out of the good treasure of the heart,.... "A good man", is
a regenerated man, one that is renewed by the Spirit of God, a believer
in Christ, a sincere lover of him, and one that follows him, wheresoever
he goes, and who has the grace of God implanted in him: for "the good
treasure the heart", is not what he is naturally possessed of, but what
is put into him: and is no other than the superabundant grace of God, or
that grace for grace, which he has received out of Christ's fulness, and
the rich experience of it he is blessed with: and may well be called a
"treasure"; for as a treasure is a collection of riches, so this
consists of various graces, each of which is more precious than gold,
silver, and precious stones; a "good" one, both from the quality and
quantity of it; and "of the heart", though this is left out in many
copies, from the seat and subject of it; and out of this the gracious
man

bringeth forth good things; tells his experience, speaks of what God has
done for his soul; says many things to the glory of the grace of God; of
the person, offices, blood, righteousness, and fulness of Christ; and of
the operations and influences of the blessed Spirit; and which are
pleasant, profitable, useful, and edifying to the saints:

and an evil man, out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.
The "evil man", is a man as he was born; who is wholly flesh, carnal,
and in a state of nature; destitute of the Spirit, and having no
principle of grace in him: "the evil treasure", is the corruption of his
nature, the desperate wickedness of his heart; and those swarms of
lusts, and all manner of sin that dwell there; from whence are
continually proceeding evil and corrupt communications, which not only
defile himself, but others; and among the rest, not only vain words and
unprofitable talk, but blasphemies against God, Christ, and the blessed
Spirit; all which men will be accountable for another day.

[Matthew 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 12:36</span></span>

But I say unto you,.... This form of speaking is used, the more strongly
to asseverate the truth of what is after said; and the rather, because
men are apt to indulge a liberty with their tongues; fancying no great
crime is committed, when only words are spoken, and no facts done;

that every idle word that a man shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment. By an "idle word" is meant, what the
Jews call, , "light conversation", and , "vain discourse", as the Hebrew
Gospel of Munster reads it here; frothy language, unprofitable talk,
which, though it does not directly hurt God or man, yet is of no use to
speaker or hearer; and yet even this, in the last general and awful
judgment, if not forgiven, and repented of, must be accounted for; and
much more such horrid blasphemies the Pharisees had vented against
Christ, and the Spirit of Christ. The Jews (d) have a saying pretty much
like this,

"That even , "for any light conversation", which passes between a man
and his wife, he shall "be brought to judgment".''

\(d\) R. Jonah apud L. Capell. in loc.

[Matthew 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 12:37</span></span>

For by thy words thou shalt be justified,.... Theophylact seems to take
these words to be a passage of Scripture cited by Christ, in proof of
what he had said, but does not point to any; nor is any such Scripture
to be found. They are rather proverbial expressions, in common use among
the Jews; or refer to the usual methods of proceeding in courts of
judicature, upon the acknowledgments and confessions of persons.

"Says Resh Lakish (e), such an one and such an one, they justify; and
such an one and such an one, they condemn. R. Eliezer replies, , "by
their words such an one and such an one are justified".''

The gloss upon it is,

"upon hearing the difference there is between them, and between their
words, they are justified.''

Our Lord's meaning is, that not only works and actions, but words of all
sorts, will come into account in the day of judgment, and will be
evidences for, or against a man, to acquit or condemn him:

and by thy words thou shalt be condemned: according to these, the
sentence of justification, or of condemnation, will be pronounced; as
these will appear to be evidences for, or against a man's being in a
state of grace and righteousness: thus for instance, a man that has
spoken for Christ, and has freely confessed that all his hope of
justification before God, and acceptance with him, is solely upon the
account of the righteousness of Christ imputed; such a man will be
declared a justified man according to the tenor of his own words: on the
other hand, a man that has spoken hard speeches against Christ, and his
righteousness; declaring he has no dependence on it, expects no
justification by it; he will be convinced of these ungodly sayings, and
out of his own mouth will be condemned. Some have thought, that Christ
here strikes at a notion which obtained among the Jews, that little or
no account would be taken of a man's words in the day of judgment;
provided his life and actions were good, and regular; but whatever were
the sentiments of the Pharisees, or of any of Christ's present hearers,
it is certain, that it is the opinion of Jewish writers, that words, as
well as actions, will be accounted for hereafter: they say (f),

"When a man dies, he lifts up his eyes and sees two come to him, and
write before him all that he has done in this world, , "and all that has
proceeded out of his mouth", , "and he gives an account for all"; and a
little after, , "all the words" of a man in this world, are prepared
before him, and not one of them lost; and in the hour he goes to his
grave, they are all set before him.''

\(e\) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 30. 1. (f) Zohar in Num. fol. 53. 2.

[Matthew 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 12:38</span></span>

Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered,.... Not the same
that charged him with casting out devils, by the prince of devils; but
others, that were present, as appears from [Luk
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016) and who do not take upon them to
make a proper reply to what he had said, or return an answer to that,
but address him on another account; being willing to divert the
discourse, and try what they could do with him in another, and more
gentle and crafty way; saying, master, not fellow, magician, Samaritan,
thou that hast a devil, and casts out devils by Beelzebub, and art a
devil, and Beelzebub himself; but doctor, teacher, allowing him, at
least, in a flattering way, that he was an instructor of mankind, though
they would not own him to be a prophet, unless he would give such signs,
as would make it appear he was one; hence they say,

we would see a sign from thee: that is, a sign from heaven, as they
desired at another time, [Mat 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)
and, as Luke says, they did now, [Luk
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016) they had seen a sign from him on
earth, in the cure of the man that had a withered hand; and another, in
dispossessing the devil out of the man, that was blind and dumb; but
these they looked upon rather as signs from hell, and done by
confederacy with the devil; and therefore desire, or rather, in an
imperious way, demand one from heaven, where they thought Satan had not
such power, as on earth; and where there could not be such collusion and
deception, as they wickedly imagined were in this last action: they seem
to require some such things to be done, as were on Mount Sinai, at the
giving of the law, when there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick
cloud, and the voice of a trumpet, and some visible appearances of the
divine majesty; and intimate, that if something of this kind was done,
if there was any visible and miraculous appearance in the heavens,
produced by him, they should believe him to be the prophet that was
spoken of, and the true Messiah; but if not, should give no credit to
him: however, this is to be learned from hence, that the Jews, in
Christ's time, expected signs and wonders to be wrought by the Messiah,
in proof of his being so, though now they reject them as needless (g).

\(g\) Maimon. Hilch. Melachim. c. 11. sect. 3.

[Matthew 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 12:39</span></span>

But he answered and said unto them,.... Not to the Pharisees, who were
unworthy of an answer from him; having, in such an imperious manner, and
with a sole view to tempt him, and after such miracles were wrought by
him, required of him a sign from heaven; but to the multitude, the
throng of people gathered thick together on this occasion, see [Mat
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045) he turns himself from the
Scribes and Pharisees, to the common people, and says to them concerning
the former,

an evil and adulterous generation; not only in a spiritual sense, being
degenerated from the faith, religion, and piety of their ancestors; but
literally, which appeared not only in their polygamy, and frequent
divorces on trivial occasions, but by criminal conversation with other
women; see [Joh 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009) and this, with the
Jews themselves, is a character of the generation in which the Messiah
comes: for they say (h),

"that just when the Messiah comes, or in the age the son of David comes,
"impudence shall be increased", corn and wine shall be dear, the
government shall be heretics, , "and the synagogue shall become a
brothel house".''

Their meaning is, that the chief magistrates should be Sadducees, and
those that pretended to religion and holiness would be adulterers, which
was now the case. Their writings (i) frequently speak of the increase
and abounding of adulteries, under the second temple, and about this
time; which obliged Jochanan ben Zaccai and the sanhedrim, to leave off
the use of the bitter waters.

Seeketh after a sign; this is perfectly Talmudic language, the language
of the Jews (k).

"The disciples of R. Jose ben Kismai, asked him, when the Son of David
came? He replied, I am afraid, lest , "ye should seek of me a sign";
they say unto him, we will not "seek of thee a sign".''

This the Jews sought of Christ, time after time; not content with one,
sought another, though such wonderful ones were wrought, which most
fully demonstrated him to be the Messiah; and therefore he would not
indulge this temper in them; but declared, that

there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas.
Not that no miracles should afterwards be wrought amongst them; for,
after this, many wondrous works were done by Christ; but no such signs
should be given they desired, not one from heaven; but one particularly
should be given them, out of the earth, and should be, not for their
conviction, but condemnation; and would seem very much like that which
was done to the prophet Jonas, or Jonah; for so is his name in the
Hebrew language, the other being the Greek termination of it.

\(h\) Misn. Sota c. 9. sect. 15. T. Bab. Sanhed. fol. 97. 1. (i) Misn.
Sota, c. 9. sect. 9. & Maimon. Hilch. Sota, c. 3. sect. 19. (k) T. Bab.
Sanhedrim, fol. 98. 1. so , "seeketh a sign", Shemot Rabba, Parash. 9.
fol. 97. 2.

[Matthew 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 12:40</span></span>

For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly,....
Or "in the belly of a great fish", as is said, [Jon
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#017) for that it was a whale, is not
there said, nor is it certain it was; nor from the smallness of its
swallow, is it thought probable it should; nor does the word here used,
necessarily imply one, but some large fish; nor are there whales in the
Phoenician Sea: it might be a kind of a sea dog, called Carcharias, and
sometimes Lamia, or Lamina, from its vast swallow; in which whole men;
even in coats of mail, have been found. However, be it what it will,
Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of it; which agrees
with the account in the above mentioned place, and is the sign Christ
speaks of in the foregoing verse; and a very great sign and miracle it
was, that being swallowed down by such a fish, he should remain in the
belly of it three days and three nights, as one dead; for, without a
miracle, he could not have lived an hour; and on the third day, as one
raised from the dead, be cast out of it upon the dry land; which was a
very eminent type of the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, as
appears by what follows. The Jews reckon up several wonders or miracles
in this case of Jonah's; as that a fish was prepared to swallow him up,
and he not drowned in the sea; and that this was prepared for him from
the creation of the world; that he should be three days and three nights
in the fish's belly, and be alive; and that he should retain his senses
and his understanding, so as to be able to pray: they represent him also
as if he was in the state of the dead (l), and that the fish itself was
dead, and was quickened again. According to Josephus, after he had been
carried 250 miles in the Hellespont of the Euxine Sea, he was cast
ashore (m).

So shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth. That Christ means himself by the "son of man", there is no
reason to doubt; and his being laid in a tomb, dug out of a rock, is
sufficient to answer this phrase, "the heart of the earth", in
distinction from the surface of it; but some difficulty arises about the
time of his continuing there, and the prediction here made agreeable to
the type: for it was on the sixth day of the week, we commonly call
"Friday", towards the close, on the day of the preparation for the
sabbath, and when the sabbath drew on, that the body of Christ was laid
in the sepulchre; where it lay all the next day, which was the sabbath
of the Jews, and what we commonly call "Saturday"; and early on the
first of the week, usually called "Sunday", or the Lord's day, he rose
from the dead; so that he was but one whole day, and part of two, in the
grave. To solve this difficulty, and set the matter in a clear light,
let it be observed, that the three days and three nights, mean three
natural days, consisting of day and night, or twenty four hours, and are
what the Greeks call "night days"; but the Jews have no other way of
expressing them, but as here; and with them it is a well known rule, and
used on all occasions, as in the computation of their feasts and times
of mourning, in the observance of the passover, circumcision, and divers
purifications, that , "a part of a day is as the whole" (n): and so,
whatever was done before sun setting, or after, if but an hour, or ever
so small a time, before or after it, it was reckoned as the whole
preceding, or following day; and whether this was in the night part, or
day part of the night day, or natural day, it mattered not, it was
accounted as the whole night day: by this rule, the case here is easily
adjusted; Christ was laid in the grave towards the close of the sixth
day, a little before sun setting, and this being a part of the night day
preceding, is reckoned as the whole; he continued there the whole night
day following, being the seventh day; and rose again early on the first
day, which being after sun setting, though it might be even before sun
rising, yet being a part of the night day following, is to be esteemed
as the whole; and thus the son of man was to be, and was three days and
three nights in the grave; and which was very easy to be understood by
the Jews; and it is a question whether Jonas was longer in the belly of
the fish.

\(l\) R. David Kimchi & Jarchi, in Jonah i. 17. & ii. 1. Zohar in Exod.
fol. 20. 3. & 78. 3. (m) Antiq. 1. 9. c. 18. (n) T. Hieros. Pesach. fol.
31. 2. T. Bab. Moed. Katon, fol. 16. 2. 17. 2. 19. 2. & 20. 2. Bechorot,
fol. 20. 2. & 21. 1, Nidda, fol. 33. 1. Maimon. Hilch. Ebel, c. 7. sect.
1, 2, 3. Aben Ezra in Lev. xii. 3.

[Matthew 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 12:41</span></span>

The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment,.... Alluding either to the
custom and practice of witnesses, who rise up from their seats, and
stand, when they give in their testimonies in a court of judicature; or
else, referring to the time of the general resurrection from the dead,
at the last day, when these men shall rise from the dead, and stand in
judgment

with this generation; shall rise when they do, and stand before the
judgment seat together, and be against them,

and shall condemn them; not as judges of them, but by their example and
practices, which will be brought above board, and observed as an
aggravation of the guilt and condemnation of the Jews: so the lives and
conversations of the saints condemn the wicked now, and will do
hereafter: in this sense the word is used in the Talmud (o); where
having related how Hillell, though a poor man, and R. Eleazar, though a
rich man, studied in the law, and Joseph, though youthful, gay, and
beautiful, withstood the importunities of his mistress, it is observed,
that Hillell "condemned" the poor; and R. Eleazar ben Harsum condemned
the rich; and Joseph condemned the wicked: in like manner, the Ninevites
will condemn the Jews,

because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; a mere man, a single
prophet, a stranger to these men, who only preached, and wrought no
miracle among them, and his stay with them was very short; whereas the
men of this generation had the Son of God "sent" to them, had the
ministry of his apostles, and of John the Baptist, and a variety of
miracles wrought among them; and all this for a series and course of
years, and yet remained impenitent: the chief aggravation of their
impenitence, and what made it the more astonishing was, that so great a
person was in the midst of them;

and behold, a greater than Jonas is here; meaning himself, who was
greater in person, office, doctrine, miracles, life, obedience,
sufferings, death, and resurrection from the dead. The Ninevites, though
a Heathenish people, having but forty days allowed them to repent in,
upon Jonas's preaching, repented immediately; whereas the Jews, though
God's: professing people, and having forty years, from Christ's
resurrection, allowed them to repent in, yet did not at all; and though
the repentance of the Ninevites was but an external one, in dust and
ashes, yet it was what secured them from temporal ruin; as the Jews
would have been saved from the destruction that came upon their temple,
city, and nation, had they repented but as they did.

\(o\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 35. 2.

[Matthew 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 12:42</span></span>

The queen of the south,.... Called the queen of Sheba, [Kg1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001). Sheba was one of the sons of
Joktan, a grandchild of Arphaxad, who settled in the southern parts of
Arabia: hence this queen is called the queen of the south. Sheba is by
the Targumist (p) called Zemargad: and this queen the queen of Zemargad:
she goes by different names. According to some, her name was Maqueda
(q), and, as others say, Balkis (r): a Jewish chronologer (s) tells us,
that the queen of Sheba, who is called Nicolaa, of the kingdom of Jaman,
or the south, came to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, and gave him much
riches: and Josephus (t) calls her Nicaulis, queen of Egypt and
Ethiopia; of whom it is here said, that she

shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn
it: the meaning is, as before; that she shall rise from the dead, and
stand as a witness against that generation at the day of judgment, and,
by her example and practices, which will then be produced, condemn them,
or aggravate their condemnation:

for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth; an hyperbolical
expression, meaning a great way off from a far country, a very distant
part of the world from Jerusalem, , "to hear the wisdom of Solomon"; the
very phrase used by the above Jewish (u) writer.

And behold, a greater than Solomon is here; one that was infinitely
greater than Solomon was, in everything; so particularly in that, in
which he excelled others, and on the account of which the queen of the
south came unto him, namely, wisdom: for he is the wisdom of God, in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The Jews
themselves (w) own, that the king, meaning the Messiah, that shall be
raised up of the seed of David, , "shall be a greater master of wisdom",
or "wiser than Solomon". Now what an aggravation of the condemnation of
the Jews will this be another day, that a Gentile woman, living in a
foreign and distant land, should, upon the fame of the wisdom of
Solomon, leave her own kingdom and country, and come to Jerusalem, to
hear his wise discourses about things natural, civil, and moral; and yet
the Jews, who had a greater than Solomon in the midst of them, and had
no need to take much pains to come to the sight and hearing of him, yet
rejected him as the Messiah, blasphemed his miracles, and despised his
ministry; though it was concerned about things of a spiritual and
evangelic nature, and the eternal welfare of immortal souls.

\(p\) In 1 Chron. i. 9. & 2 Chron. ix. 1. (q) Ludolph. Hist. Aethiop. 1.
2. c. 3. & not. in Claud. Confess. sect. 1. (r) Pocock. Specimen Hist.
Arab. p. 59. (s) Juchasin, fol. 136. 1. (t) Antiqu. 1. 8. c. 2. (u)
Juchasin, fol. 136. 1. (w) Maimon. Hilchot. Teshuba, c. 9. sect. 2.

[Matthew 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 12:43</span></span>

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man,.... By "the unclean"
spirit, is meant Satan, the old serpent, the devil; who by the Jews, is
wont to be called as here, , "the unclean spirit" (x); and that, because
he is by sin become so, though he was not so originally; is the cause of
uncleanness in men, and delights in unclean persons, places, and things:
his "going out of a man", is not to be understood of his being
dispossessed of the bodies of men; nor of the ejection of him, and his
going by force, through the power of divine grace, out of the souls of
men; but either of his leaving the Jews for a while, in some sort,
whilst Christ and the Gospel continued among them; and of his going out
of the Scribes and Pharisees; not really, but putting on another form,
appearing as an angel of light, and under the guise of holiness and
righteousness: and so he may be said to go out of men, when any outward
reformation is made in them; and they take up a profession of religion,
though destitute of the grace of God:

he walketh through dry places; referring to a prevailing notion, that
unclean spirits walk in, and haunt, desert and desolate places; and may
have regard to the Gentiles, among whom Satan might go, seeking rest and
satisfaction among them, in their idolatries and other wickedness, till
he was there also disturbed by the Gospel sent among them: or by these
"dry places" may be meant the saints, whom he takes his walks among, in
order, by tempting, to distress them, being secure of pharisaical
persons: and these may be so called, not for what they are in
themselves; not because the sun of righteousness shines upon them: or
because thirsty and desirous of divine and spiritual things; much less
as if they had no moisture, since they have a well of living water in
them, and are watered by the Lord; or were unfruitful, as dry places
usually are; but for what they were to the unclean spirit, there being
nothing in their grace, and the exercise of it, and in their spiritual
performances, grateful to him; nothing to quench his thirst, and satisfy
his sinful appetite; nor were there in them the mire and dirt of
iniquity to roll in, as in unregenerate persons: wherefore he is
represented as

seeking rest, and findeth none: his view in walking in these places, or
among such persons, is rest; not the rest of the saints, he seeks their
disturbance, but his own rest; which is to do all the mischief he can,
by stirring up corruption, tempting to sin, and discouraging the
exercise of grace; but is not able to do so much mischief as he would,
and so cannot find the rest he seeks for, nor satisfy his envious,
spiteful, and malicious temper: and this being the case, it follows,

\(x\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 77. 2.

[Matthew 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 12:44</span></span>

Then he said, I will return into my house,.... Into the land of Judea,
particularly into the Scribes and Pharisees, outward professors of
religion; who, notwithstanding their outward reformation, and great
pretensions to holiness, are Satan's house still: he has a property in
them, a claim upon them; and though he says,

from whence I came out, yet he never really and properly quitted it,
only seemingly, and in appearance; and therefore his returning is only
throwing off the guise, and reassuming his former character, as a
vicious and unclean spirit.

And when he is come, he findeth it empty: not empty of sin: this puts me
in mind of a passage in the Misna (y), where it is said, that on a fast
day,

"when they stand in prayer, they cause to descend, or go before the ark,
an old man, who is used (to prayer,) whose children, , "and his house,
are empty", so that his heart is perfect in prayer,''

or entirely at leisure for it. The commentators (z) on that phrase, "his
house is empty", note, that he was empty of sin, and free from it, and
one concerning whom an evil report had not gone forth from his youth:
but such was not this house; it was empty of God, of the true knowledge
of him, of the fear of him, and love to him; of Christ, of faith in him,
affection for him, and hope on him; of the Spirit of God, and of his
graces, and of spiritual, internal religion, and powerful godliness.

Swept; not with the Spirit of grace convincing of sin, righteousness,
and judgment; but with the besom of an outward reformation:

and garnished; not with internal grace, which makes saints all glorious
within; but with secret lusts and corruptions, which rendered it an
agreeable habitation for this unclean spirit; and at most, with some
show of morality, a little negative holiness, or abstinence from outward
acts of sin, an observance of some external rites and ceremonies, and a
few hypocritical performances of fasting and prayer; which Satan can
very well bear with, so long as the heart is empty of spiritual grace,
and till an opportunity offers of throwing off all appearance of good.

\(y\) Taanith, c. 2. sect. 2. (z) Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Matthew 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 12:45</span></span>

Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits,.... This is
said in allusion to, and in imitation of the seven spirits before the
throne; or may denote a large number of devils, seven being a number of
perfection; or else the various corruptions of a man's heart, the swarms
of internal lusts which are there stirred up by Satan;

more wicked than himself, as these are more pernicious to man, than the
devil himself:

and they enter in and dwell there; that is, though they were there
before, now they exert and show themselves, and such men appear to be
under the power and government of them; when leaving their seeming
religion and holiness, they return like the dog to the vomit, and the
swine to the wallowing in the mire.

And the last state of that man is worse than the first: he becomes more
wicked than ever he was, before he made pretensions to religion; as such
apostates generally are more extravagant in sinning, and are seldom or
ever recovered by repentance, and their last end is eternal damnation;
see [Pe2 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020)

even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation. This parable fitly
suited them, the Scribes and Pharisees, and the men of that generation,
from whom in some measure the unclean spirit might be said to depart
through the doctrine, and miracles of Christ, to go into the Gentile
world; but being followed there with the preaching of the Gospel by the
apostles, returns to the Jews, and fills them with more malice,
blasphemy, and blindness, than ever, which issued in their utter ruin
and destruction; of which this parable may be justly thought to be
prophetical.

[Matthew 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 12:46</span></span>

While he yet talked to the people,.... Upon these subjects, which so
nearly concerned the Scribes and Pharisees, and which could not fail of
drawing upon him their resentment and ill will.

Behold his mother and his brethren: by "his mother" is meant Mary; but
who are "his brethren", is not so easy to say: some are of opinion, that
Joseph had children by Mary, who are here meant; but it is more
generally believed, that these were either the sons of Joseph by a
former wife, whose name is said to be Escha; or rather, Mary's sister's
sons, the wife of Cleophas, the cousin-germans of Christ, it being usual
with the Jews to call such kindred brethren; and so they might be James,
Joses, Simon, and Judas: these

stood without: for Christ was within doors, not in a synagogue, as
Piscator thought, but in an house; see [Mat
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001) and his mother and brethren stood
without doors, either because they could not get in for the throng of
the people; or because they would not, it not being proper to make all
within acquainted with what they had to say to him:

desiring to speak with him; not with a pure view to interrupt him in his
work, or to divert him from it, lest he should overspend himself; nor
from a principle of ambition and vain glory, to show that they were
related to him, and that he was at their beck and command; but rather,
to observe unto him the danger he exposed himself to, by the freedom he
took with the Pharisees in his discourses, and probably to acquaint him
with some conspiracies formed against him.

[Matthew 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 12:47</span></span>

Then one said unto him,.... Either one of his auditors, or, as the
Ethiopic version has it, one "of his disciples": the other evangelists
intimate, that more than one acquainted him with it; which is easily
reconciled: for, upon his mother and brethren calling to him, as Mark
says they did; first one and then another, and more, might apprise him
of it, and especially as he did not immediately go out unto them.

Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak
with thee: whether this message was carried at the request of the mother
and brethren of Christ, and delivered in a simple manner, and with an
honest intention; or whether it was officiously done, and with a design
to interrupt him, and to try him, whether he would prefer his natural
relations, and their society and conversation, to the spiritual work in
which he was engaged, in doing good to the souls of men, is not certain;
the latter seems probable, from the following words, and conduct of
Christ. Some copies read, "desiring to see thee".

[Matthew 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 12:48</span></span>

But he answered and said unto him that told him,.... Of his mother and
brethren being without doors, desiring, and waiting to speak to him,

Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? These questions are put, not
as if he himself was ignorant who were his mother or his brethren; or as
suggesting as if he had none; or as denying that these were in such a
relation to him; or as casting any slight upon them; or as intending to
teach men disrespect to parents and kindred, according to the flesh; but
as displeased with the man, or men, for interrupting him in his work;
and to let them know, that the business of his heavenly Father was
preferred by him to any his natural relations could have with him; and
that he might have an opportunity of pointing out who were his relations
in a spiritual sense.

[Matthew 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 12:49</span></span>

And he stretched forth his hand towards his disciples,.... By whom are
meant, not only the twelve, but all others present, who truly believed
in him, both men and women; and who might sit near him and together, and
whom, by this motion of his hand, he pointed out as his spiritual
relations, to the multitude that sat round him:

and said, behold my mother, and my brethren; in whose hearts he was
formed, and who were the children of God by adopting grace, and so his
brethren; and were as dear to him as his mother and brethren. It is
reasonable to suppose, that when he said, "behold my mother", and, as in
the following verse, "sister"; he might stretch forth his hand
particularly, toward the pious and religious women that believed in him,
and ministered to him of their substance, who might be now present; such
as Mary Magdalene, Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and
Susanna, and others; since these are mentioned by Luke in the same
chapter in which this passage stands in his Gospel; and when he said
"behold my brethren", he might point directly to the twelve, and the
rest of the men that believed in him, and followed him.

[Matthew 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 12:50</span></span>

For whosoever shall do the will of my Father,.... This is not to be
understood of a perfect obedience to the will of God, revealed in his
righteous law; for since this cannot be performed by any mere man, no
one could be in such a spiritual relation to Christ: but of the
obedience of faith to the will of God, revealed in the Gospel; which is
to believe in Christ, and have everlasting life; see [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040). This is the will of Christ's
Father,

which is in heaven, and which is good news from heaven, to sinners on
earth; and which Christ came down from heaven to do, and to declare to
the children of men: such as "hear the word of God and do it", as Luke
says, [Luk 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#021) that is, hear the
Gospel, understand and believe it, and become obedient to the faith of
it; these are in this near manner related to Christ, evidentially and
openly, as well as those who were now present:

the same is my brother, and sister, and mother; as dear to me, as such
are to those, to whom they stood thus related in the flesh: and these
natural relations serve to convey some ideas of that relation, union,
nearness, and communion, there are between Christ and his people; all
these relative characters may be observed in the book of Solomon's Song,
to which our Lord may be reasonably thought to have respect; see [Sol
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 13](mat013)

</div>
