<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh008)  [Next](neh010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NEHEMIAH 9

In this chapter we have an account of a fast kept by the Jews, which was
observed, as by outward acts of humiliation, so by confession of sin,
reading the law, and worshipping the Lord, [Neh
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001) and of a long prayer that the
Levites made, in which they celebrate the divine perfections, take
notice of various instances of the goodness of God to the people of
Israel, acknowledge their manifold transgressions, observe the Lord's
correction of them for them, in which they own he was righteous, [Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 9:1</span></span>

Now in the twenty fourth day of this month,.... The seventh month, the
month Tisri or September, two days after the feast of tabernacles was
ended:

the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with
sackclothes, and earth upon them; which were all outward tokens of
mourning and humiliation, see [Joe 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008)
which they could not show during the festival; but that being over, they
return to it, see [Neh 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009).

[Nehemiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 9:2</span></span>

And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers,.... Such
as were genuine Israelites, of the seed of Abraham, who had married
wives of the Gentiles, strangers to the commonwealth of Israel, either
before the reformation by Ezra, not being then discovered, or had fallen
into this evil since; but now, on the reading of the law, were convinced
of it, and so separated themselves from such wives, which was a proof of
the truth of their repentance:

and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers:
particularly their taking of strange wives, which their fathers had also
done, and set them a bad example, which they had followed; of standing
and confessing, see [Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013).

[Nehemiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 9:3</span></span>

And they stood up in their place,.... In the outward court of the
temple, where men used to stand when they prayed and confessed their
sins: and read in the book of the law of the Lord their God; that they
might the better know the mind and will of God, and do their duty: this
they did

one fourth part of the day; the space of three hours, from sun rising,
or six o'clock in the morning, to the time of the morning sacrifice,
which was about nine o'clock:

and another fourth part they confessed; the goodness of God to them, and
the sins they had been guilty of:

and worshipped the Lord their God; bowed down before him in prayer and
supplication, and so spent three hours more, which reached to noon or
twelve o'clock; and from thence to three o'clock, about the time of the
evening sacrifice, and from thence to sun setting, or six o'clock, and
so spent the whole day in the above exercises alternately.

[Nehemiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 9:4</span></span>

Then stood up upon the stairs of the Levites,.... On an ascent; an
elevated place where the Levites used to stand when they sang at the
time of sacrifice, and where they might be seen and heard by the people:

Jeshua and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and
Chenani; who seem to be all Levites, see [Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007),

and cried with a loud voice unto the Lord their God; praying with great
fervency, and making bitter lamentation for the sins of the people and
their own.

[Nehemiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 9:5</span></span>

Then the Levites, Jeshua,.... Or, then the Levites, even Jeshua:

and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, and
Pethahiah; the same as before, with a little variation of their names,
and perhaps some of them might have two names:

and said; to the men that stood and confessed their sins, [Neh
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002)

stand up; for though they are before said to stand, yet, through shame
and confusion of face, and awe of the Divine Majesty, might be fallen on
their faces to the ground:

and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever; for all the great and
good things he had done for them, notwithstanding their sins; and
particularly for his pardoning grace and mercy they had reason to hope
for:

and blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing
and praise: the glory of which name, nature, and perfections of his,
cannot be set forth by the highest praises of men, and the largest
ascriptions of blessing and honour to him.

[Nehemiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 9:6</span></span>

Thou, even thou art Lord alone,.... Whose name alone is Jehovah, the one
only true and living God:

thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host; the
airy and starry heavens, and the sun, moon, and stars in them, and the
third heaven, the seat of God, angels, and saints:

the earth, and all things that are therein; men, beasts, trees, metals,
minerals, &c.

the seas, and all that is therein; fishes, sea plants, &c. see [Act
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024),

and thou preservest them all; they consist in thee, and are upheld in
their being by thee, [Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)

and the host of heaven worshipped thee; not the sun, moon, and stars,
only in their way, [Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002) but the
angels chiefly, [Heb 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006).

[Nehemiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 9:7</span></span>

Thou art the Lord the God, who didst choose Abram,.... From among the
Chaldeans, and out of his father's family:

and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees; by calling him from
thence, of which see [Gen 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028), to
which may be added what Amama (x) on that place observes; that some
think that the sacred fire, which the Chaldeans worshipped, was kept in
this city, from whence it was called Ur, that being worshipped by them
and by the Assyrians under the name of Ur (y):

and gavest him the name of Abraham; which was changed when the covenant
of circumcision was given him, [Gen
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005).

\(x\) Anti-barbar. Biblic. l. 3. p. 652. (y) Fortunati Schaech.
Elaeochrism. Myrothec. l. 1. c. 9. col. 44.

[Nehemiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 9:8</span></span>

And foundest his heart faithful before thee,.... A true believer in his
word and promises, [Gen 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006) and
closely attached to the fear of him, and observance of his commands, as
abundantly appeared in the trial of him, in offering up his son, [Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001),

and madest a covenant with him, to give the land of the Canaanites, the
Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the
Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his seed; not to him personally, but
to his posterity, at least including and chiefly designing them; of
which covenant see [Gen 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018),

and hast performed thy words, for thou art righteous; in all his ways
and works, faithful to his promise, a covenant keeping God, and who kept
and fulfilled this covenant, assisting Joshua to conquer the land of
Canaan, and put Israel into the possession of it.

[Nehemiah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 9:9</span></span>

And didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt,.... The hard
bondage in which their lives were made bitter; and was not a mere
spectator of it, but looked upon them in it with pity and compassion,
and sent them a deliverer, [Exo 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023)

and heardest their cry by the Red sea; which was before them, and the
rocks on both sides of them, and the host of Pharaoh behind, pressing
upon them, when he heard them, and wrought salvation for them, [Exo
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010).

[Nehemiah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 9:10</span></span>

And shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants,
and on all the people of his land,.... By inflicting the ten plagues
upon them:

for thou knowest that they dealt proudly against them; behaved haughtily
to them, and despised them, see [Exo
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011)

so didst thou get thee a name, as it is this day; displayed his power on
Pharaoh, and his goodness to Israel, the fame of which reached all over
the world, and continued to that day, see [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016).

[Nehemiah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 9:11</span></span>

And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the
midst of the sea on dry land,.... That is, the Israelites, see [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021),

and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps; with great ease, and
with indignation, meaning the Egyptians, that pursued hotly after them,
and were thrown into the sea:

as a stone into the mighty waters; where they sunk and perished, see
[Exo 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 9:12</span></span>

Moreover, thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar,.... The
Israelites, to shelter them from the heat of the sun in a dry and barren
wilderness:

and in the night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way
wherein they should go; through a trackless desert, see [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021).

[Nehemiah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 9:13</span></span>

Thou camest down also upon Mount Sinai,.... By some visible tokens of
his presence, as a cloud, fire, smoke, &c. which must be understood
consistent with his omniscience, see [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018),

and spakest with them from heaven; the decalogue or ten commandments,
[Exo 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001),

and gavest them right judgments and true laws, good statutes and
commandments; both judicial and ceremonial, which were of excellent use
to them in their civil and ecclesiastical polity; these were not spoken
to Israel, but given to Moses on the mount, to be delivered to them.

[Nehemiah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 9:14</span></span>

And madest known unto them thy holy sabbath,.... Which was not made
known to others, and was peculiar to the Jewish nation, and a privilege
granted to them, to have rest corporeal and spiritual, typical of the
rest in Christ:

and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses
thy servant; moral, ceremonial, and judicial, such as other nations had
not, [Deu 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008).

[Nehemiah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 9:15</span></span>

And gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger,.... To satisfy that,
meaning the manna, [Exo 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003)

and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock, for their thirst;
to quench it; this was done both quickly after they came out of the land
of Egypt, and a little before their entrance into the land of Canaan,
see [Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)

and promisedst them that they should go in to possess the land which
thou hadst sworn to give them; which oath was made to them and to their
fathers also, see [Num 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030).

[Nehemiah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 9:16</span></span>

But they and our fathers dealt proudly,.... Behaved in a haughty manner
towards God, their kind benefactor:

and hardened their necks; refused to take the yoke of his law, as
refractory oxen, that withdraw their necks from the yoke:

and hearkened not to thy commandments; to do them, though they promised
they would, [Exo 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007).

[Nehemiah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 9:17</span></span>

And refused to obey,.... Though exhorted, admonished, and threatened,
such was their obstinacy:

neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; in
delivering them at the Red sea, in raining manna about them, and giving
them water out of the rock:

but hardened their necks; see the preceding verse:

and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their bondage;
they not only proposed it, but determined upon it, which is reckoned the
same as if they had done it, see [Num
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004),

but thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness; as he had proclaimed his name before
Moses, and as the whole of his conduct towards the people of Israel
abundantly shewed, see [Exo 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)

and forsookest them not; when in the wilderness, where otherwise they
must have perished, but still fed and protected them, notwithstanding
their provocations.

[Nehemiah 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 9:18</span></span>

Yea, when they had made them a molten calf,.... In imitation of the
Apis, or ox of the Egyptians:

and said, this is thy god that brought thee out of Egypt; or the image
of thy god, as the Arabic version, see [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004),

and had wrought great provocations; of all which nothing was greater
than idolatry.

[Nehemiah 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 9:19</span></span>

Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the
wilderness,.... Where no supply could be had, if he had cast them off,
see [Neh 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017),

the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in
the way; which, if it had, they would have been scorched by the heat of
the sun:

neither the pillar of fire by night, to show them light, and the way
wherein they should go; or otherwise they would have lost their way, and
not have known which way to have gone.

[Nehemiah 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 9:20</span></span>

Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them,.... In the knowledge
of the laws delivered to them; the spirit of prophecy, according to Ben
Melech, and which Aben Ezra interprets of the spirit put upon the
seventy elders, [Num 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017),

and withheldest not thy manna from their mouth; all the while they were
in the wilderness, until they came to Canaan's land; called the Lord's
manna, because prepared by him, and given by him to them; a part or
portion and gift from the Lord, as Ben Melech, from whence it had its
name, see [Exo 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015)

and gavest them water for their thirst; which seems to have respect to
the last rock stricken for them, after their many provocations in the
wilderness, [Num 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011).

[Nehemiah 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">neh 9:21</span></span>

Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so that they
lacked nothing,.... As not for food, so neither for raiment, as follows:

their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not; of which see
[Deu 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 9:22</span></span>

Moreover, thou gavest them kingdoms and nations,.... The two kingdoms of
Sihon and Og, and the seven nations of Canaan:

and didst divide them into corners; or "corner"; into every corner of
the land of Canaan, so that they possessed the whole of it, a few cities
excepted; Jarchi interprets it of one corner, that they might not be
mixed with the people of the land, but be all together in one place; but
Aben Ezra understands it of the Canaanites, of their being divided and
scattered into corners, when they fled from the Israelites; but the
former sense seems best:

so they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of
Heshbon; or "eren", or "namely" (z), "the land of the king of Heshbon";
for Sihon was king of Heshbon, and so the land the same:

and the land of Og king of Bashan; those lands both lay on the other
side Jordan, and were possessed by the tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the
half tribe of Manasseh.

\(z\) So Piscator, Patrick, Rambachius.

[Nehemiah 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 9:23</span></span>

Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven,....
Fulfilling the promise made to Abraham, [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005) their number when they came out
of Egypt, and just before they entered into the land of Canaan, being
upwards of 600,000 men, besides women and children, [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)

and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised
to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it; the land of
Canaan, promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their seed, into
which the Lord brought them by Joshua; he was the instrument, but the
thing was of God.

[Nehemiah 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">neh 9:24</span></span>

So the children went in and possessed the land,.... Not the fathers of
the Israelites that came out of Egypt, they died in the wilderness, all
excepting two, but their children, which seems to be the reason of this
manner of expression, see [Num 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030)

and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the
Canaanites; by means of Joshua, the general of the armies of Israel;
there is an elegant paronomania in the word for "subdue", and the
Canaanites, which cannot be expressed in our language:

and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of
the land, that they might do with them as they would; no less than
thirty one kings, see [Jos 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#009).

[Nehemiah 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">neh 9:25</span></span>

And they took strong cities,.... Such as, in an hyperbolical way, are
said to be walled up to heaven, [Deu
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028)

and a fat land; of a good and fruitful soil, abounding with all good
things, [Deu 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007)

and possessed houses full of all goods; ready built and furnished for
them, both with good provisions and good furniture:

wells digged; to supply them with water:

vineyards, and olive yards, and fruit trees in abundance; which they
planted not:

and they did eat, and were filled, and became fat; in body, though in
mind became wanton and wicked; they made their hearts fat, or stupid, as
Aben Ezra interprets it, see [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)

and delighted themselves in thy great goodness; not in praising the Lord
for it, and using it to his honour and glory, but indulged themselves to
luxury and intemperance; though it may be understood of a lawful
pleasure in the enjoyment of the great affluence they were brought into,
which last agrees with what follows.

[Nehemiah 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">neh 9:26</span></span>

Nevertheless, they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee,....
Notwithstanding all these favours and mercies bestowed upon them, which
was great ingratitude:

and cast thy law behind their backs; as of no account, and unworthy of
their regard; that which they should have had continually before their
eyes, as the rule and guide of their actions, they cast behind them, not
caring to look into it, and read it:

and slew thy prophets, which testified against them to turn them to
thee; the prophets that bore a testimony against their sins, admonished
them of them, called heaven and earth to record against them should they
continue in them, and all to turn them from them by repentance to the
Lord; those they were so wroth with on this account as to slay them, see
[Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037),

and they wrought great provocations; serving Baalim and Ashtaroth, and
other gods of the nations, than which nothing was more provoking to the
Lord.

[Nehemiah 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 9:27</span></span>

Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who
vexed them,.... As the kings of Mesopotamia, Moab, Canaan, and others:

and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thee; as they
usually did, [Jdg 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009),

thou heardest them from heaven; and according to thy manifold mercies
thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hands of their
enemies; such were judges, Othniel, Ehud, Barak, Gideon, &c. and this
was, done for them, not on account of their merits, but the abundant
unmerited mercy of the Lord towards them.

[Nehemiah 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">neh 9:28</span></span>

But after they had rest,.... From their enemies, enjoyed their liberty,
and were in prosperity:

they did evil again before thee; relapsed into idolatry:

therefore leftest thou them in the hand of their enemies, so that they
had the dominion over them; as the Philistines had for the space of
forty years, [Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001),

yet when they returned and cried unto thee, thou heardest them from
heaven, and many times didst thou deliver them, according to thy
mercies; this was their case frequently in the times of the judges; they
sinned and fell into the hands of their enemies, then they repented, and
cried to God for help, and he had compassion upon them, and saved them.

[Nehemiah 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">neh 9:29</span></span>

And testifiedst against them,.... By sending prophets to them, to
admonish them of their sins, and remind them of their duty:

that thou mightest bring them again unto thy law; to regard it, and walk
according it:

yet they dealt proudly; with an haughty air rejected the counsel of God:

and hearkened not unto thy commandments; yielded not obedience to them:

but sinned against thy judgments; transgressed his laws, which were so
just, righteous, reasonable, and equitable:

which if a man do, he shall live in them; or by them, in the land of
Canaan, see [Lev 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005),

and withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear;
like oxen, that wriggle and struggle, and draw back, and will not admit
the yoke upon them.

[Nehemiah 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">neh 9:30</span></span>

Yet many years didst thou forbear them,.... Throughout the reigns of
several kings, such was God's longsuffering towards them: or, "thou
didst draw upon them"; that is, his mercy, as Jarchi interprets it; he
drew it out of his heart, and prolonged it towards them:

and testifiedst against them by thy Spirit in thy prophets; who reproved
and admonished them, as they were moved by the Holy Spirit of God in
them, who spoke in his name, and what he suggested to them:

yet they would not give ear; to what the prophets said, and the Spirit
of God in them:

therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands:
people that were lords of many countries, as the Assyrians and
Chaldeans.

[Nehemiah 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">neh 9:31</span></span>

Nevertheless, for thy great mercies' sake, For the displaying of that,
and the glorifying of it, which is so large and exceeding abundant:

thou didst not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; some were left in
the land, and those that were carried captive found favour in the eyes
of those that carried them away, and were suffered to live, and many of
them now had returned to their own land:

for thou art a gracious and merciful God; of which they had abundant
proof and evidence.

[Nehemiah 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">neh 9:32</span></span>

Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who
keepest covenant and mercy,.... The same titles Nehemiah gives to the
Lord, [Neh 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#005) and it may be
reasonably thought the whole prayer is his composure, which was
delivered by him to the Levites:

let not all the trouble seem little before thee; as if it was not
enough; let it be judged sufficient, and no more be added, but mercy
shown; Aben Ezra thinks the word "little" is not to be connected with
"trouble", but with the nearest antecedent "mercy", and so Gussetius
(z); as if the sense was, let not thy mercy be small with thee, but let
it be largely extended along with all the trouble, or at the time when
trouble of every kind

comes upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on
our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the times
of the kings of Assyria unto this day; but this sense is not clear, and
makes it have respect to times to come; whereas it relates to time past,
and to all the trouble and affliction they had met with from the
Assyrian kings, from the time they invaded their land, and carried them
captive, until this very time.

\(z\) Ebr. Comment. p. 937.

[Nehemiah 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">neh 9:33</span></span>

Howbeit, thou art just in all that is brought upon us,.... They own the
justice of God, could not complain of any wrong done them; and had he
shown them no mercy at all, it was but what they deserved:

for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly; he had done
according to the truth of his word of promise, he had faithfully kept
it, but they had transgressed his righteous law.

[Nehemiah 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">neh 9:34</span></span>

Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept
thy law,.... All ranks of men, from the highest to the lowest, had shown
no regard, nor yielded obedience to the holy law of God:

nor hearkened unto thy commandments, and thy testimonies, wherewith thou
didst testify against them; moral and ceremonial, which were a
testification of the will of God to them, and a testimony against them
if they observed them not.

[Nehemiah 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">neh 9:35</span></span>

For they have not served thee in their kingdom,.... When in it, whether
of Israel or of Judah, and when in the most flourishing circumstances:

and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them; amidst all the
prosperity and affluence of good things they enjoyed, which was an
obligation upon them to serve the Lord:

and in the large and fat land which thou gavest before them; the land of
Canaan, a land flowing with milk, which lay open for them, their enemies
being driven out before them, see [Neh
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#025),

neither turned they from their wicked works; their idolatries more
especially.

[Nehemiah 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">neh 9:36</span></span>

Behold, we are servants this day,.... For though they had leave to
return to their land, and rebuild their city and temple, yet they were
still in subjection to the kings of Persia:

and for the land thou gavest unto our fathers, to eat the fruit thereof,
and the good thereof, behold, we are servants in it; though the rightful
owners and proprietors of it by the gift of God to their ancestors, to
hold it and enjoy the good of it, and yet were obliged to pay tribute
for it to the kings of Persia, all excepting priests and Levites; see
[Ezr 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#008).

[Nehemiah 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">neh 9:37</span></span>

And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us,
because of our sins,.... Though a very fruitful land, and brought forth
much, yet not for them, but for foreign kings, that had the sovereignty
over them, and enacted much toll, tribute, and custom from them, which
greatly lessened the profit of the earth to them:

also they have dominion over our bodies; and could oblige them to work
for them, and do any service they should command:

and over our cattle, at their pleasure; to carry burdens for them, or
ride post with them:

and we are in great distress; being servants and tributaries to a
foreign power.

[Nehemiah 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">neh 9:38</span></span>

And because of all this,.... Of all this distress, and that it might be
removed, and be clear of it; or "in all this distress and evil", as
Jarchi and Aben Ezra, in the midst of it all:

we make a sure covenant; or faithfully promise to observe the law of
God, and particularly put away strange wives, and not intermarry with
the people of the land:

and write it; that it may remain and be a testimony against them should
they break it, being their own handwriting:

and our princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it; as witnesses of it,
and thereby binding themselves to observe the same things; their names
that sealed are given in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 10](neh010)

</div>
