<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh012)  [Next](est000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NEHEMIAH 13

This chapter relates the reformation of various abuses crept in among
the Jews by Nehemiah, who removed the Moabites and Ammonites, mixed with
them, [Neh 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001), threw the household
goods of Tobiah out of a chamber of the temple, and restored it to its
former use, [Neh 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#004), took care that
the Levites had their portion given them which had been kept from them,
[Neh 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010) prevented the profanation
of the sabbath by selling goods on that day, [Neh
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015), and put a stop to the marrying
of strange wives, which had prevailed again among them, [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023).

[Nehemiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 13:1</span></span>

On that day,.... Not when the wall of the city was dedicated, nor
quickly after; for it cannot be thought that people should be so
corrupted so soon as this chapter shows; but when Nehemiah had governed
them twelve years, and had been at Babylon, and was returned again, as
appears from [Neh 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006), compared with
[Neh 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001),

they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the people; for from
the time of the reading of the law by Ezra, [Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001) it became a custom to read the law
publicly:

and therein was found written, that the Ammonite and the Moabite should
not come into the congregation of the Lord; that is, be admitted to
marry with any of the people of Israel; See Gill on [Deu
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003).

[Nehemiah 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 13:2</span></span>

Because they met not the children of Israel with bread,.... The same
reason is given, and what follows in this verse is observed in [Deu
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004); See Gill on [Deu
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004), [Deu
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#005).

[Nehemiah 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 13:3</span></span>

Now it came to pass, when they had heard the law,.... Or the law
concerning the Ammonite and the Moabite, and which included other
nations also, and forbad marriage with them:

that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude; all of these,
and other nations, they had contracted affinity with.

[Nehemiah 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 13:4</span></span>

And before this,.... Before the above law was read, and observed and
acted upon:

Eliashib the priest; whom some take to be a common priest; so Bishop
Usher (a); but he seems rather to be the high priest, by comparing it
with [Neh 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#028),

having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God; which has
led some to the notion of his being a common priest; but chamber may be
put for chambers, and those for the whole house or temple, which the
high priest had the greatest concern in, and oversight of:

was allied to Tobiah; the servant and Ammonite, an inveterate enemy of
the Jews, [Neh 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#010), having married a
daughter of Shecaniah, and his son a daughter of Meshullam, who were
both priests, and so as it seems related to Eliashib, [Neh
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#018).

\(a\) Annal. Vet. Test. p. 200.

[Nehemiah 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 13:5</span></span>

And he had prepared for him a great chamber,.... In the temple, by
throwing together several chambers, as Piscator observes:

where aforetime they laid the meat offerings, the frankincense, and the
vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which
was commanded to be given to the Levites, and to the singers, and the
porters, and the offerings of the priests; see [Neh
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#037).

[Nehemiah 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 13:6</span></span>

But in all this time was not I at Jerusalem,.... Nehemiah, who was
absent all the while these things were done by Eliashib, or otherwise
they would not have been suffered:

for in the thirty second year of Artaxerxes, king of Babylon, came I
unto the king from Jerusalem; after he had governed there twelve years,
to whom he came to give an account of affairs there; this was not
Xerxes, as some (b) have thought, for he reigned but twenty one years;
but Darius Hystaspis, who reigned thirty six years, according to
Ptolemy's canon, and with which Herodotus (c) agrees; he is called king
of Babylon, because that, with the whole empire, was in the hands of the
king of Persia, as it had been from the times of Cyrus:

and after certain days obtained I leave of the king; to return to
Jerusalem again; not after five years, as Dr. Prideaux (d) thinks; for
it is not likely that Nehemiah would stay so long ere he asked leave of
the king to return to Jerusalem, which was so much his care, and on
whose prosperity his heart was so much set; rather at most it was but a
full year he stayed ere he got leave to return, as Vatablus and Piscator
interpret it; in which sense the phrase of certain days is used in [Lev
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029), and in other places quoted by
the last mentioned interpreter.

\(b\) Apud Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 2. fol. 8. 2. (c) Polymnia, sive,
l. 7. c. 1. (d) Connect. par. 1. p. 397.

[Nehemiah 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 13:7</span></span>

And I came to Jerusalem,.... Through the king's leave, and with a
commission from him:

and understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah; was informed of
the mal-administration of his office:

in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God; whereby it
was profaned and polluted.

[Nehemiah 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 13:8</span></span>

And it grieved me sore,.... That such a sacred place should be converted
to common use, and to that of an Heathen, and of an enemy to the Jews
and their religion:

therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the
chamber; as being chief magistrate, and acting by commission under the
king of Persia, and to regulate everything amiss, according to the
Jewish laws, as well as those of the king, his power being, no doubt, as
large as Ezra's, [Ezr 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025), by
"household stuff" is meant what is movable in the house, as chairs,
tables, vessels for dressing, caring, drinking, &c. there are various
opinions about this with the ancients (e).

\(e\) Vid. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 1. c. 19.

[Nehemiah 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 13:9</span></span>

Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers,.... By which it
appears there were more than one, or that several were thrown into one;
which was done not only by washing them, but as this was a ceremonial
uncleanness, contracted by the habitation of an Heathen in them, their
purification might be by the water of separation, [Num
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009)

and thither brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with the
meat offering and the frankincense; replaced them where they were
before.

[Nehemiah 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 13:10</span></span>

And I perceived that the portion of the Levites had not been given
them,.... The tithes, being removed to some other place, might be
converted to another use; or the people, seeing what was done by
Eliashib, neglected to bring them in, as judging they would not be
properly disposed of; and besides, the Levites had deserted their
station upon this:

for the Levites and the singers that did the work were fled everyone to
his field; to look after their country farms, or to get their living by
agriculture, since there was no care taken of them at Jerusalem; see
[Neh 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#028).

[Nehemiah 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 13:11</span></span>

Then I contended with the rulers;.... The ecclesiastical rulers, the
priests that were appointed over those chambers, [Neh
12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044), he expostulated with them
warmly, and chode them severely for their conduct:

and said, why is the house of God forsaken? no care being taken of the
maintenance of the ministers of it, contrary to the promise made [Neh
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#037),

and l gathered them together; the Levites and singers that were
dispersed in the countries round about:

and set them in their place; in the temple, and in the course of their
ministry there.

[Nehemiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 13:12</span></span>

Then brought all Judah the tithe of corn, and the new wine, and the oil,
into the treasuries. When they saw a reformation made, and things were
going in their proper channel, and a right use would be made of their
tithes, these given to proper persons, who were now reinstated in their
office.

[Nehemiah 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 13:13</span></span>

And I made treasurers over the treasuries,.... New ones, since the
others appointed were either dead or unfaithful to their trust, [Neh
12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044),

Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe; who also was a priest, as
Ezra was both priest and scribe; one that besides his office as a priest
was expert in the law, and capable of instructing others:

and of the Levites, Pedaiah, and next to them was Hanan the son of
Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah, for they were counted faithful; had a good
report of all that knew them, for men of fidelity and uprightness, and
so fit for such a trust:

and their office was to distribute unto their brethren; to deliver to
them their share in the tithes, first fruits, &c.

[Nehemiah 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 13:14</span></span>

Remember me, O my God, concerning this,.... Not in a way of strict
justice, as if he thought he merited anything at the hand of God for
what he had done; but in a way of grace and mercy, that he would
graciously accept thereof, as done for the honour of his name, and
overlook all failings and infirmities therein, see [Neh
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#022)

and wipe not out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God,
and for the offices thereof; for the support of the worship of God in
the temple, and for the regulating of the wards and courses in it, both
priests and Levites, and for the maintenance of them; which being done
from a right principle, love to God, and with a right view, the glory of
his name, might be truly reckoned good works: and which he desires might
not be wiped or blotted out of the book of his remembrance, see [Hos
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#010).

[Nehemiah 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 13:15</span></span>

In those days saw I in Judah some treading winepresses on the
sabbath,.... Which was not a work of necessity, and so did not drive
away the sabbath, as the Jews express themselves, but might have been
deferred to another day:

and bringing in sheaves; of wheat, it being the time of wheat harvest:

and lading asses; with goods to be carried from place to place, and sold
on that day; this was contrary to the express law, for the ass was to
rest, [Deu 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014),

as also wine, grapes, and figs: it being the time of ingathering the
fruits of the earth:

and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the
sabbath day; besides those borne on asses, others were carried on men's
shoulders; this was contrary to the law of the sabbath, which required
that both men and beasts should have rest:

and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals; that
is, the sabbath day; and if it was not lawful to sell food, then not
anything else; so far from it, that according to the Jewish canons (f),
such that were in partnership might not discourse together of what they
should sell or buy on the morrow, the day after the sabbath; and so far
from gathering and carrying grapes and figs, that a man might not go
into his gardens and fields to see what were wanting, or how the fruits
were: now Nehemiah admonished the Jews of these evils they committed,
and testified against them as breakers of the law, and called heaven and
earth to testify against them, should they go on to violate it.

\(f\) Maimon. Hilchot Sabbat, c. 24. sect. 1, 2.

[Nehemiah 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 13:16</span></span>

There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish,.... From Tyre
and Zidon, and the parts adjacent: these they brought from Joppa, and
from thence to Jerusalem, and had houses or lodgings near the fish gate
or fish market, where they sold them:

and all manner of ware; or merchandise, which, being a trading city,
they had from all nations:

and sold on the sabbath day unto the children of Judah, and in
Jerusalem; or even in Jerusalem, the holy city, where stood the temple,
and where the worship of God was kept, and where the magistrates lived,
who should have been terrors to evildoers: indeed, the law of the
sabbath was not binding on these Tyrians, but then they tempted the Jews
to break it, by bringing their ware to sell.

[Nehemiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 13:17</span></span>

Then I contended with the nobles,.... The rulers of the city, the civil
magistrates, sharply reproved them for their neglect of duty:

and said unto them, what evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the
sabbath day? by suffering servile works to be done in it, and things
sold on it.

[Nehemiah 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 13:18</span></span>

Did not your fathers thus,.... Profane the sabbath in like manner:

and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon our city?
suffered them to be carried captive into a strange land, and their city
destroyed for their sins, and for this of sabbath breaking among the
rest, see [Jer 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021),

yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath; additional
judgments to those that had been already upon them for the same evil
with others.

[Nehemiah 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 13:19</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark
before the sabbath,.... Or "were shaded" (g); that is, as Jarchi
interprets it, when the shadows of the eve of the sabbath were stretched
out upon the gates; the sabbath did not begin till sun setting, and the
stars appeared; but before that, as the sun was declining, the shadows
through the houses in Jerusalem, and mountains about it, spread
themselves over the gates: and when it was near dusk, and as soon as it
was so,

I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should
not be opened till after the sabbath; until sun setting the next day:

and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should be burden
brought in on the sabbath day; the porters being not to be trusted,
being liable to be bribed and corrupted, which he knew his servants were
not; and therefore, since it might be necessary on a few occasions to
open the gates to let some persons in and out, and especially such who
dwelt near, and came to worship, he placed his servants there, to take
care that none were admitted that had any burdens upon them.

\(g\) "obumbratae", Pagninus, Montanus; "obumbrarentur", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Rambachius; "incidentibus umbris", Tigurine
version.

[Nehemiah 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 13:20</span></span>

For the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware,.... The Tyrians
particularly, [Neh 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#016) lodged
without Jerusalem once or twice; one sabbath day or two, not being able
to get into the city, such strict watch and care being taken to keep the
gates shut; this they did, hoping the Jews would come out to them and
buy their goods, though they were not admitted to bring them within the
city.

[Nehemiah 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">neh 13:21</span></span>

Then I testified against them,.... Against their continuance there, and
threatened them, and called heaven and earth to witness what he would do
to them, if they did not depart:

why lodge ye about the wall? of the city, waiting an opportunity to get
in, and tempting the Jews to come out and buy their ware:

if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you; beat them, or slay them, at
least imprison them:

from that time forth came they no more on the sabbath; finding there was
no likelihood of getting into the city, and that they were liable to be
taken up and punished.

[Nehemiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 13:22</span></span>

And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves,....
From all ceremonial uncleanness, that they might be fit in a ceremonial
sense to perform the duties of the office on the sabbath day:

and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath
day; not the gates of the city, his servants were placed there, nor was
this the work of the Levites, and much less did this require a
particular purification to fit for it; but the gates of the temple, that
no impure person might enter there; and on that day it required the
greater diligence, because of the number of people that came to worship:

remember me, O my God, concerning this also; with respect to his care to
have the sabbath kept holy, as well as his concern for the honour of the
house of God, and the maintenance of his ministers, [Neh
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#014),

and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy; he desired to be
dealt with, not according to any merits of his own, but according to the
abundant mercy of God; that he would kindly and graciously vouchsafe to
accept any good that he had done for his mercy sake, and forgive
whatever was amiss in him.

[Nehemiah 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 13:23</span></span>

In those days also I saw Jews that married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon,
and of Moab. Ashdod, or Azotus, as it is called in [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040), was one of the five cities of
the Philistines; which, though none of the seven nations with whom
marriage was forbid, yet it was very unfit and improper to marry with
them, [Jdg 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#003). This place was a mart
of the Arabians (h), where they sold their goods, to which the Jews
might resort, and thereby be ensnared into such marriages; and which
with the Ammonites and Moabites were unlawful, [Neh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001).

\(h\) Mela de Situ Orbis, l. 1. c. 10.

[Nehemiah 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">neh 13:24</span></span>

And their children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod,.... Which they
learned of their mothers, so that it was a mixed language they spoke,
partly Jewish and partly Philistine; but some refer this not to their
speech, but to the number of their children; that half of them, which
Jarchi interprets many of them, spoke in the language of Ashdod, even as
many as were most with their mothers, and chiefly brought up by them:

and could not speak in the Jews' language; not at all, or so much as to
be understood well, which inclines to the last sense:

but according to the language of each people; their mothers were of,
whether of Ashdod, or of Ammon, or of Moab.

[Nehemiah 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">neh 13:25</span></span>

And I contended with them,.... Argued with them, faithfully admonished
them, and sharply reproved them:

and cursed them; assuring them that the curse of God would come upon
them, unless they repented. Aben Ezra interprets it of excommunicating
them, either with "Cherem" or "Niddui", which were two sorts of
excommunication among the Jews; but it is a question whether as yet
those were used by them:

and smote certain of them; ordered them to be beaten with rods or
scourges, as transgressors of the law:

and plucked off their hair; or ordered it to be plucked off by the
executioner that smote them; which sort of punishment, as it was
painful, it was disgraceful and ignominious, see [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006),

and made them swear by God, saying, ye shall not give your daughters
unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for
yourselves; not intermarry with them; this they had sworn to before,
[Neh 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029).

[Nehemiah 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">neh 13:26</span></span>

Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things?.... By marrying
strange wives, by whom he was drawn into idolatry, [Kg1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003),

yet among many nations was there no king like him; as not for grandeur
and riches, so not for wisdom, and yet was ensnared by his idolatrous
wives:

who was beloved of God; alluding to his name Jedidiah, which signifies
beloved of the Lord, [Sa2 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024)

and God made him king over all Israel; which was a proof of his love to
him, and so he was under the greater obligation to serve him, and him
only, and yet his heart, through his wives, was turned after other gods:

even him did outlandish women cause to sin; and if so great and wise a
man was enticed by them to idolatry, much more may you, and therefore it
was very dangerous to marry with them.

[Nehemiah 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 13:27</span></span>

Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil,.... To suffer
it to be done, and connive at it, and not punish for it:

to transgress against our God; his law, his mind, and will:

in marrying strange wives? forbidden by him, [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001).

[Nehemiah 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">neh 13:28</span></span>

And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest,....
A grandson of the high priest; for the high priest here is Eliashib,
according to our version, and not Joiada his son, according to Dr.
Prideaux (i); the person designed, Josephus (k) makes to be Manasseh,
the brother of Jaddua the high priest: was

son in law to Sanballat the Horonite; married a daughter of his, who was
the avowed enemy of the Jewish nation; and for whom, according to the
same writer, Sanballat obtained leave of Alexander to build a temple on
Mount Gerizim; but this is to protract the age of Nehemiah and Sanballat
to too great a length; besides, Eliashib seems to have been now high
priest, and not even his son Joiada, and much less Jaddua, a grandson of
Joiada:

therefore I chased him from me; drove him from his court, suffered him
not to minister at the altar; banished him from the city, as Jarchi, and
even from the land of Judea.

\(i\) Connect. par. 1. p. 412. (k) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 8. sect. 2, 4.

[Nehemiah 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">neh 13:29</span></span>

Remember them, O my God,.... The priests, and punish them: because they
have defiled the priesthood; by marrying strange wives, and rendering
themselves unfit to officiate in it:

and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites; made with Levi,
Aaron, and Phinehas, see [Num 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#011),
of the corruption of which, complaint is made, [Mal
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">neh 13:30</span></span>

Thus cleansed I them from all strangers,.... Both people and priests
from strange wives, obliging them to put them away, or flee their
country:

and appointing the wards of the priests and the Levites, everyone in his
business: to do the work of their office in their courses and turns.

[Nehemiah 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">neh 13:31</span></span>

And for the wood offering, at times appointed,.... Of which see [Neh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#034). Levites were appointed to
receive the wood that was brought at the times and by the persons fixed,
and lay it up in its proper place, and carry it to the altar when
wanted:

and for the first fruits; to receive and take care of them, and
distribute them to the persons to whom they belonged:

remember me, O my God, for good; to bless him with all good things,
temporal and spiritual, to keep him faithful, to make him useful in
church and state, and protect him from all his enemies: or rather this
may respect what goes before, that as to the wood offering and the
firstfruits, that God would graciously remember him as to them, since
the one was as necessary to the altar as the other was to those that
minister at it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Introduction](est000)

</div>
