<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num030)  [Next](num032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 31:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 31

This chapter contains an order to make war upon Midian, which was
accordingly done, [Num 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001), but Moses
was wroth, because they saved the women alive, who, through the counsel
of Balaam, had been the cause of sin, and of the plague for it in
Israel, and therefore orders them, and the male children, to be slain,
[Num 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#013), and then directs to the
purification of the soldiers, their captives and spoil, [Num
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#019), and by the command of God an
account is taken of the prey, and a division of it made between the
soldiers and the congregation, and out of each part a tribute is levied
for the Lord, [Num 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#025) and the sum
of the whole booty is given, [Num
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#032) and of the part which belonged
to the soldiers, and of the tribute given to the Lord, [Num
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#036) and of the part which belonged
to the children of Israel, [Num 31:42](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#042)
and besides the above tribute to the Lord, the officers made a voluntary
oblation out of their spoil, both by way of gratitude for sparing their
lives, and to make atonement for their souls, [Num
31:48](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#048).

[Numbers 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 31:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After the plague upon Israel for
their fornication and idolatry, into which they were drawn by the
daughters of Moab and Midian, and after the sum of the people was taken
in the plains of Moab, and various laws given or repeated, and a little
before the death of Moses:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 31:2</span></span>

Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites,.... For the injury they
had done them, by sending their daughters among them, who enticed them
to commit uncleanness with them, and then drew them into the worship of
their idols, which brought the wrath of God upon them, and for which
24,000 persons were slain. Now, though the Moabites had a concern in
this affair as well as the Midianites, yet they were spared; which some
think was for the sake of Lot, from whom they descended; but why not the
Midianites for the sake of Abraham, whose offspring they were by
Keturah? Jarchi says, they were spared because of Ruth, who was to
spring from them; and so she might, and yet vengeance be taken on great
numbers of them: but the truer reason seems to be, either because the
sin of the Moabites was not yet full, and they were reserved for a later
punishment; or rather because they were not the principal actors in the
above affair; but the Midianites, who seem to have advised Balak at
first to send for Balaam to curse Israel, and who harboured that
soothsayer after he had been dismissed by Balak, and to whom he gave his
wicked counsel, and which they readily followed, and industriously
pursued:

afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people; or die, see [Num
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#013), it being some satisfaction to
him to see the good land, as he did from Abarim, and the Israelites
avenged on their enemies before his death.

[Numbers 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 31:3</span></span>

And Moses spake unto the people, saying,.... In obedience to the divine
command; this must be supposed to be spoken to the heads or princes of
the tribes:

arm some of yourselves unto the war: not the whole body of the militia,
600,000 men and upwards, only some of them, and these choice and select
men; and, according to the Jewish writers, good men, who, detesting the
sins of lewdness and idolatry, would more strictly and severely avenge
themselves on the Midianites for drawing their brethren into those sins,
whereby they fell; and so Jarchi calls them righteous men:

and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the Lord of Midian:
what the Lord calls the vengeance of the Israelites, Moses calls the
vengeance of the Lord, because they were the Lord's people, and his
cause and theirs the same: and because the sins they were drawn into by
the Midianites were not only against themselves, and to their prejudice,
but against the Lord and to the dishonour of his name.

[Numbers 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 31:4</span></span>

Of every tribe a thousand,.... So that the whole number of those that
were armed were 12,000 as after given:

throughout all the tribes of Israel; this is observed, as Jarchi thinks,
to comprehend the tribe of Levi, which in some cases was left out of the
account:

shall ye send to the war; to fight with Midian.

[Numbers 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 31:5</span></span>

So they were delivered out of the thousands of Israel,.... Several
thousands very probably offered themselves voluntarily to go to the war,
or however were summoned together on this account, and out of them the
following number was delivered of picked and chosen men:

a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war; which was but
a small number to go against so considerable a nation and people; but
this was done to show that the war was of the Lord, he would fight the
battle, and give them victory, it being the same to him to do it with
few as with many; and to encourage the people of Israel to believe the
Lord would give them success against their many and powerful enemies in
the land of Canaan, on the borders of which they now were.

[Numbers 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 31:6</span></span>

And Moses sent them to the war,.... Being mustered and armed:

a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the
priest to the war; which looks as if Phinehas was the general of this
army; for Moses went not to the war, and no mention is made of Joshua,
nor might it be proper for him, he being the successor of Moses, who was
quickly to die; but it seems rather that there was no one person that
had the command of the whole, but every captain commanded his own
company; since, when Moses met them, and was angry with them for sparing
the women, he does not address anyone as the chief commander, but all
the officers, [Num 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014), however, it
was very proper and prudent to send Phinehas with them, both on account
of his office as a priest, to encourage the people, and because of his
extraordinary zeal against the Midianites for what they had done, as
appears by his slaying a prince of Simeon and a Midianitish princess in
their uncleanness:

and he went with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his
hand; by "the holy instruments", Aben Ezra understands the ark with what
appertained to it, which in later times used to be carried out when the
Israelites went to war, [Jos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#004), and
Jarchi interprets them of the ark and plate of gold (z) which was upon
the forehead of the high priest; but what had Phinehas to do with this,
who was but a common priest? though the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases
it,"with the Urim and Thummim of holiness, to inquire by them;''and it
appears, that sometimes a son of an high priest was intrusted with the
ephod, to which the breastplate was fastened, which had the Urim and
Thummim on it, and made use thereof to inquire by, as in the times of
David, [Sa1 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006), but it is the
opinion of some learned men, and they may be in the right, that these
instruments are no other than the trumpets, and who suppose the "vau" is
not copulative, but explanative, so Ben Gersom, and read the words thus,
"with the holy instruments, even", or, "that is, the trumpets" (a), the
silver trumpets ordered to be made, [Num
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002) one of which was far the journey
of the camps, and also to blow an alarm for war, and which was done by
the priests; and so the Targum of Jonathan adds here,"to cause the camp
of Israel to rest, and to cause it to go;''that is, to direct it when it
should stop, and when it should move.

\(z\) So the Rabbins in Abendana in Miclol Yophi in loc. (a) "erantque
tubae", Tigurine version; "id est tubae", Vatablus; "nempe tubae",
Piscator; so Ainsworth.

[Numbers 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 31:7</span></span>

And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses,....
Whether the Midianites came out against them with an army, and there was
a pitched battle between them, is not certain; however the Israelites
committed acts of hostility upon them, by entering their cities,
plundering their houses, and slaying the inhabitants of them; the Targum
of Jonathan is,"they warred against Midian, and surrounded it in the
three corners of it, as the Lord commanded Moses;''for, as Maimonides
(b) observes from tradition,"when they besiege a city to take it, they
do not surround it in the four corners of it, but in the three corners
of it, and leave a place to flee out, that everyone that would might
escape for his life, as it is said, "and they warred against Midian, as
the Lord commanded Moses"; by report, or from tradition, it is learnt
that so he commanded him;''that is, in such a manner to besiege a city;
but for this there is only tradition, for it is not mentioned among the
rules after directed to in such a case, [Deu
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010),

and they slew all the males; which fell into their hands; for, no doubt,
there were multitudes that made their escape, since in later times we
read of the Midianites, as a very powerful people, and very distressing
to Israel, [Jdg 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001) these, as Aben
Ezra observes, they slew, were such as were grown up, for as for their
little ones, them they spared and carried captive, [Num
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#009).

\(b\) Hilchot Melacim, c. 6. sect. 7.

[Numbers 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 31:8</span></span>

And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were
slain,.... Besides the males of the common people, they slew their
kings, who were petty kings or princes, perhaps under the king of Moab,
or had reassumed their titles and government after the death of Sihon
the king of the Amorites, who, in his time, were called dukes of Sihon,
[Jos 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#021), namely:

Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian; the
Targum of Jonathan says of Zur, this is Balak, which is not probable; it
is more likely, what Aben Ezra observes, that he was the father of
Cosbi, whom Phinehas slew, [Num 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015).

Balaam also, the son of Beor, they slew with the sword; so that he died
not a natural death, but a violent one, not such an one as he desired,
the death of the righteous, but of bloody and deceitful men, who do not
live out half their days; for if the Jewish writers (c) are to be
credited, he was but thirty four years of age when he was slain, which
is not quite half the age of man, that being seventy, [Psa
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010), it appears by this that he was
among the Midianites at the time of this war; either he stayed here till
this time, when he went from Balak with an intention to go into his own
country; or he had returned hither, being either sent for, by the
princes of Midian, on this occasion; or, as some say, as Aben Ezra
observes, that he came to Midian after he returned to his place, on
hearing the plague that came upon Israel through his counsel, to receive
the money of the elders of Midian for it; and so Chaskuni.

\(c\) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 7. 2.

[Numbers 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 31:9</span></span>

And the children of Israel took all the women of Midian captives,....
The word "all" is not in the original text, nor should it be supplied;
for if all had been taken, and carried captive, and put to death, as
those were afterwards, how could there have been such an increase of the
Midianites as there was in some time after this? see [Jdg
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001) but the meaning is, that as many
as fell into their hands they took and carried captive:

and their little ones; both male and female:

and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks; their oxen
and their sheep, and also their asses, as appears by the following
account:

and all their goods: in their houses, their wealth and substance, gold,
silver, &c.

[Numbers 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 31:10</span></span>

And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, &c. ) So far as they
went into the country, which, perhaps, might not be the whole land of
Midian:

and all their goodly castles with fire; which were either the palaces of
their princes and nobles, or such like great personages; or they were
fortified places, for the security of their cities and country: the
Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan interpret them of their houses of
worship, their temples, and their altars.

[Numbers 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 31:11</span></span>

And they took all the spoil,.... In their cities and castles; and all
the prey, both of men and of beasts; all sorts of cattle, oxen, sheep,
and asses.

[Numbers 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 31:12</span></span>

The women and children, who were the captives, and the beasts which were
the prey, and the gold, silver, &c. which were the spoil:

unto Moses and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the
children of Israel; that is, they were bringing the above persons things
unto them, returning from the war with Midian:

unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near Jericho:
see [Num 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001), but they were stopped,
and were not admitted into the camp until seven days after.

[Numbers 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 31:13</span></span>

And Moses and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
congregation,.... Attended, no doubt, with a proper retinue:

went forth to meet them without the camp; partly to do honour to them,
and to congratulate them on their victory, and partly to hinder them
going into the camp directly, until they were purified; see [Gen
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#017).

[Numbers 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 31:14</span></span>

And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host,.... The general
officers who had the command of the army, for there does not appear to
be anyone that was one general over the whole, otherwise the displeasure
would have fallen upon him:

with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came
from the battle; rather "with" should be left out, not being in the
text; and these captains only explain who the officers were, and these
were one hundred and thirty two, as Aben Ezra observes; twelve who were
captains over thousands, and were more properly the general officers;
and one hundred and twenty over so many hundreds, into which the whole
were subdivided.

[Numbers 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 31:15</span></span>

And Moses said unto them, have ye saved all the women alive? Which
either had been reported to him, or he concluded, by seeing so many with
them; and this question is put, not for information, but by way of
reproof, and as chiding them for what they had done; for they might have
received orders from him to put them to death, when he sent them out;
and if so, there was the more reason to be angry with them; or he might
conclude they would have done this of themselves, knowing what
instruments of mischief these women had been to Israel.

[Numbers 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 31:16</span></span>

Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of
Balaam,.... Who advised the Midianites to send their women into the camp
of Israel, and allure them to uncleanness, and so draw them into
idolatry, which counsel they followed and it succeeded; for, by this
means, they were brought

to commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor; by
worshipping Baalpeor, the god of the Moabites and Midianites; whereby
they transgressed the commandment of God, which forbid them having and
worshipping any other gods besides him, and is a sin highly offensive to
him, being greatly derogatory to his honour and glory:

and there was a plague among the congregation of the Lord; for that sin;
and in that plague died 24,000 persons, [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009).

[Numbers 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 31:17</span></span>

Now therefore kill every male among the little ones,.... Which they had
taken and brought captives, [Num 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#009).

and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him; who might be
such, at least many of them, who had lain with Israelitish men; and as
the adulterers had been put to death, so now the adulteresses; or they
were ordered to, be slain, even all of them, lest they should entice the
children of Israel to uncleanness, and so to idolatry again: now these
were known to be such, either by conjecture at their age, or rather,
through the examination of matrons, unless it can be thought, as it is
by some, that it was by divine revelation.

[Numbers 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 31:18</span></span>

But all the women children,.... The females among the little ones:

that have not known a man by lying with him; which might be pretty
clear, and easily concluded, from their age:

keep for yourselves; either to be handmaids to them, or to be married
among them when grown up, and become proselytes, and initiated into
their religion.

[Numbers 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 31:19</span></span>

And do ye abide without the camp seven days..... Which was the time that
anyone that touched a dead body remained unclean, [Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011),

whosoever hath killed any person; as most of them if not all must have
done; all the males of Midian that fell into their hands being slain by
them, that were men grown:

and whosoever hath touched any slain; as they must to strip them of
their garments, and take their spoil from them:

purify both yourselves and your captives, on the third and on the
seventh day; which were the days appointed for the purification of such
that were polluted by touching dead bodies, [Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011) and their captives, which were
the female little ones; (for as for the women, and males among the
little ones, they were ordered to be slain;) though they were Heathens,
yet inasmuch as they were to be for the service of the Israelites, and
to be brought up in their religion, they were to be purified also; to
which purpose is the note of Jarchi;"not that the Gentiles receive
uncleanness and need sprinkling, but as ye are the children of the
covenant, so your captives, when they come into the covenant, and are
defiled, need sprinkling.''

[Numbers 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 31:20</span></span>

And purify all your raiment,.... By washing them; and this may intend
not so much their own wearing apparel, as the raiment they took off of
the dead bodies of the Midianites, since the person that touched a dead
body was not obliged to wash his clothes, but the clean person that
sprinkled the water of purification on him, [Num
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#019), some render the words, "purify
yourselves" (d), "together with the raiment", &c. which seems to be the
best version of them:

and all that is made of skins; of any sort of creatures, as the covering
of tents, shoes, bottles, &c. see [Lev
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#032).

and all work of goats' hair; such as the covering of tents was also made
of: and this, according to Jarchi and other Jewish writers (e) includes
vessels made of the horns, hoofs, and bones of these creatures: and all
things made of wood; as beds, cups, dishes, &c. all which might be
purified by washing; see [Lev 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#012).

\(d\) "purgatote vos", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; Vid. L'Empereur,
Not. ad Kimchii p. 130. (e) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Celim, c. 2.
sect. 1.

[Numbers 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 31:21</span></span>

And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war, which went to the
battle,.... To all the soldiers, officers, and common men:

this is the ordinance of the law, which the Lord commanded Moses;
concerning the purification of unclean persons and things, hereby
confirming what Moses had said.

[Numbers 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 31:22</span></span>

Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the
lead. These are excepted, and, though unclean, are not to be purified by
washing, but in another way, by fire, as follows; all these metals were
well known in those early times, and were made use of for instruments
and vessels of various sorts.

[Numbers 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 31:23</span></span>

Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the
fire,.... Either through the smoke of the fire, and so be purified by
suffumigation; or be put into the fire itself, where though they might
be melted as the above things, yet not consumed as raiment, and vessels
of skins, goats' hair, and wood, would be:

and it shall be clean; accounted so:

nevertheless, it shall be purified with the water of separation; with
the water mixed with the ashes of the red heifer burnt, and sprinkled on
it; see [Num 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009).

and all that abideth not the fire; without being consumed, as whatsoever
is of wood, &c.

ye shall make go through the water; dip them in it, and rinse them there
with a quantity sufficient; which the Targum of Jonathan says is forty
seahs of water.

[Numbers 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 31:24</span></span>

And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day,.... As the leper did,
[Lev 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#009),

and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp; into
the camp of Israel, into the camp of the Levites, and into the camp of
God, the tabernacle.

[Numbers 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 31:25</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After the purification of the
soldiers, their captives, and spoil:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 31:26</span></span>

Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and beast,.... The
number of the females that were taken captive and spared, and of the
cattle, the sheep, oxen, and asses:

thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation;
who were all men of authority and character, and fit to be employed in
such service, and of whose capacity and fidelity there could be no
doubt.

[Numbers 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 31:27</span></span>

And divide the prey into two parts,.... Into two equal parts, both the
number of the people and of the cattle, when taken:

between them that took the war upon them, and went out to battle; the
soldiers; and by this it appears that they went voluntarily and
cheerfully:

and between all the congregation; so that the part of them that went to
battle, and of those that stayed in the camp, were alike, and which in
process of time became a statute and ordinance, [Sa1
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#024).

[Numbers 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 31:28</span></span>

And levy a tribute unto the Lord of the men of war, which went out to
battle,.... That is, out of the part of the prey which was divided to
them:

one soul of five hundred, both "of the persons"; or one woman of five
hundred, as the Targum of Jonathan:

and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the sheep; that is, one out
of five hundred, of each of them also.

[Numbers 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 31:29</span></span>

And take it of their half,.... Of the half part of the prey divided to
the soldiers:

and give it unto Eleazar the priest for an heave offering of the Lord;
by way of thanksgiving for the success and victory, God had given them,
by means of which so much booty had fallen into their hands.

[Numbers 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 31:30</span></span>

And of the children of Israel's half, thou shall take one portion of
fifty,.... Which was abundantly more than what was taken out of the part
of the soldiers; and the reason of it is plain and easy to be discerned;
the soldiers had taken much pains, and gone through much fatigue, as
well as had hazarded their lives, and therefore less was to be taken
from them; and besides the tribute levied out of their half was to be
given to the priests, who were not so numerous as the Levites, among
whom the part out of the half of the congregation was to be distributed:

of the persons; of the women, as the Targums of Jonathan, one of fifty
out of them was to be given to the Levites to be their handmaids, or to
be taken in marriage by them, or their sons, when fit for it:

of the beeves, of the asses, and of the sheep, of all manner of beasts;
of oxen, asses, sheep, and goats, one out of fifty of each of these
sorts were to be taken. Aben Ezra observes, no mention is made of
camels, being but few, and no part taken:

and give them unto the Levites, which keep the charge of the tabernacle
of the Lord; for these being employed in the service of the tabernacle,
came in for their share of the tribute levied unto the Lord.

[Numbers 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 31:31</span></span>

And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the Lord commanded Moses. Took
an account of the booty, divided it equally between the soldiers and the
congregation of Israel, and levied a part out of each as a tribute for
the Lord, which was given to the priests and Levites.

[Numbers 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 31:32</span></span>

And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had
caught,.... The remainder of it, besides what they had eaten in their
return from the war, and during their seven days' stay without the camp:
from hence to the end of [Num 31:47](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#047) is
only an account of the prey or booty taken, which in general were
675,000 sheep, 72,000 beeves or oxen, 61,000 asses, and 32,000 females
who had never known man; the half out of these, which fell to the share
of the soldiers, were 337,500 sheep, 36,000 beeves or oxen, 30,500
asses, and 16,000 females, out of which were given as an heave offering
to the Lord six hundred and seventy five sheep, seventy two beeves or
oxen, sixty one asses, and thirty two women: the half divided unto the
children of Israel consisted of 337,500 sheep, 36,000 beeves or oxen,
30,500 asses, and 16,000 women, out of which one in fifty, both of women
and cattle, were given to the Levites; what that amounted to is not
expressed, but may be easily reckoned.

[Numbers 31:48](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 31:48</span></span>

And the officers which were over thousands of the host,.... Over the
twelve thousand, of which the host or army consisted: namely, the
captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, came near unto
Moses; of their own accord, without being sent, or required to do what
they did.

[Numbers 31:49](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">num 31:49</span></span>

And they said unto Moses,.... Gave the following relation to him, which
is a very surprising one:

thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our
charge; since the war with Midian was over, they had mustered the
several companies under their command, such as had thousands, and those
that had hundreds:

and there lacketh not one man of us; which is a most amazing and unheard
of thing, that in waging war with a whole nation, slaying all their
males, sacking and burning so many cities, plundering the inhabitants of
their substance, taking and carrying off such a vast number of captives,
yet not one should fall by the sword of the enemy, or by any disease or
accident whatever, but all to a man should return to the camp of Israel
again; this is not to be paralleled in any history.

[Numbers 31:50](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">num 31:50</span></span>

We have therefore brought an oblation to the Lord,.... A freewill
offering, out of the spoil, over and above the tribute levied out of the
half that came unto them:

what every man hath gotten: or "found" (f), in the houses, and upon the
bodies of the slain, or of such that were taken captives:

of jewels of gold either such as were set in gold; or rather, as the
words may be rendered:

vessels of gold (g), as dishes, cups, spoons, and the like:

chains; which were wore about the neck, or upon the arm, as Aben Ezra:

and bracelets; for the hand, as the same writer, see [Gen
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022),

rings; for the finger:

ear rings; for the ear, as we render it, the word signifies something
round:

and tablets; which, according to the Targum of Jonathan, were ornaments
that hung down between the breasts:

to make an atonement for our souls before the Lord; not only this
offering was brought as a token of gratitude and thankfulness, for
sparing of everyone of their lives, and giving them such success and
victory, and so large a spoil of the enemy; but also to expiate any sins
they had been guilty of in going out, and coming in, and particularly
for sparing the women they should have put to death, for which Moses was
wroth with them, [Num 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014).

\(f\) "invenit", Pagninus, Montanus. (g) "vas auri", Montanus; "vasa
aurea", Vatablus.

[Numbers 31:51](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">num 31:51</span></span>

And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them,.... For it seems
the several things before mentioned were all of gold:

even all wrought jewels; or "vessels of work" (h) or wrought vessels, or
instruments, "chains, bracelets", &c. which were all of gold, and
curiously wrought.

\(h\) "vas operis", Montanus.

[Numbers 31:52](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">num 31:52</span></span>

And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the Lord,....
The whole amount, weight, and value of it put together:

even of the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, and
perhaps of every common soldier, who might contribute his part, though
it is not mentioned, but included in the oblation of the officers:

was 16,750 shekels; which, according to the calculation of a very
learned man (i), were 7,780 ounces, four drachms, two scruples, and
thirty five grains.

\(i\) Scheuchzer. Physica Sacr. vol. 2. p. 399.

[Numbers 31:53](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">num 31:53</span></span>

For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself. And which he
kept for himself, and did not deliver in with the prey or booty, which
was brought to Moses and Eleazar, the sum of which was taken by them;
and this seems to confirm what has been hinted, that, as each soldier
had taken spoil for himself, so everyone contributed his quota towards
this freewill offering to the Lord.

[Numbers 31:54](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">num 31:54</span></span>

And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of
thousands and of hundreds,.... Which they so freely and generously
offered:

and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation; and laid it up
in some chamber there:

for a memorial for the children of Israel before the Lord: in
remembrance of the signal victory these men obtained, and of the
singular care of divine Providence in protecting them, that not one was
lost in the expedition; and of their sense of gratitude and thankfulness
for the favours granted them, and to put the children of Israel in mind
for their imitation, when favoured with mercies from the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 32](num032)

</div>
