<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num007)  [Next](num009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 8

In this chapter orders are given for the lighting the seven lamps of the
candlestick, [Num 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001); and for the
consecration of the Levites to their office, by a purification of them,
[Num 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#005); by a separation of them from
the children of Israel, and the imposition of their hands on them, and
of the hands of the Levites on the offerings offered for them, [Num
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#009); and being thus given to the Lord,
and claimed as his, instead of the firstborn of Israel, they are given
to Aaron and his sons to do service in the tabernacle, [Num
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#016); and their age at which they were
to enter into service and cease from it is fixed, [Num
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#023).

[Numbers 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 8:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Whether immediately after the
offerings of the princes, or at another time, is not certain; Aben Ezra
thinks it was in the night God spake unto him, because then the lamps
were lighted and burning:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 8:2</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him,.... It being his work to light the
lamps, though, as Ben Gersom observes, it was not incumbent on an high
priest alone to do this, for it also belonged to the sons of Aaron, who
were common priests, [Exo 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021);
though it is probable that as this was the first time of lighting them,
it might be done by Aaron himself, his sons attending and assisting him;
in which he was an eminent type of Christ, the great High Priest, who
lights the lamps in all his golden candlesticks, the churches, [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020), and from whom they have all
their light and all the supplies of it:

when thou lightest the lamps; which was done at evening, [Exo
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008); pointing at the great light set
up by Christ, the light of the world, in the evening of it, in the last
days:

the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick; the
Targum of Jonathan is,"at the same time of thy lighting the lamps over
against the candlestick, there shall be seven lamps giving light: three
on the west side and three on the east side, and the seventh in the
middle:''and in the like order Jarchi places them, who observes, that
the three eastward looked over against the middlemost, the wicks that
were in them; and so the three westward, the tops of the wicks were over
against the middlemost: and he also observes, that the middlemost lamp
was no other than the body of the candlestick, and so all the rest of
the lamps were over against and looked to that; and this is the sense of
Maimonides (m), and other Jewish writers; but the truer meaning of the
phrase is, that the seven lamps gave light, as they were to do, to that
part of the holy place that was opposite to the candlestick, the north
part of it, where stood the shewbread table, the candlestick being in
the south, [Exo 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#022); that the table
of the Lord might have light, as it was proper it should; and the
priests might see to set on and take off the bread, which otherwise they
could not, there being no window in the place; See Gill on [Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037).

\(m\) Hilchot Beth Hacbehirah, c. 3. sect. 8.

[Numbers 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 8:3</span></span>

And Aaron did so, he lighted the lamps thereof over against the
candlestick,.... As God had taken up his residence in the most holy
place, as appears by the voice speaking from off the mercy seat, [Num
7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089); and sacrifices were begun to be
offered in the outward court on the altar of burnt offering, it was
proper that the service of God in the holy place should also be set on
foot; as placing of the shewbread on the shewbread table, and burning
incense on the golden altar of incense; which could not well be done
until the lamps were lighted, and therefore orders were given for the
lighting them, which was accordingly done by Aaron:

as the Lord commanded Moses; [Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037).

[Numbers 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 8:4</span></span>

And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold,.... As it is also
said to be; See Gill on [Exo 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031);
and See Gill on [Exo 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#036),

unto the shalt thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work; of
which, see [Exo 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031),

according unto the pattern which the Lord had showed Moses; when on
Mount Sinai with him:

so he made the candlestick; that is, ordered it to be made, and took
care that it was made exactly to the pattern he had of it; otherwise
Bezaleel was the artificer; and so the Targum of Jonathan here expresses
him by name.

[Numbers 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 8:5</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... the same time the order about
lighting the lamps was given; and this section is joined to the former,
Aben Ezra thinks, to show that Aaron employed himself in lighting the
lamps, but in the rest of the services the Levites helped him, and stood
before him to do what he commanded them: they were ordered to be taken
and given to Aaron before; and they were numbered, and their services
appointed to each division of them; and now they are ordered to be
ordained and consecrated to their office:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 8:6</span></span>

Take the Levites from among the children of Israel,.... Among whom they
were mixed, as were all the tribes mixed together as Aben Ezra says,
before they took their journey from Mount Sinai; however, from hence
forward, they were distinguished from Israelites, as they are both in
Scripture and in Jewish writings; see [Ch1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#002); though this seems to design no
other but their appointment and separation to their work and service, as
ministers to the priests of the Lord; and so as Aaron did not assume the
honour of priesthood to himself but was called of God, the Levites did
not take the honour of their office to themselves but had it by the
appointment and call of God:

and cleanse them; with water, by sprinkling the water of purification on
them, and by washing their bodies and clothes with water; which outward
washing was a sign of moral purity, which was necessary to their
employment in the service of the sanctuary; for though there was no
particular uncleanness on them, either ceremonial or moral, but what was
common to men; yet it was proper, by such outward rites, to put them and
others in mind, that they which are employed about holy things should be
eminently pure and holy; and as their business was to carry holy things,
to bear the sacred vessels of the sanctuary from place to place when
needful, they ought of all men to be clean, [Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011), and in this they were emblems
of the ministers of the word, who ought to be pure, as in heart, so in
life and conversation, and be examples of purity to others, [Co2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006).

[Numbers 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 8:7</span></span>

And thus shall thou do unto them, to cleanse them,.... Or order Aaron to
do unto them; the cleansing of the Levites was the work of Aaron, either
by himself or by his order; in which he was a type of Christ, who is the
refiner and purifier of the sons of Levi, [Mal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003),

sprinkle water of purifying upon them; or "water of sin" (n); water
which purifies from sin, in a ceremonial sense; and this was water mixed
with the ashes of the red heifer, which was the purification of persons
deified by the dead, as Jarchi observes; and though the law concerning
the red heifer, and of making the water of purification, is not made
mention of till afterwards, [Num 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001),
yet it was very probably given before; and the Jews say (o), it was on
the second of Nisan, or the first month, which was the day after the
tabernacle was erected, that Eleazar the priest burnt the red heifer and
sprinkled all Israel; this only "sanctified to the purifying of the
flesh", [Heb 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013), in a ceremonial
sense, but was typical of the blood of Christ, which "purges the
conscience from dead works"; that so men may be fitted and qualified, as
the Levites were, "to serve the living God", [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014),

and let them shave all their flesh; the hair of their bodies, in all
parts thereof; even the beard, as Aben Ezra notes, some say; yet not the
corners of it; but the whole hair of the body, everywhere, was to be
shaved off; to denote the most perfect purity, and a removal of all
superfluity of haughtiness and excrescences of the flesh from them: so
the Egyptian priests used to shave their whole body every third day,
lest there should be anything filthy in those that served the gods (p):
this cleansing of the Levites was after the same manner as lepers were
cleansed: and Jarchi observes, from one of their writers, that because
the Levites gave an atonement for the firstborn, who committed idolatry,
which is called the sacrifices of the dead, and the leper is called a
dead man, they were obliged to shaving as the lepers; but Ben Gersom
gives a better reason for the shaving of them; that it was to put them
in mind that they should forsake material (or corporeal) things, and
employ themselves in the service of God; see [Act
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002) [Ti2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004),

and let them wash their clothes; and much more their bodies, as
Chaskuni, after the manner of those who were polluted by touching a dead
body; typical of the saints having their bodies washed with pure water,
and their garments washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb, [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022),

and so make themselves clean; the Targum of Jonathan adds, in forty
seahs of water; and according to the sense of that paraphrase, both the
bodies and clothes of the Levites were dipped in water.

\(n\) "aquas peccati", Montanus; "aquam peccati", Piscator, Drusius;
"the sin water", Ainsworth. (o) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 7. p. 22. (p)
Herodot. Enterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 37.

[Numbers 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 8:8</span></span>

Then let them take a young bullock,.... Of two years old, as the Jewish
writers gather from the other in the next clause, being called the
second; though the wise men say one of three years old is fit for such a
sacrifice; nay, others say, if four or five years old; but the decision
is according to the wise men (q).

with his meat offering, even fine flour mingled with oil: which always
went along with a burnt offering, and consisted of three tenth deals of
line flour, and half an hin of oil, [Num
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#012),

and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering; which was
the offering for the sin of the whole congregation of Israel, through
ignorance; and this being for all the Levites, and they being instead of
the firstborn of Israel, such an offering was required; and though there
was no particular sin charged upon them, but it became necessary for
their perfect cleansing and expiation.

\(q\) Misn. Parah, c. 1. sect. 2. & Bartenora in ib.

[Numbers 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 8:9</span></span>

And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the
congregation,.... Not without it, but within it, in the court of the
tabernacle, at least at the door of it, where stood the altar of burnt
offering, on which sacrifices for them were now to be offered:

and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel
together; the heads of the tribes, and elders of the people, as Aben
Ezra interprets this phrase in [Lev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#003); where the whole congregation is
said to be assembled at the consecration of the priests, as here at the
consecration of the Levites, having a concern therein, as well as to be
spectators and witnesses of this solemn affair; and no doubt as many of
them as could conveniently assemble at the door of the tabernacle did,
though every individual of that large body of people could not possibly
do it.

[Numbers 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 8:10</span></span>

And thou shalt bring the Levites before the Lord,.... From the door of
the tabernacle, to the altar of burnt offering, where the Lord was in
some sense present to accept the sacrifices offered to him:

and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites; as
were used to be put upon sacrifices, for the Levites were themselves
offered for an offering of the children of Israel, as is expressed in
[Num 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011); by which rite they
signified that they voluntarily parted with them, and gave them up to
the Lord, and transferred their service to them, in which they were to
serve in their room and stead; these, according to some Jewish writers,
were the firstborn of Israel that laid their hands on the Levites, a
type of the general assembly and church of the firstborn; or rather the
princes and heads of the tribes, who represented the whole body. Some
think by this rite is signified the consent of the people in the
designation and appointment of the ministers of the word to their work
and office; but what in the New Testament seems to answer to this is,
the laying of the hands of the presbytery on ministers of the word, [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014).

[Numbers 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 8:11</span></span>

And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord,.... Or "wave" (r)
them, as a wave offering, which was moved to and fro, backwards and
forwards; not that they were actually so waved and moved to and fro by
Aaron, which could not be done by him; though it is possible he might
make such a motion himself, and they might do the like after him,
thereby signifying that they belonged unto the Lord of the whole earth;
and some think this testified their readiness to serve the Lord; to
which may be added their constant employment in his service, being
always in motion, doing one piece of service or another continually; as
the people of God, and especially the ministers of the word, should be
always abounding: in the work of the Lord. Ainsworth supposes that the
troubles and afflictions of the ministers of God are figured hereby:

for an offering of the children of Israel; to the Lord, hereby devoting
them to his service:

that they may execute the service of the Lord; for them, in their room
and stead, do what otherwise they must have done; see [Num
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#007); with this compare [Isa
66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020).

\(r\) "et motabit", Tigurine version; "et faciet elevare", Pagninus,
Montanus, Vatablus; "et agitabit", Drusius; "et agitato", Piscator.

[Numbers 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 8:12</span></span>

And the Levites shall lay their hands on the heads of the bullocks,....
Or "on the head" (s); on the head of everyone of them, as Aben Ezra,
thereby, as it were, transferring their sins to them, for these were to
make atonement for them, as the latter part of the verse shows; and this
was a figure of the imputation of sin to Christ, and taught that
doctrine, and led the faith of the offerers to the sin bearing and sin
atoning Saviour:

and thou shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a
burnt offering, unto the Lord; that is, shall order to be offered; for
not Moses, but Aaron, offered these offerings, as Aben Ezra observes, of
which this is a proof, that Aaron is said to make the atonement for
them, [Num 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#021), for which purpose
these sacrifices were offered, particularly the first; and the latter by
way of thanksgiving for atonement made by the former: so it follows:

to make an atonement for the Levites; who could not be admitted to
service until their sins were expiated; as no man is worthy to be
employed in the work of God, but such for whom reconciliation for their
sins is made by the blood and sacrifice of Christ, by which they are
purged from dead works to serve the living God.

\(s\) "super caput", Tigurine version. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius.

[Numbers 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 8:13</span></span>

And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons,....
After atonement was made for them, as Aben Ezra observes; then they were
presented to Aaron and his sons, to whom they were given to he their
ministers, and assistants to them:

and offer them for an offering unto the Lord: or, and "waved them", &c.
as before, that is, order them to be waved; for not Moses, but Aaron,
did this, and indeed was done already; and therefore should rather be
rendered, as by Bishop Patrick, after thou hast offered, or waved them.

[Numbers 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 8:14</span></span>

Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of
Israel,.... By sprinkling the water of purification upon them; by
offering sacrifices for them; by presenting them before the Lord, with
the hands of the people of Israel put upon them; by offering and waving
them before the Lord, and by setting them before Aaron and his sons, as
their ministers:

and the Levites shall be mine: in a special and peculiar manner devoted
to his service, and by him given to his priests for that purpose; so the
Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan,"and the Levites shall minister before
me.''

[Numbers 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 8:15</span></span>

And after that shall the Levites go in,.... Not into the sanctuary,
where only the priests entered, much less into the most holy place,
where only the high priest went, and that but once a year, in neither of
which places the Levites had anything to do, but into the court of the
tabernacle:

to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: to watch there,
and to assist the priests at the altar of burnt offering, to take down
the tabernacle and bear the vessels of it, and set it up, as occasion
required:

and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them for an offering; cleanse
them by sprinkling the water of purifying on them, and offer them by
waving them as before; and indeed this is no new thing which is here
observed, but what was already done, and therefore should be rendered,
"when thou shalt have cleansed them", or "after thou hast cleansed
them", &c. and so the particle "vau" is sometimes used (t).

\(t\) See Noldius, p. 289, 290, 299.

[Numbers 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 8:16</span></span>

For they are wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel,....
All of them, entirely, and most certainly; or, "given, given" (u), which
is repeated for the confirmation of it; or because of their being twice
given, first to the Lord by the children of Israel, and then by the Lord
to Aaron and his sons, as Chaskuni; though Jarchi interprets it of the
different parts of their service they were devoted to, given for bearing
and carrying the vessels of the sanctuary, and given for the song, or to
be singers in the temple:

instead of such as open, every womb, even instead of the firstborn of
all the children of Israel have I taken them unto me; See Gill on [Num
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012), and See Gill on [Num
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013).

\(u\) "dati, dati", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; so Drusius and
Ainsworth.

[Numbers 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 8:17</span></span>

For all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine,

both men and beasts,.... Not only in common with other of his creatures,
but in a special respect on account of his signal deliverance of them;
they were his, as Jarchi expresses it, by the line of judgment, or rule
of justice and equity, because he protected them among the firstborn of
the Egyptians, saved them when he slew theirs, as follows:

in the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt; both of
men and beasts:

I sanctified them for myself; claimed them as his own, and set them
apart for his own use, or ordered them to be set apart: see [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002).

[Numbers 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 8:18</span></span>

And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children of
Israel. Gave up his right in the firstborn, and instead of them took the
Levites for his use and service: see [Num
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012).

[Numbers 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 8:19</span></span>

And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and his sons, from among
the children of Israel,.... Or I have given the Levites that were given;
that is, the Lord gave to Aaron and his sons the Levites, that were
first given to him; as they were, when brought before him, and the
children of Israel laid hands on them, and they were offered before the
Lord, [Num 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010),

to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the
congregation; to do what otherwise they must have done, watch and guard
the tabernacle, carry the sacrifices to the priests, assist them at the
altar, take down and set up the tabernacle, and carry it, and the
vessels of it, from place to place:

and to make an atonement for the children of Israel; not by offering
sacrifices for them, which was the work of the priests, but by being now
offered themselves, [Num 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010); that
they themselves might be the atonement of their souls as Aben Ezra
expresses it, as well as they were by their service hereafter a means of
preserving the Israelites from death; which may be interpreted of making
an atonement, which Phinehas is said to do by his deed, though no
sacrifice was offered, [Num 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007);
which sense seems to be confirmed by what follows:

that there be no plague among the children of Israel, when the children
of Israel come nigh to the sanctuary; by approaching nearer than they
should, touching what they ought not, intruding themselves into service
they were not called to, or doing it amiss, not being instructed in it,
or inured to it as the Levites were. The phrase, "the children of
Israel", is five times used in this verse, to denote the love of God to
them, as Jarchi observes.

[Numbers 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 8:20</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of
Israel,.... The several parties concerned in the consecration of the
Levites: these

did to the Levites according unto all that the Lord commanded Moses,

so did the children of Israel unto them: which, as Jarchi notes, is said
to the praise of them that did it, and of what was done by them;
everything was done that was ordered, and in the manner in which it was
prescribed; Moses sprinkled, or ordered to be sprinkled, the water of
purification on them, and set them before the tabernacle, and before the
Lord; the children of Israel laid their hands on them, and Aaron waved
them, offered the sacrifices for them.

[Numbers 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 8:21</span></span>

And the Levites were purified,.... From sin, by the sprinkling of the
sin water, or water of purification on them, [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007),

and they washed their clothes; that they might have no defilement about
them, neither in their bodies, nor in their garments:

and Aaron offered them as an offering before the Lord; a wave offering,
as in [Num 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011),

and Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them; by offering the
sacrifices for them, [Num 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012).

[Numbers 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 8:22</span></span>

And after that went the Levites in,.... Into the court of the
tabernacle, being at the door of it when the above rites and ceremonies
of their consecration were performed:

to do their service in the tabernacle of the congregation, before Aaron
and his sons; in their presence, and by their order, as they should
direct them:

as the Lord had commanded Moses, so did they unto them; Aaron and his
sons did to the then present Levites according to the command of God by
Moses; they exactly observed every punctilio of it, and complied with
it; and this the sons of Aaron did continually to the sons of the
Levites, as Aben Ezra remarks, in all succeeding ages; when the Levites
were consecrated to their service, the same things were done unto them
that are here ordered.

[Numbers 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 8:23</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time he gave the
instructions about the consecration of the Levites, the time of their
entrance on their service, and of leaving it, was fixed:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 8:24</span></span>

This is it that belongeth unto the Levites,.... The fixed and settled
time for their service, as is after related:

from twenty and five years old and upward, they shall go in to wait upon
the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; in [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003); the time for the Levites entering
on the work of the tabernacle is fixed to thirty years and upward, which
Jarchi reconciles thus; at twenty five years old the Levite goes in to
learn the rites of service, and he learns five years, and when thirty
years of age he services; the same is observed by others (w); but what
Aben Ezra proposes seems much better; at thirty years of age a Levite
entered into the service of bearing and carrying burdens; and at twenty
five years of age he entered into the service of the tent or tabernacle,
where he was employed in lighter service, such as opening and shutting
the doors of the sanctuary, keeping out strangers and unclean persons,
and singing the songs of the sanctuary; but was not concerned till
thirty years of age in carrying the vessels of the sanctuary on the
shoulders, as the Kohathites; or in taking down and setting up the
tabernacle, loading and unloading the wagons, as the Gershonites and
Merarites; which is the business assigned unto them, and spoken of in
[Num 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#022), where the age of thirty
years, and upward, is mentioned, as the time of their entrance on it,
[Num 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#023).

\(w\) Ben Gersom in loc. Bartenora in Pirke Abot, c. 5. sect. 21.

[Numbers 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 8:25</span></span>

And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the
service thereof,.... The heavy service of it:

and shall serve no more; by bearing and carrying the vessels of the
sanctuary upon their shoulders, as Jarchi interprets it; this, according
to the Jewish writers, was only in force while the tabernacle was in the
wilderness, and was moved from place to place: but when it had a fixed
habitation, and that laborious service of bearing and carrying the
vessels of it ceased, years made no difference in the Levites, or
disqualified them for service; for it is said (x), that the Levites were
not bound by this law, but in the time of the tabernacle; but when it
was at Shiloh, and at Jerusalem, where there was no bearing and carrying
upon the shoulder, the Levites were not rejected on account of years,
only for their voice, when they had lost that, and could not sing.

\(x\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Cholin, c. 1. sect. 6.

[Numbers 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 8:26</span></span>

But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the
congregation,.... By giving advice, instructing younger Levites, and
doing lighter service. Jarchi says, they shall return to shutting of
doors, singing and loading wagons; but the last especially seems too
burdensome: the ministry of such is explained by the next clause:

to keep the charge; of the tabernacle, to watch and observe that no
stranger or unclean person enter into it; and this they were capable of
when at the age of fifty, and upwards:

and shall do no service; heavy and laborious:

thus thou shall do unto the Levites touching their charge; dismiss them
from service when at such an age, or however make their service easier;
for this respects ancient men, as Aben Ezra notes; though it may include
both their entrance on their work, and their cessation from it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 9](num009)

</div>
