<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num006)  [Next](num008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 7

This chapter gives an account of the presents brought, by the princes of
the twelve tribes at the setting up of the tabernacle, for the use of
it, [Num 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001); and at the dedication of
the altar, and the service of that, [Num
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#010); first of the prince of the tribe
of Judah, [Num 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012); then of the
prince of Issachar, [Num 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#018); of the
prince of Zebulun, [Num 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#024); of the
prince of Reuben, [Num 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#030); of the
prince of Simeon, [Num 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#036); of the
prince of Gad, [Num 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#042); of the
prince of Ephraim, [Num 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#048); of the
prince of Manasseh, [Num 7:54](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#054); of the
prince of Benjamin, [Num 7:60](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#060); of the
prince of Dan, [Num 7:66](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#066); of the
prince of Asher, [Num 7:72](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#072); of the
prince of Naphtali, [Num 7:78](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#078); the sum
of all which follows, [Num 7:84](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#084); and
the chapter is concluded with a token of God's approbation and
acceptance of the whole, [Num 7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089).

[Numbers 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 7:1</span></span>

And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the
tabernacle,.... Not on the very exact day on which it was first reared
up, for that was on the first day of the first month of the second year
from the coming up of Israel out of Egypt, [Exo
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017); whereas the following offerings
of the princes were not offered, and many other things previous to them,
recorded in the preceding chapters, were not done, until after the first
day of the second month of that year, [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001); though the Jews say (e) the first
of Nisan, or of the first month, was the first for various things, and
the first on which the princes offered; but no one particular day can be
intended, because the princes were twelve days successively offering
their offerings; wherefore "the day" here only denotes the time about
which it was when this service was performed; when the tabernacle was
not only set up, but "fully" set up, when everything relating to it was
in its proper place and order; when not only it was put together, and
all the vessels and instruments of it in their due place, but also when
the people of Israel, for whose sake it was erected, that the Lord God
might dwell among them, were numbered, and their camps formed and
pitched around the tabernacle; and the Levites were taken and numbered
also, who were to serve at it, and their place and service were
appointed unto them about it; for then, and not till then, was the
service of it completed, and its proper place and situation fixed and
settled:

and had anointed it; with the holy oil Moses was directed to make and
anoint it with, [Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023),

and sanctified it: set it apart for holy use and service, to be an
habitation for God, and the place of his worship:

and all the instruments thereof; the ark, table, candlestick, &c.

both the altars, and all the vessels thereof, and had anointed them,

and sanctified them; the altar of incense, and the altar of burnt
offering, and all appertaining: thereunto; according to Ben Gersom, this
finishing of the whole was at the end of the seven days of consecration
of Aaron and his sons, [Exo 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#035).

\(e\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 7. p. 21. Baal Hatturim in loc.

[Numbers 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 7:2</span></span>

That the princes of Israel,.... The princes of the twelve tribes of
Israel:

heads of the house of their fathers; of the each of the houses and
families the tribes were divided into, and took their name from each of
their ancestors, as is next explained:

who were princes of the tribes; the twelve tribes, as before observed,
[Num 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#004),

and were over them that were numbered; over the children of Israel that
were numbered, [Num 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#019); by which it
that these princes are the very same persons that are mentioned by name
there, as they are here afterwards; and were with Moses and Aaron, and
assisting to them when they took the number of them; but according to
the Targum of Jonathan, and Jarchi, these were appointed over them in
Egypt; but the former is right: these now

offered not sacrifices but gifts; they brought their presents to the
Lord for the service of his sanctuary, and set them before him, as
follows.

[Numbers 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 7:3</span></span>

And they brought their offering before the Lord,.... Before the
tabernacle, as it is afterwards explained, where he had now taken up his
habitation:

six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; according to the number of the
twelve tribes, of which they were princes, two oxen for each wagon,
which were to carry the tabernacle, and its vessels, from place to
place; and which wagons were covered, not only to hide the things to be
put into them from the sight of the people, being sacred, but to
preserve them from the rain and dust, and the like; and no doubt, but as
they were made of the best materials, So they were covered with rich
coverings for the honour of the vessels put into them, being the
presents of princes, and in which they joined, and could not be ordinary
carriages. The word is rendered "litters" in [Isa
66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020); and by some, "coaches"; the
Targum of Jonathan is,"six wagons yoked,''or drawn with a yoke of oxen;
and Aben Ezra says, it signifies a kind of oxen which drew wagons; but
the Targum of Jonathan, Jarchi, and Ben Gersom interpret it "covered",
as we do:

a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox; two princes
joined in the present of one wagon, which shows it could not be a common
wagon, but rich carriage, and ornamented, as the Targum of Jonathan
adds; and each prince presented an ox, so that there was a yoke of them
for each wagon:

and they brought them before the tabernacle; the Targum of Jonathan
says, Moses would not receive them, and therefore they brought them
before the tabernacle; and so, says Jarchi, Moses received them not at
their hands, until it was declared to him by the mouth of the Lord what
he should do, as follows.

[Numbers 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 7:4</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Out of the tabernacle, before which
the wagons and oxen were brought:

saying: as follows.

[Numbers 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 7:5</span></span>

Take it of them,.... The present of the wagons and oxen, by which it
appears that this freewill offering of the princes was according to his
mind and will, and what they were influenced and guided to by his
Spirit, and was well pleasing in his sight, and acceptable to him:

that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation; be made use of, and employed in carrying the tabernacle,
and the things of it, from place to place, when the Israelites
journeyed:

and thou shalt give them to the Levites; to ease them, whose business it
was to bear and carry the several parts of the tabernacle, and the
vessels of it:

to every man according to his service; whether lighter or heavier, for
such difference there was in the three divisions of the Levites; and
according as their work was, they had more or fewer wagons and oxen
given them, as it follows, [Num 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#007).

[Numbers 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 7:6</span></span>

And Moses took the wagons and the oxen,.... Of the princes, as he was
directed:

and gave them unto the Levites; the Gershonites and Merarites; for, as
for the Kohathites, they had no part of them, for a reason after given,
[Num 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009).

[Numbers 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 7:7</span></span>

Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon,.... The
eldest son of Levi:

according to their service; which was to bear and take care of the
curtains, coverings, hangings and rails of the tabernacle; and which,
when carrying from place to place, it was proper they should be covered
from being exposed to rain and dust; and being so many as they were,
must be heavy, burdensome, and cumbersome, and therefore two wagons,
with two yoke of oxen, were given them, to ease them.

[Numbers 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 7:8</span></span>

And four wagons and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari,.... All
the remaining wagons and oxen, which were double the number given to the
Gershonites:

according unto their service; being much heavier than theirs, having all
the boards, pillars, sockets, pins; cords, &c. to bear and carry: thus
Moses was directed of God wisely to dispose of those carriages, in
proportion to the services each was employed in; and in a spiritual way,
as the day, duty, and service of the people of God be, he proportions
grace and strength to them to answer thereunto:

under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest; under whose care,
inspection, and direction, were both the Gershonites and Merarites, [Num
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028); and by whom were delivered,
according to the instruction of Moses, the several wagons and oxen, to
them.

[Numbers 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 7:9</span></span>

But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none,.... Being all disposed of to
the sons of Gershon and Merari: the reason of which follows:

because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they
should bear upon their shoulders; as the ark with the mercy seat, and
cherubim, the shewbread table, the candlestick, and the two altars;
though in later times we find the ark was sometimes not only carried by
the priests, but upon a cart, [Jos
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017).

[Numbers 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 7:10</span></span>

And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar,.... For setting it
apart to sacred use and service, even the altar of burnt offering; or
rather after it had bean sanctified and set apart, when it began to be
made use of for sacrifice:

in the day that it was anointed; with the anointing oil, whereby it was
devoted to sacred service:

even the princes offered their offering before the altar; the altar of
burnt offering; they brought their vessels for the service of it, and
the creatures for sacrifice, and set them before it; signifying what
they meant, thereby, that the silver and golden vessels were for the use
of it, and the beasts for sacrifice to be offered up on it: and here
Jarchi also observes, that Moses would not receive their offering until
he knew the mind of God about it, and it was declared to him from
himself.

[Numbers 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 7:11</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... For before this was said to him, even
what follows, Moses knew not, as the same writer observes, how they
should offer, in what order, whether according to their birth, or
whether according to the journeying of their camps, or whether they
should offer together, or one after another, one day after another (g);
this affair is set in a clear light:

they shall offer their offering each prince on his day; one on one day,
and the other on the next, and so on successively for twelve days
running; and this was ordered for the greater solemnity of the service,
and that it might be taken notice of, and each have the honour and
credit of it; and this was done, not according to the order of their
birth, but as their standards were fixed, first Judah, and those under
him, and so the rest in course:

for the dedicating of the altar; see [Num
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#010).

\(g\) Vid. Siphri apud Yalkut in loc.

[Numbers 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 7:12</span></span>

And he that offered his offering on the first day,.... Was he whose
standard was pitched first, at the east, to the rising sun: and this

was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah; who was the
prince and captain of that tribe, though the title is not here given
him, as to the rest of the princes, this being left to be concluded from
his offering first; for if they that offered after him were princes, he
must needs be one; or it may be this title is omitted, because the chief
prince, of the prince of the tribe of Judah, most peculiarly belongs to
a greater Personage, even the Messiah, who was to spring, and did spring
from that tribe, [Ch1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#002); and, as
Baal Hatturim says, from Nahshon; and who also observes, that Ben
Nahshon is the Messiah.

[Numbers 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 7:13</span></span>

And his offering was one silver charger,.... Or dish, like one of those
used in the shewbread table to hold the bread in, only they were of
gold, this of silver, and belonged to the altar of burnt offering; the
use of which might be to hold the meat offering in, as it may seem from
the latter part of the verse, or the wave breast or heave shoulder,
which belonged to the priest:

the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels; which were sixty
one ounces, four drachms, one scruple, and seventeen grains (h), worth
about sixteen pounds and five shillings of our money:

one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
the standard that was kept in the sanctuary; this was a lesser vessel,
and was either for holding the drink offering, or receiving the blood of
the sacrifices; its weight was thirty three ounces, five drachms, and
three grains, and was worth about eight pounds and fifteen shillings of
our money:

both of them were full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering; which always attended other sacrifices after mentioned, part
of which was burnt on the altar of burnt offering, and the rest were the
perquisites of the priests.

\(h\) Vid. Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 366.

[Numbers 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 7:14</span></span>

One spoon of ten shekels of gold, &c. Its weight was according to the
shekels, its matter of gold; it weighed four ounces, one drachm, and
nine grains, and was worth about seven pounds and ten shillings of our
money:

full of incense; this looks as if this spoon was designed for the golden
altar of incense, which might be at this time also dedicated; but Jarchi
understands it as for the altar of burnt offering, and observes, we
never find incense belonging to a private person, nor to the outward
altar (the altar of burnt offering), but this only, and which was
temporary.

[Numbers 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 7:15</span></span>

One young bullock,.... Of three years old, as the Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem:

one ram; of two years old, as the same Targums:

one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering; of which see [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003).

[Numbers 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 7:16</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. Though these offerings of the
princes were by way of thanksgiving, and to express their joy and
gladness at the erection of the tabernacle, its altars, and the service
thereof; yet as this might not be without sin, which attends the best
and purest performances of men, a sin offering was required, teaching us
to look to Christ, who was made an offering for sin, for the taking away
the sins of our holy things.

[Numbers 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 7:17</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... So that here were all sorts
of offerings on this occasion, meat and drink offerings, burnt
offerings, sin offerings, and peace offerings: and for the latter were
brought

two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year; the
reason why so many were brought and used for this sort of sacrifice was,
because with these a feast was made, of which not only the priests
partook, but the princes, and as many of their friends and acquaintance
as they thought fit to invite:

this was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab: which he offered
out of his own substance, as the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem
paraphrase it; though some have thought, that the presents and offerings
were so large, and the princes not so very rich, or so much above the
common people, as may be thought, that therefore they were assisted by
the several tribes they were princes of: and as was this prince's
offering, so were all the rest that follow in the order, according to
their encampment under the several standards where they were fixed; and
which were offered successively every day, the sabbath day or days not
excepted, these being religious services, until the whole twelve were
finished; and their presents and their offerings were exactly the same,
and the account of them is given in the same words; they either agreeing
together to make the same presents and offerings, or else they were
directed to do so by the Spirit of God; whereby might be signified the
common and equal right that they, and the tribes they represented, had
in the altars, and the benefits arising from thence; as those that
believe in Christ have an altar which is himself, they have a joint
right to partake of, and have an equal share in the benefits of
righteousness, peace, pardon, and atonement by him; see [Heb
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010); wherefore there is nothing more
particularly to be observed in [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017); only that in the several
accounts of the presents and offerings of each prince, the vowel points
in the Hebrew text are omitted, excepting in the names of persons that
offer; which does not at all militate against the antiquity of the
points, or their being coeval with the consonants, since, both in
manuscripts and printed copies, these may be left out for brevity's
sake, and quicker dispatch, and without any detriment, since they may be
easily supplied from the first instance given; and they may be omitted
on purpose, that these accounts might be the more taken notice of as a
very wonderful thing, that their presents and offerings should be
exactly alike; since the vowels being wanting, the naked letters may the
more strike the eye, and lead the mind to notice them; and whereas the
accents are all along continued, the reason of which may be, because the
vowels once put, and read, might be more easily known, especially by one
skilful in the Hebrew language, than the stops, distinctions, and
divisions of the text, as a learned man has observed (i).

\(i\) Vid. Pfeiffer. Dubia vexata, cent. 2. loc. 19. p. 147.

[Numbers 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 7:18</span></span>

On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did
offer. See [Num 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#008).

[Numbers 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 7:19</span></span>

He offered for his offering one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 7:20</span></span>

One spoon of gold of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 7:21</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 7:22</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 7:23</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Nethaneel the son of Zuar; see [Num
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#008).

[Numbers 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 7:24</span></span>

On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of
Zebulun, did offer. See [Num 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#009).

[Numbers 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 7:25</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 7:26</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 7:27</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 7:28</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 7:29</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Eliab the son of Helon; see [Num 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#009).

[Numbers 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 7:30</span></span>

On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of
Reuben, did offer. See [Num 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 7:31</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 7:32</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 7:33</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 7:34</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 7:35</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Elizur the son of Shedeur; see [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 7:36</span></span>

On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the
children of Simeon, did offer. See [Num
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#006).

[Numbers 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 7:37</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 7:38</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 7:39</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:40](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 7:40</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 7:41</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai; see [Num
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#006).

[Numbers 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 7:42</span></span>

On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of
Gad, offered. See [Num 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">num 7:43</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">num 7:44</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">num 7:45</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">num 7:46</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">num 7:47</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Eliasaph the son of Deuel; see [Num
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 7:48</span></span>

On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the children
of Ephraim, offered. See [Num 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#010).

[Numbers 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">num 7:49</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">num 7:50</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">num 7:51</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">num 7:52</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">num 7:53</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Elishama the son of Ammihud; see [Num
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#010).

[Numbers 7:54](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">num 7:54</span></span>

On the eighth day offered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur,

prince of the children of Manasseh. See [Num
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#010).

[Numbers 7:55](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">num 7:55</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:56](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">num 7:56</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:57](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">num 7:57</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">num 7:58</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">num 7:59</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur; see [Num
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#010).

[Numbers 7:60](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">num 7:60</span></span>

On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of
Benjamin, offered. See [Num 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#011).

[Numbers 7:61](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">num 7:61</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:62](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">num 7:62</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:63](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">num 7:63</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:64](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">num 7:64</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:65](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">num 7:65</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Abidan the son of Gideoni; see [Num
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#011).

[Numbers 7:66](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">num 7:66</span></span>

On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the children
of Dan, offered. See [Num 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#012).

[Numbers 7:67](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">num 7:67</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:68](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">num 7:68</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:69](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">num 7:69</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:70](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">num 7:70</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:71](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#071)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">num 7:71</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai; see [Num
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#012).

[Numbers 7:72](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#072)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_072">num 7:72</span></span>

On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children of
Asher, offered. See [Num 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:73](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#073)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_073">num 7:73</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:74](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#074)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_074">num 7:74</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:75](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#075)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_075">num 7:75</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:76](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#076)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_076">num 7:76</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:77](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#077)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_077">num 7:77</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Pagiel the son of Ocran; see [Num
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:78](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#078)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_078">num 7:78</span></span>

On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of
Naphtali, offered. See [Num 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:79](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#079)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_079">num 7:79</span></span>

His offering was one silver charger,.... See Gill on [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013).

[Numbers 7:80](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#080)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_080">num 7:80</span></span>

One golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense. See Gill on [Num
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014).

[Numbers 7:81](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#081)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_081">num 7:81</span></span>

One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt
offering. See Gill on [Num 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:82](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#082)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_082">num 7:82</span></span>

One kid of the goats for a sin offering. See Gill on [Num
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#016).

[Numbers 7:83](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#083)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_083">num 7:83</span></span>

And for a sacrifice of peace offerings,.... See Gill on [Num
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#017).

Ahira the son of Enan; see [Num 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#015).

[Numbers 7:84](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#084)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_084">num 7:84</span></span>

This was the dedication of the altar by the princes,.... These the
presents they made, and the offerings they offered when the altar first
began to be made use of, after it had been anointed and sanctified for
sacred service:

in the day when it was anointed: this shows that it was not the precise
and exact day of the setting up of the tabernacle, and the anointing of
the altar, that the above presents and offerings were brought, since
they were twelve successive days in bringing; but that the sense is,
that about that time, or quickly after it was anointed, the princes
dedicated it in the manner before described:

twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold;
according to the number of the princes, and the tribes they were princes
of; a noble instance both of devotion and piety, and of liberality and
generosity; and is a standing example on record to all princes and great
personages in all successive ages, to promote religion and godliness, by
their own personal conduct and behaviour, and to encourage and support
it by their generous benefactions and donations: the sum total of what
they contributed is in this and the following verses given.

[Numbers 7:85](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#085)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_085">num 7:85</span></span>

Each charger of silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl
seventy,.... See Gill on [Num 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013),

all the silver vessels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary; which amounted to 1,139 ounces and
four drachms (k), which were worth about three hundred pounds of our
money.

\(k\) Vid. Scheuchzer. ut supra. (Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 366.)

[Numbers 7:86](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#086)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_086">num 7:86</span></span>

The golden spoons were twelve, full of incense,.... Which points at the
use those spoons or cups were of, namely, to carry incense in them, such
as were used on the day of atonement (l):

weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary; See Gill
on [Num 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#014),

all the gold of the spoons was twenty shekels; which amounted to forty
nine ounces, five drachms, scruples, and eight gains, worth about
seventy five pounds of our money.

\(l\) Misn. Yoma, c. 4, 4. & 5, 1.

[Numbers 7:87](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#087)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_087">num 7:87</span></span>

All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks,.... According
to the number of the princes and their tribes, and so:

the rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve; which were also for
the burnt offering:

with their meat offering; which always went along with the burnt
offering:

and the kids of the goats, for a sin offering, twelve; thus the twelve
princes, and by them the twelve tribes, expressed their faith in Christ,
the antitype of those sacrifices, and their hope of his coming into the
world to be a sacrifice for sin, and of their atonement, reconciliation,
peace, pardon, and salvation by him; see [Act
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006).

[Numbers 7:88](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#088)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_088">num 7:88</span></span>

And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings were twenty
and four bullocks,.... Each prince bringing two:

the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty;
five of each being brought by every prince; so that the whole number of
beasts for peace offerings only, which were to feast with, were two
hundred four:

this was the dedication of the altar after that it was anointed; this
clearly shows, that it was not the precise day the altar was anointed
the dedication was made, but some little time after; even that the first
prince brought his presents and offerings for the dedication of it.

[Numbers 7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_089">num 7:89</span></span>

And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation, to
speak with him,.... With God, to consult him on some affair or another,
or to learn whether he had anything else to communicate to him, to be
delivered to the children of Israel; or whether he had any directions
and instructions to give him about the presents and gifts of the
princes, since this seems to be immediately after their offerings:

then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him; the Targum of Jonathan
paraphrases it, the voice of the Spirit; but rather the voice of the
Shechinah, or Word of God, the eternal "Logos", is what was heard; who
in the fulness of time was to be made flesh, and dwell among men, and be
heard, and seen, and handled by them; for as for the voice of the
Father, the was not heard at any time, [Joh
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037),

from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of the testimony, from
between the two cherubim; upon the ark in which the law was, called the
testimony, was the mercy seat; over that were placed two cherubim
shadowing it, and between these was the seat of the divine Majesty,
which he had now taken, and from hence the voice of him speaking, was
heard; which, as it follows upon the presents and offerings of the
princes, may be interpreted, of the divine approbation and acceptance of
them, since it was promised by the Lord to Moses, that upon their
building a tabernacle for him he would dwell in it; and upon the making
a mercy seat with the cherubim over the ark, he would there meet with
Moses, and commune with him; all which being done to his mind he fulfils
his promise: though it seems that at this time Moses did not go into the
most holy place, only into the tabernacle of the congregation, the
outward sanctuary, the court of the tabernacle; and there he heard the
voice, as Jarchi observes, coming out of the most holy place, and from
the mercy seat there, which was so loud, clear, and distinct, as to be
well heard and understood by him; he supposes the voice went out from
heaven to between the two cherubim, and from thence to the tabernacle of
the congregation: and he spake unto him; what he spoke is not said,
unless it is what follows in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 8](num008)

</div>
