<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num035)  [Next](deu000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 36:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 36

This chapter gives an account of an application made by the heads of the
tribe of Manasseh, concerning the inheritances of the daughters of
Zelophehad, which, should they marry into other tribes, would be removed
thither, and so be a loss to theirs, [Num
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001), which case was judged worthy of
regard; and to remedy this inconvenience, they were ordered to marry
into the family of their father's tribe, and this was to be a law to all
heiresses for the future in other tribes, [Num
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#005) and accordingly the daughters of
Zelophehad married their father's brothers' sons, [Num
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#010).

[Numbers 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 36:1</span></span>

And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead,.... The
princes, as Aben Ezra; so the Septuagint version, which was the tribe of
Manasseh, whose grandson Gilead was, as follows:

the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh of the families of the sons of
Joseph, came near; to the house of judgment, as the Targum of Jonathan,
the sanhedrim or court of judicature, consisting of the following
persons:

and spoke before Moses; the Septuagint version adds, "and before Eleazar
the priest", as in [Num 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#002).

and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel: the
princes of the several tribes; or it may be rather the seventy elders.

[Numbers 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 36:2</span></span>

And they said,.... One in the name of the rest:

the Lord commanded my lord; that is, Moses, whom they address in a very
respectable manner, being the chief governor of the nation under God:

to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel;
which command may be seen, in [Num
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#053),

and my lord was commanded by the Lord to give the inheritance of
Zelophehad our brother; or kinsman, being of the same tribe:

unto his daughters; who sued for it, and upon Moses's consulting the
Lord about it, it was ordered they should have it, [Num
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001) and which these princes observed
was likely to be attended with the following inconvenience.

[Numbers 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 36:3</span></span>

And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the
children of Israel,.... Which was not an unreasonable supposition, and
perhaps was judged very probable and likely, if some method was not
taken to prevent it; which they might conclude from the application of
some young men of the other tribes unto them:

then shall their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our
fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they
are received; for the inheritance given unto them would of course, the
above being the case, descend to their sons, and whose fathers being of
other tribes, it would be fixed there:

so shall it be taken from the lot of our inheritance; which gave them
some concern; for though this was no personal injury to them, nor any
detriment to their families and estates, yet, as it was a lessening of
their tribe, they were uneasy at it; and the rather they might be, since
half their tribe was to settle on that side Jordan, where they now were:
and now all this, the suit of the daughters of Zelophehad for their
father's inheritance, which was granted them, the address of young men
to them as heiresses, the concern of the heads of the tribe of Manasseh
on this account; all this, I say, being before they entered into the
land, or it was conquered by them, or divided to them by inheritance,
show their strong faith and assurance that they should possess it.

[Numbers 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 36:4</span></span>

And when the jubilee of the children of Israel shall be,.... At which
time inheritances were to be restored to the original proprietors of
them; yet this would be of no service in the present case, but rather
the contrary, since it would fix the inheritances of these daughters in
another tribe or in other tribes into which they should marry; and so
Aben Ezra and Jarchi interpret it, "though" there shall be a jubilee,
that will be of no advantage; it will not remedy this inconvenience: for

then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe
whereunto they are received; it being one principal part of the business
of the jubilee year to settle the inheritances of every tribe; and these
daughters being married into another tribe, of consequence their
inheritance would be placed there; or should it be sold by their
husbands, or their sons, at the year of jubilee it would be restored to
them as of such a tribe:

so shall their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the
tribe of our fathers; and thereby be a lessening of it; and every tribe
being ambitious of preserving and increasing its grandeur, this affair
sensibly affected the heads of this tribe.

[Numbers 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 36:5</span></span>

And Moses commanded the children of Israel,.... Even all the tribes of
Israel, whom the following law concerned, as well as the tribe of
Manasseh:

according to the word of the Lord; whom no doubt he consulted on this
occasion, as he did when the daughters of Zelophehad applied unto him
about the inheritance of their father:

saying, the tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well; in showing such
a concern for the welfare of their tribe; the consideration of which
would be of service to them all, and therefore was worthy of notice.
Aben Ezra observes, that the heads of the fathers spoke for the sake of
every tribe, what was for the good of them all, and therefore was well
spoken.

[Numbers 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 36:6</span></span>

This is the thing which the Lord doth command concerning the daughters
of Zelophehad,.... Concerning this affair relative to them; the Targum
of Jonathan paraphrases the words,"not for the generations that rise up
after the division of the land, but for the daughters of Zelophehad;''as
if this order only respected them, or what might happen before the land
was divided, but not after; and this is the general opinion of the
Jewish writers; but it seems, that as the following law not only
concerns them, but all heiresses, so all such after as well as before
the division of the land, since the reason of it holds good after as
before:

saying, let them marry to whom they think best; whom they like best, who
are most acceptable to them; as it was reasonable they should, and not
have such forced upon them, whose persons were disagreeable to them:

only into the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry; they
were to marry not only such as were of the tribe of Manasseh, but of
their father's family in that tribe; they could only marry into the
family of the Hepherites; see [Num
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#032).

[Numbers 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 36:7</span></span>

So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe
to tribe,.... Which shows that this concerns all the tribes of Israel,
though yet not fully expressed, as it is afterwards:

for everyone of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the
inheritance of the tribe of his fathers; or cleave (a) to a wife in that
tribe for marriage; this word is used in the original institution of it,
[Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024) though they were not
strictly obliged to marry in their own tribe; and frequently they did
intermarry with other tribes, which, had it been unlawful, would not
have been done, as it was by kings, and priests, and others; nor was
there any danger of an inheritance going into another tribe by a man's
marrying into it; wherefore this signifies only, that they were to be
careful to keep their inheritances in their tribe; and therefore if any
of them had no sons, only daughters, he was to marry them in his own
tribe and family, that the inheritance might not remove, as follows(a)
"adhaerebunt", Montanus, Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius.

[Numbers 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 36:8</span></span>

And every daughter that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe if the
children of Israel,.... For the same law which gave the daughters of
Zelophehad right to their father's inheritance, gave every other
daughter in Israel a right to inherit where there were no sons, [Num
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#008) and every such daughter,
according to this law:

shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father; marry
into her father's tribe and family; by which it appears that such who
were not heiresses might marry persons of another family, and even of
another tribe:

that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his
fathers; of his father's brethren, or of those that are near akin to
him.

[Numbers 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 36:9</span></span>

Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another,....
Which was one end of the year of jubilee, but that did not sufficiently
secure it without this law, as this case shows:

but everyone of the tribes of Israel shall keep himself to his own
inheritance; the chief view of which was, that it might clearly appear
of what tribe and family the Messiah sprang when he came.

[Numbers 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 36:10</span></span>

Even as the Lord commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad.
They married into, the family of their father's tribe, according to the
following account.

[Numbers 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 36:11</span></span>

For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah,.... The names of
the daughters of Zelophehad, and the same as in [Num
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#033), only the order a little varied,
Tirzah and Noah here changing places; there they are according to their
birth, here they are according to their marriage, as Aben Ezra thinks;
though Jarchi is of opinion, that being thus differently placed shows
that they were equal to one another, and one was not preferred to the
other:

these were married unto their father's brothers' sons; so that they were
first cousins.

[Numbers 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 36:12</span></span>

And they were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh, the son
of Joseph,.... The family of the Hepherites, of which they were. Aben
Ezra observes, that their being married into families, and not a family,
is a sign that their uncles' sons were not all of them brethren, or the
sons of one man, but of more, though all sons of one or other of their
father's, brethren:

and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their
father; by means of these marriages, even both in their father's tribe
and family.

[Numbers 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 36:13</span></span>

These are the commandments and the judgments,.... The judicial laws
concerning the division of the land of Canaan, the case of inheritances
in it, and the cities of refuge:

which the Lord commanded by, the hand of Moses unto the children of
Israel, in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho; where the
Israelites had been ever since they were first observed by Balak king of
Moab, and where the various things had been done recorded in the
preceding chapters from that time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Introduction](deu000)

</div>
