<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num032)  [Next](num034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 33:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 33

This chapter gives an account of the journeys of the people of Israel,
from their first coming out of Egypt, to their arrival in the plains of
Moab by Jordan, and the names of the various stations where they rested
are given, [Num 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001) and they are
ordered, when they passed over Jordan, to drive out the Canaanites,
destroy their idols, and divide the land among their families in their
several tribes, [Num 33:50](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050) or
otherwise it is threatened the Canaanites should be troublesome and
vexatious to them, even those that remained; and it might be expected
God would do to the Israelites as he thought to do to those nations,
[Num 33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055).

[Numbers 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 33:1</span></span>

These are the journeys of the children of Israel,.... Which are related
in this chapter following:

which went forth out of the land of Egypt: whither their fathers went
and stayed, and were kept in hard bondage, but in due time were
delivered from it, and came out from thence:

with their armies; in great numbers, and in an orderly manner, in rank
and file, and like so many squadrons, see [Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004), under the hand of Moses and
Aaron: who were sent to the king of Egypt to require their dismission,
and who were the instruments under God of their deliverance, and were
the leaders of them; as of them out of Egypt, so through the wilderness,
in their, several journeys here recorded.

[Numbers 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 33:2</span></span>

And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys, by the
commandment of the Lord,.... Which may be understood, either that their
journeys were by the commandment of the Lord; so Aben Ezra takes the
connection to be, and which is undoubtedly true, and which is expressed
plainly elsewhere; for so it was, that when the cloud abode on the
tabernacle they rested, and had their stations, and continued as long as
the cloud tarried on it, and when that was taken up, then they marched;
and thus at the commandment of the Lord they rested, and at the
commandment of the Lord they journeyed, see [Num
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017) or that Moses wrote the account
of their journeys, and several stations, at the commandment of the Lord,
that it might be on record, and be read in future ages, and appear to be
a fact, that they were led about in a wilderness, in places which were
unknown to others, and had no names but what they gave them:

and these are their journeys according to their goings out; from place
to place; some of the ancients, as Jerom (z) particularly, and some
modern writers, have allegorized these journeys of the children of
Israel, and have fancied that there is something in the signification of
the names of the places they came to, and abode in, suitable to the
cases and circumstances of the people of God in their passage through
this world; but though the travels of the children of Israel in the
wilderness may in general be an emblem of the case and condition of the
people of God in this world, and there are many things in them, and
which they met with, and befell them, that may be accommodated to them;
yet the particulars will never hold good of individual saints, since
they are not all led exactly in the same path of difficulties and
troubles, but each have something peculiar to themselves; and it will be
difficult to apply these things to the church of God in general, in the
several stages and periods of time, and which I do not know that any
have attempted; and yet, if there is anything pointed out by the
travels, one would think it should be that.

\(z\) "De 42 mansionibus", Fabiolae, "inter opera ejus", T. 3. fol. 13.

[Numbers 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 33:3</span></span>

And they departed from Rameses,.... A city in Egypt, where the children
of Israel, a little before their departure, seem to have been gathered
together in a body, in order to march out all together, as they did.
This place the Targum of Jonathan calls Pelusium. Dr. Shaw (a) thinks it
might be Cairo, from whence they set forward; see [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037) and it was

in the first month; in the month Nisan, as the same Targum, or Abib,
which was appointed the first month on this account, and answers to part
of our March and April:

on the fifteenth of the first month, on the morrow after the passover;
that was kept on the fourteenth, when the Lord passed over the houses of
the Israelites, and slew all the firstborn in Egypt, which made way for
their departure the next morning; the Egyptians being urgent upon them
to be gone:

the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all
the Egyptians; openly and publicly, with great courage and boldness,
without any fear of their enemies; who seeing them march out, had no
power to stop them, or to move their lips at them, nay, were willing to
be rid of them; see [Exo 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#007).

\(a\) Travels, p. 307. Ed. 2.

[Numbers 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 33:4</span></span>

For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the Lord had smitten
among them,.... Which contributed much to the more easy and safe
deliverance of the children of Israel; for their hearts were heavy with
sorrow, and their hands were full, and they had other work to do,
namely, to bury their dead, than to molest Israel; and besides, they
knew it was for detaining them this stroke came upon them:

upon their gods also the Lord executed judgments; they were moved at the
presence, and by the power of God, and fell and were dashed to pieces,
as the idols of the same land were in later times, see [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001) and this still the more
intimidated and frightened the Egyptians, that they dared not attempt to
hinder the departure of the Israelites from them. The Targum of Jonathan
says, the Word of the Lord did this; and adds, their molten idols became
soft, their strong idols were mutilated, their earthen idols were
diminished, their wooden idols became ashes, and those of beasts died.

[Numbers 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 33:5</span></span>

And the children of Israel removed from Rameses,.... Or Pelusium, as the
same Targum again:

and pitched in Succoth: where, as the same paraphrase says, they were
covered with the clouds of glory, suggesting that to be the reason of
its name; but that was rather because of the booths or tents the
Israelites erected, pitched, and dwelt in, during their abode there:
this, according to Bunting (b), was eight miles from Rameses; according
to whose computation, for want of a better guide, the distances of the
several stations from each other will be given.

\(b\) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 81.

[Numbers 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 33:6</span></span>

And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham,.... Which was
eight miles from Succoth:

which is in the edge of the wilderness; of the name, see [Exo
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020) but Dr. Shaw (c) makes this
particular portion of the wilderness to be fifty miles from Cairo or
Rameses.

\(c\) Travels, p. 308.

[Numbers 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 33:7</span></span>

And they removed from Etham, and turned again to Pihahiroth,.... Which
was sixteen miles from Etham. This turning, Aben Ezra says, respects the
cloud, or Israel; and indeed it may respect both, for, as the cloud
turned, Israel turned, being directed by it; and this does not mean that
they had been at Pihahiroth before, and now returned to it again; but
that they by direction turned out of the straight way in which they were
to go to Pihahiroth; for the word "again" may as well, or better, be
left out; see Gill on [Exo 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002),

which is before Baalzephon; the name of an idol, as the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem, supposed to be placed here, to watch and guard
the passage, as Zephon signifies:

and they pitched before Migdol: which was either the name of a city, the
same with Migdol, [Jer 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001) or it was
a tower, as the word signifies, placed here on the borders of the land,
for the defence of it.

[Numbers 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 33:8</span></span>

And they departed from before Pihahiroth,.... Being forced by Pharaoh's
army pressing upon them:

and passed through the midst of the sea; from shore to shore, as on dry
laud:

into the wilderness: that part of it which lay on the other side, for
still it was the wilderness of Etham they went into, as follows:

and went three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in
Marah; so called from the bitterness of the waters there, and which is
computed to be forty miles from Pihahiroth.

[Numbers 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 33:9</span></span>

And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim,.... Which was eight
miles from Marah:

and in Elim were twelve fountains of water, and three score and ten palm
trees, and they pitched there; being a convenient place of water for
them,

[Numbers 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 33:10</span></span>

And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea. This
encampment, is omitted in the book of Exodus, see [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001) this part or arm of the Red sea,
whither they came, was six miles from Elim.

[Numbers 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 33:11</span></span>

And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the wilderness of
Sin. Sixteen miles from the Red sea, where they were last; see [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 33:12</span></span>

And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin,.... According
to the account in Exodus, this was after they had the manna given them,
see [Exo 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001).

and encamped at Dophkah; twelve miles from the wilderness of Sin; and of
this, and the next encampment, no mention is made in Exodus.

[Numbers 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 33:13</span></span>

And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush. The strong fort,
as the Targum of Jonathan calls it; this was twelve miles from Dophkah:
according to the Jewish chronology (d), this Alush is the wilderness of
Sin, where the Israelites came on the fifteenth day of the seventh month
from their going out of Egypt; and they say, that in Alush the sabbath
was given them, and that there they kept the first sabbath, as it is
said:

and the people rested on the seventh day, [Exo
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#030).

\(d\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 5. p. 17.

[Numbers 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 33:14</span></span>

And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim,.... Eight miles
from Alush:

where was no water for the people to drink; and they murmured, and a
rock here was smitten by Moses at the command of God, and waters gushed
out sufficient for them and their flocks, [Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 33:15</span></span>

And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of Sinai.
Eight miles from Rephidim; and from a mount of this name here were given
the decalogue, with all other statutes and ordinances, judicial and
ceremonial, and orders and directions for building the tabernacle, and
making all the vessels appertaining to it, and which were all made
during their stay here.

[Numbers 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 33:16</span></span>

And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at
Kibrothhattaavah. Eight miles from the desert of Sinai; here the people
lusted after flesh, and murmured, which, though given them, a pestilence
came and destroyed many of them, and here they were buried, whence the
place was so called, which signifies the "graves of lust", i.e. of those
that lusted: no mention is made of Taberah, either because it was the
same with Kibroth, or near it; or, as Aben Ezra on [Deu
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#022) says, they encamped there but one
day, and so is not mentioned in the journeys, though it was one of the
three they journeyed from Mount Sinai to Kibrothhattaavah, see [Num
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 33:17</span></span>

And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth. Eight
miles from Kibrothhattaavah, where Miriam was smote with leprosy, [Num
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 33:18</span></span>

And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched at Rithmah. Eight miles
from Hazeroth: Rethem, from whence this place seems to have had its
name, is generally rendered by "juniper", [Kg1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004) and the Targum of Jonathan here
adds, where the juniper trees grew; and, perhaps, it is the same with
the valley of Retheme, of which some travellers (e) thus write, "this
valley", called in the Hebrew Retheme, and commonly Ritma, derives its
name from a yellow flower, with which the valley is covered; we found
here, on the left hand, two cisterns of excellent water; and water being
to be had here, might be the reason of the Israelites pitching in this
place. Some learned men (f) think it is the same with Kadeshbarnea, from
whence the spies were sent, that being the next remove from Hazeroth, as
this was; see [Num 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016), with which
agrees the remark of Jarchi, that this place was so called, because of
the evil tongue of the spies, as it is said, [Psa
120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003) "what shall be done unto thee,
thou false tongue? sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper";
alluding to the signification of Rithmah; perhaps this is the same
place, which by Josephus (g) is called Dathema, and so in the
Apocrypha:"Then the heathen that were at Galaad assembled themselves
together against the Israelites that were in their quarters, to destroy
them; but they fled to the fortress of Dathema.'' (1 Maccabees 5:9)

\(e\) Egmont and Heyman's Travels, vol. 2. p. 154. (f) Dr. Lightfoot,
vol. 1. p. 35. Dr. Clayton's Chronology of the Hebrew Bible, p. 382,
383. (g) Antiqu. l. 12. c. 8. sect. 4.

[Numbers 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 33:19</span></span>

And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez. Six miles
from Rithmah, and then from Rimmon to Libnah, which was six miles also;
and from thence to Rissah, which was six miles more; and from Rissah to,
Kehelathah, which was the same number of miles; and from thence to
Shapher, which was six miles also; and then they came to Haradah, which
was four miles from thence; the next remove was to Makheloth, which was
four miles and a half from the last place; then they went to Tahath,
which was four miles more; and from thence to Tarah, which also was four
miles; the next place they came to was Mithcah, four miles from Tarah;
and then to Hashmonah, which was eight miles more.

[Numbers 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 33:30</span></span>

And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth. Thirty two
miles from Hashmonah. In [Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006) it
is called Mosera; and according to the account there, they came hither
from the following place, Benejaakan; probably they went first thither
from Hashmonah, and then from Mosera or Moserot, and so to Benejaakan
again, going backwards and forwards, so Jarchi; the distance of the two
places was twenty four miles; for the further reconciliation this; see
Gill on [Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006) and the Samaritan
version there.

[Numbers 33:32](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 33:32</span></span>

And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad. In the
Targum Jonathan called Gudgod, as it is Gudgodah in [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007), where the remove to this place
is said to be from Mosera; it was twenty miles from Benejaaken; from
thence they went to Jotbathah, twenty four miles from Horhagidgad; and
from thence to Ebronah, twenty miles more; and so to Eziongeber, of
which see [Kg1 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#026) which was twenty
eight miles from Ebrorah; and their next remove was to the wilderness of
Zin, which was Kadesh, forty eight miles from Eziongeber; and from
Kadesh they went to Mount Hor, forty eight miles more: which was

in the edge of the land of Edom; as Kadesh also was; see [Num
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016).

[Numbers 33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 33:38</span></span>

And Aaron the priest went up into Mount Hor, at the commandment of the
Lord,.... Delivered to Moses:

and died there in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were
come out of Egypt; not being suffered to go with them into the land of
Canaan, because of his sin of unbelief at Kadesh, the last place from
whence they came: in Mount Hor he died:

on the first day of the fifth month; the month Ab, answering to part of
July and part of August; so that he lived but four months after his
sister Miriam; see [Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:39](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 33:39</span></span>

And Aaron was one hundred and twenty three years old when he died in
Mount Hor. He was eighty three when he stood before Pharaoh, [Exo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007), and forty years he had been with
Israel since, which make this number; he was three years older than
Moses.

[Numbers 33:40](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 33:40</span></span>

And King Arad the Canaanite,.... Or the king of Arad the Canaanite:

which dwelt in the land of Canaan, he heard of the coming of the
children of Israel; towards the land of Canaan, in order to possess it,
and he came out and fought with them, and was vanquished; see [Num
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001), this was when Israel was at
Mount Hor; from whence they departed to Zalmonah, twenty eight miles
from the mount; and from thence to Punon, which was twenty more; and so
to Oboth, which was twenty four miles from Punon: and thence

to Ijeabarim, in the border of Moab, which was sixteen miles, see [Num
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009).

[Numbers 33:45](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">num 33:45</span></span>

And they departed from Ijim, and pitched in Dibongad. Sixteen miles from
Ijim; the remove from whence is said to be to the valley of Zared, [Num
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#012) in which Dibongad was, so called
perhaps because rebuilt by Gad afterwards.

[Numbers 33:46](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">num 33:46</span></span>

And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim. Sixteen
miles from Dibon, perhaps the same with Diblath, [Eze
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014), according to the account in [Num
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016), &c. they went from hence to
Beer, a place where they found a well, which gave it this name; and
several other removes are mentioned there, which are not here, and
which, perhaps, were small removes, and not properly stations.

[Numbers 33:47](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">num 33:47</span></span>

And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of
Abarim,.... Sixteen miles from Almondiblathaim; these were so called
from passages near them over the river Jordan: and this station was
pitched

before Nebo; one of those mountains, whither Moses went up and died.

[Numbers 33:48](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 33:48</span></span>

And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the
plains of Moab,.... Sixteen miles from Abarim, where all those things
were transacted, which make the history of Balak and Balaam, [Num
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001) and where the Israelites now were
by Jordan near Jericho; not on that side Jordan where Jericho stood, but
on the other; Jericho, according to Eusebius, was ten miles from
Bethjesimoth, where Israel now were, as follows.

[Numbers 33:49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">num 33:49</span></span>

And they pitched by Jordan from Bethjesimoth, even unto Abelshittim, in
the plains of Moab. Their camp reached twelve miles, as the Jews
commonly say, which we may suppose was the distance of these two places,
which were both in the plains of Moab; and the Jerusalem Targum is
express for it, for mentioning Israel's encampment from Bethjesimoth to
Abelshittim, it asks, how far is that? twelve miles: the latter is
sometimes called Shittim, from the shittim wood which grew there, [Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001) and here it has the addition of
Abel to it, to signify mourning, from the mourning of the children of
Israel on account of the plague, in which 24,000 persons died, [Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:50](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">num 33:50</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan, near
Jericho,.... See Gill on [Num 33:48](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#048);
see Gill on [Num 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001),

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 33:51](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">num 33:51</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them,.... What was to be
said, being what concerned the whole body of the people:

when ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan; near to which
they now were, and Moses was about to leave them; and therefore it was
the more necessary to give them some instructions and directions what
they should do, when they were come into it.

[Numbers 33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">num 33:52</span></span>

Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before
you,.... Not at once, but gradually; and the sense is, that they should
use their utmost endeavours wholly to extirpate them:

and destroy all their pictures; their idolatrous ones; the pictures of
their gods, or the statues and figured stones of them: the Targum of
Jonathan interprets it,"all the temples of their worship;''and the
Jerusalem Targum,"all their idols;''so called, as Jarchi notes, because
they covered the floor with a pavement of marble stones, to worship upon
them by the stretching out of their hands and feet, according to [Lev
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001),

and destroy all their molten images; of gold, silver, &c.

and quite pluck down all their high places; their temples, groves, and
altars built upon them.

[Numbers 33:53](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">num 33:53</span></span>

And ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell
therein,.... Turn them out of their cities, towns, and houses, and
inhabit them:

for I have given you the land to possess it; who had a right to dispose
of it, and a better title they needed not desire than the Lord could and
did make them.

[Numbers 33:54](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">num 33:54</span></span>

And ye shall divide the land by lot,.... What is said in this verse is
the same with [Num 26:53](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#053), where it has
been explained; See Gill on [Num
26:53](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#053); see Gill on [Num
26:54](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#054); see Gill on [Num
26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055); see Gill on [Num
26:56](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#056).

[Numbers 33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">num 33:55</span></span>

But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land before you,....
Should be remiss and careless about it, and indifferent to it, and not
make use of the proper means to get rid of them, but, on the contrary,
make covenants with them, and intermarry among them; or, however, become
friendly to them, and suffer them to dwell among them:

then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain of them;
sparing their lives, and permitting them to dwell among them:

shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides; which figurative
expressions show that they should be very troublesome and distressing to
them, even in their most tender and nearest concerns, and dearest
relations, and which are explained and more properly expressed as
follows:

and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell; among other things by
their wicked conversation, and by drawing them into sin through their
ill examples, and so bring the displeasure of God upon them, and
punishment for their evil doings.

[Numbers 33:56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">num 33:56</span></span>

Moreover, it shall come to pass,.... This being the case, they suffering
the Canaanites to dwell among them, and they mingling with them,
learning their works, and serving their gods: that

I shall do unto you as I thought I should do unto them; deliver them up
into the hands of their enemies, who should carry them captive into
other lands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 34](num034)

</div>
