<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num031)  [Next](num033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 32:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 32

This chapter relates, how that the tribes of Gad and Reuben requested a
settlement in the country of Jazer and Gilead, being fit for the
pasturage of their cattle, [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)
at which Moses at first was very much displeased, as being unreasonable,
and tending to discourage the rest of the people; and as acting a part
like that their fathers had done before them, which brought the wrath of
God upon them, so that they all but two perished in the wilderness; and
this he suggests would be the case again, if such measures were taken,
[Num 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006) upon which they explain
themselves, and declare they had no intention of forsaking their
brethren, but were willing to leave their children and cattle to the
care of divine Providence, and go armed before Israel, until they were
brought into, and settled in the land of Canaan; nor did they desire any
part or inheritance in it, [Num 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016),
this satisfied Moses, and he agreed to it, that the land they requested
should be their possession, provided the conditions were fulfilled by
them, which they proposed, [Num 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020),
and which they again agreed unto, and promised to perform, [Num
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025), wherefore Moses gave orders to
Eleazar, Joshua, and the chief fathers of the tribes, to put them in
possession of the land of Gilead on those conditions, [Num
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028) and which were again promised
that they would observe, [Num 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#031),
and at the same time Moses made a grant of the kingdoms of Sihon and of
Og to the tribes of Reuben and Gad, and to half the tribe of Manasseh,
[Num 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033) and the chapter is closed
with an account of the cities built or repaired by the children of Gad
and Reuben, [Num 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034) and of the
cities in Gilead taken and possessed by the children of Machir, and by
Jair, who were of the tribe of Manasseh, [Num
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039).

[Numbers 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 32:26</span></span>

Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,.... Their
families, and their substance:

shall be there in the cities of Gilead; such as are before mentioned,
[Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003) and which they proposed to
repair and fortify, to preserve their families and possessions from the
Amorites about them.

[Numbers 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 32:27</span></span>

But thy servants will pass over,.... The river Jordan, and go into the
land of Canaan:

every man armed for war; Moses had required that all should go over, and
they consent to it, and promise that everyone should, though this was
not insisted on when they came to it, for only about 40,000 went over,
[Jos 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013), whereas the two tribes of
Gad and Reuben, and the half tribe of Manasseh, numbered more than
110,000; see [Num 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#007),

before the Lord to battle, as my lord saith; for now, instead of saying,
"before the children of Israel", a phrase they first used, they say,
"before the Lord", as Moses had expressed it.

[Numbers 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 32:28</span></span>

So concerning them Moses commanded,.... That they should have a grant of
the land they requested: this looks as if Moses determined the case
himself, though perhaps it was by the vote, and with the consent of the
whole court; only Moses strictly enjoined them to observe it, namely:

Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of
the tribes of the children of Israel; and the rather he did this,
because he knew that he should die, and not see either the thing itself
or the conditions of it performed.

[Numbers 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 32:29</span></span>

And Moses said unto them,.... To Eleazar, Joshua, and the princes of the
congregation:

if the children of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you
over Jordan, every man armed to battle before the Lord; as they have
promised they will:

and the land shall be subdued before you; which must be done before
their return:

then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession; which, no
doubt, included that of Jazer too, since Jaazer, which is the same, is
after mentioned as one of the cities built by the children of Gad, [Num
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#035).

[Numbers 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 32:30</span></span>

But if they will not pass over with you armed,.... Shall change their
minds, and break their promise, and refuse to go over the river Jordan
with the other tribes, and armed ready to engage in battle with the
enemy:

they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan; take their
lot there, but have no inheritance or possessions on this side Jordan.

[Numbers 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 32:31</span></span>

And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered,...., The
word is in the singular number, and shows their unanimity, that they
agreed to what Moses said, and replied all of them as one man, as Jarchi
expresses it; and it may be there was one that was the mouth of them
all, and answered for them:

saying, as the Lord hath said unto thy servants, so will we do; here
they make use of the word Jehovah, taking what Moses had said unto them
as from the Lord, and therefore should strictly and punctually observe
it, as if they heard the Lord himself speak it.

[Numbers 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 32:32</span></span>

We will pass over armed before the Lord into the land of Canaan,....
This is repeated again and again, for the confirmation of it, assuring
that it should be strictly performed according to the true intent of it:

that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be ours;
that is, that the possession and inheritance they desired, and which had
been granted them, on conditions to be performed by them, might be
ratified and confirmed unto them on their fulfilment of them.

[Numbers 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 32:33</span></span>

And Moses gave unto them,.... By word of mouth, in the presence of the
court, or rather by some instrument drawn up and signed by him and the
sanhedrim, or witnessed by them:

even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto
half the tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph; no mention is made of this
half tribe joining with the other two tribes in the request to settle on
this side Jordan, and therefore it is generally thought that they were
encouraged, by the success of the two tribes, to make a like motion; or
else Moses and the princes, observing that there was too much land for
the said tribes, joined this half tribe with them, the land being
suitable for them:

the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of
Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts, even the cities
of the country round about; of which kingdoms, and the conquest of them,
see [Num 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#024), and several of the
cities in them are after mentioned.

[Numbers 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 32:34</span></span>

And the children of Gad built,.... Or rather repaired the walls and
fortifications, and rebuilt houses which had been demolished in the wars
with Sihon and Og; when the following places were taken by the
Israelites:

Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer; the two first are mentioned in [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003). Aroer was a city situated on the
river Arnon, and was after this in the hands of the Moabites: Jerom says
(q), it was showed in his day on the top of the mountain, upon the bank
of the river Arnon, which flows into the Dead sea, [Jer
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019).

\(q\) De loc. Heb. fol. 87. I.

[Numbers 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 32:35</span></span>

And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah. Of these no mention is
made elsewhere, except Jaazer, which is the same with Jazer, [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003).

[Numbers 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 32:36</span></span>

And Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities,.... The first of these is
the same with Nimrah, [Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003), and
the other is the same with Betharam, [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027), it is called in the Jerusalem
Talmud (r), Bethramtha, and so by the Syrians, Bethramphta; and to the
same place Herod gave the name of Livias or Julias (s): these cities the
children of Gad built or repaired for their families:

and folds for sheep; they also built for their cattle, as they promised
to do, and Moses enjoined them, [Num
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016).

\(r\) Sheviith, fol. 38. 4. (s) Vid. Reland. Palestin. Illustrat. par.
2. p. 643.

[Numbers 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 32:37</span></span>

And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim.
Heshbon was the royal city of Sihon king of the Amorites, and Elealeh
was within a mile of it, see [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003), this shows that those cities
were not built anew properly, only repaired, for they were cities in
being long before; besides, they had not time to build new cities, for
in a few months after this they passed over Jordan; though indeed they
left men enough behind to rebuild cities, whom they might set to work
about them when they departed: Kirjathaim is, by the Targum of Jonathan,
called the city of two streets paved with marble, and it adds, this is
Beresha: Jerom (t) says, it is now called Coraiatha, which is pretty
near its ancient name, and that it is ten miles from Medeba, a city of
Arabia, mentioned as one of the cities in the kingdom of Sihon king of
the Amorites, [Num 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#030).

\(t\) De loc. Heb. fol. 89. M.

[Numbers 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 32:38</span></span>

And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,).... For Nebo was
the name of an idol, after which perhaps the city was called: Baalmeon
signifies "Baal's habitation", and where it is highly probable was a
temple of his; and the children of Reuben, not liking to retain such
idolatrous names, gave them others, but what they were it is not said;
and certain it is, that when these places came into the hands of the
Moabites, their ancient names were restored to them, as appears from
[Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002).

and Shibmah; the same with Shebam, [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003), and gave other names unto the
cities which they built; but they are neither known, nor did they always
continue, as has been observed.

[Numbers 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 32:39</span></span>

And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took
it,.... That part of it which Moses gave unto the half tribe of
Manasseh, which till now was in the hand of the Amorites; for half Mount
Gilead, and the cities thereof, were given to the Reubenites and
Gadites, which is the land of Gilead they desired, and which was already
conquered; for they call it the country which the Lord smote before
Israel, [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001),

and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it; for though they were
driven out of one part of Gilead, yet not out of the whole.

[Numbers 32:40](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 32:40</span></span>

And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh,.... That is, to
the children of Machir, who went and took it; though some say, as Aben
Ezra observes, that Machir himself was now alive, and that it was given
to him, but that is not probable; for, supposing him to be living when
the children of Israel came out of Egypt, all that came from thence, who
were twenty years old and upwards, died in the wilderness, excepting
two, see [Num 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#011),

and he dwelt therein; that is, the family of the Macharite; see [Num
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#029).

[Numbers 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 32:41</span></span>

And Jair the son of Manasseh,.... By his mother's side, otherwise he was
of the family of Judah; for Hezron, of the family of Judah, married a
daughter of Machir, the son of Manasseh, by whom he had a son called
Segub, who was the father of Jair, [Ch1
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#021), the same

went and took the small towns thereof; of that part of Gilead given to
Machir:

and called them Havothjair; after his own name: in [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014), they are called
Bashanhavothjair.

[Numbers 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 32:42</span></span>

And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof,.... Who this
Nobah was is not certain, very probably a descendant of Manasseh; it is
said (u) he was among those that were born in Egypt, and died after the
death of Moses, and was buried beyond Jordan, as it is said, also did
Machir and Jair, so that there were none left but Caleb, and Joshua:

and called it Nobah, after his name; but it seems that in later times
its ancient name was restored to it; for Jerom (w), says there was a
village in Arabia, called Cannatha, which is supposed to be this place;
though he also tells us (x), that eight miles from Heshbon; to the
south, is shown a desert place called Naba. Pliny (y) places Cannatha in
the Decapolis.

\(u\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 9. p. 27. (w) Ut supra. (De loc. Heb. fol.
89. M.) (x) De loc. Heb. fol. 93. H. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 18.

[Numbers 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 32:1</span></span>

Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great
multitude of cattle,.... By which it seems that they had more in
proportion than any of the other tribes; by what means it is not easy to
say; very probably they were more addicted to the pastoral life, and
took more delight in breeding cattle, and were more diligent in taking
care of them: however, the reason for this observation presently
follows:

and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead; Jazer was
in the kingdom of Sihon, and Gilead in the kingdom of Og, which had been
both conquered by the Israelites:

that, behold, the place was a place for cattle; where much cattle was
fed, there being a great deal of good pasturage for them: Jazer appears
to be a well watered country, [Jer
48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032), and Gilead and Bashan which
joined and belonged to the same country of Og, who was king of Bashan,
were famous for good feeding of cattle: hence we read of the bulls of
Bashan, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats on Mount Gilead that
looked plump and sleek; see [Mic 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014).

[Numbers 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 32:2</span></span>

The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto
Moses,.... The children of Gad are mentioned first, though Reuben was
the firstborn, and had a standard under which Gad pitched: it may be, as
Aben Ezra thinks, the Gadites were the first authors of this counsel,
the contrivers of this scheme; who first moved it to the Reubenites,
which they had an opportunity of doing, lying encamped by them; or
however, they might be the most busy and active in this affair, or the
best spokesmen; for it could be only some, in the name of the whole,
that addressed Moses on this account, and spoke to him about it:

and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation; who
perhaps were the seventy elders, and with Moses the chief ruler, and
Eleazar the high priest, made up the grand sanhedrim, or great council
of the nation, and were undoubtedly the most proper persons to apply
unto:

saying: as follows.

[Numbers 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 32:3</span></span>

Ataroth, Dibon, and Jazer,.... These were places which belonged to the
Amorites, and were taken from Sihon, their king: of Ataroth we read
nowhere else but in this chapter; of Dibon see [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002), Jazer was a city, from whence
the land about it had its name; it is the same with Jaazer, [Num
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#032) and stood about fifteen miles
from Heshbon (k), the capital city of the kingdom of Sihon:

and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon;
these were all places in the same country; of Heshbon see [Num
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025), Nimrah is the same with
Bethnimrah, [Num 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036) and sometimes
called Nimrim, famous for its water, [Isa
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006). Jerom says (l) the name of it in
his time was Benamerium, and lay to the north of Zoar; Elealeh,
according to the same writer (m) was but a mile from Heshbon, of which
see [Isa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004). Shebam is the same with
Shibmah, [Num 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036), and seems to be a
place famous for vines, [Isa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008); it
is thought to be the same with the Seba of Ptolemy (n), and according to
Jerom (o), there were scarce five hundred paces between this place and
Heshbon; Nebo, the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan call the grave of
Moses, because on a mountain of this name Moses died, and where it is
supposed he was buried; but it is certain he was buried not on a
mountain, but in a valley, [Deu 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006),
this perhaps had its name from the mountain near which it was, and of
which see [Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002). Beon is the same
that is called Baalmeon, [Num 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038)
and Bethbaalmeon, [Jos 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017), where
was very probably a temple of Baal; it was about nine miles from Heshbon
(p).

\(k\) Jerom. de loc. Heb. fol. 92. G. (l) lbid. K. (m) Ibid. fol. 91. A.
(n) Geograph. l. 5. c. 19. (o) Comment. in Esaiam, c. 16. 8. (p)
Eusebius apud Reland: Palest. Illustr. par. 2. l. 3. p. 611.

[Numbers 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 32:4</span></span>

Even the county which the Lord smote before the congregation of
Israel,.... In which the above cities were, and perhaps some others not
named: this was now in the hands of the people of Israel, being subdued
by them, the conquest of which is ascribed unto the Lord, for the
victory was of him; it was he that smote their enemies; and delivered
their country into their hands; and now Moses, Eleazar, and the princes
of the congregation, being the representatives of the people, had a
right to dispose of it, and, which these two tribes request might be
given to them, because, say they:

it is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle; to stock it, with
and great numbers of them; see

[Numbers 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 32:5</span></span>

Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight,.... Directing
their speech to Moses, the ruler of the congregation, in a very modest,
decent, and respectable manner:

let this land be given unto thy servants for a possession; as their own
portion and inheritance, to be enjoyed by them, and their children after
them:

and bring us not over Jordan; into the land of Canaan, where as they
after explain themselves, they did not desire to have any part with
their brethren, but should be content with their possession here, should
it be granted them.

[Numbers 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 32:6</span></span>

And Moses said unto the children of Gad, and to the children of
Reuben,.... Being displeased with their motion, as his following
discourse shows, it having at first sight an appearance of covetousness
and cowardice:

shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here? it is not
reasonable that your brethren should be left by you and engage in a war
with your common enemies, to dispossess them of their land before they
can settle in it and you remain here easy and quiet in the possession of
a fruitful country.

[Numbers 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 32:7</span></span>

Wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel.... Which he
suggests it would, should they settle on that side Jordan, since they
would lose the assistance of two of their tribes, even two thirds of one
of their standards in fighting with their enemies and subduing their
land; and besides it might be thought that this request of theirs not
only proceeded from selfish views and a love of ease, which might set a
bad example to others, but carried in it a distrust of ever being able
to enter into, at least to conquer and possess, the land of Canaan, and
so might have a tendency to discourage their brethren:

from going over into the land, which the Lord hath given them?
despairing of ever enjoying it, and so laying aside all thoughts of it,
and not caring to make any attempt to get possession of it.

[Numbers 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 32:8</span></span>

Thus did your fathers,.... Meaning not particularly and only the fathers
of these two tribes he was speaking to, but of them and the other tribes
also, who acted much such a part; did not choose to go into the good
land to possess it, when they were bid to do it, but were for sending
spies first, which brought an ill report of it, and discouraged the
people from going into it; the history of which Moses here gives:

when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land; called only Kadesh,
[Num 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026) the reason of the name See
Gill on [Num 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#013).

[Numbers 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 32:9</span></span>

For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol,.... That is, when they
went up the hill, for they were bid to go up into the mountain, and
proceeded on into the country, until they came to the valley or brook,
of Eshcol, so called from the cluster of grapes they there cut down, and
brought along with them, [Num 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017).

and saw the land; searching it for the space of forty days:

they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel; by telling them
that there were giants in the land, and that the people in common were
strong, and their cities walled, and that they were not able to go up
against them and overcome them; and by this means they disheartened the
people:

that they should not go, into the land which the Lord had given them;
and this Moses feared, and suggests would be the consequence of the
request the two tribes now made.

[Numbers 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 32:10</span></span>

And the Lord's anger was kindled, the same time,.... Against the spies
that brought the ill report, and against all the people that were
disheartened and murmured upon it, and which, above all things, was to
be dreaded now:

and he sware, saying; as follows.

[Numbers 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 32:11</span></span>

Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old
and upwards,.... See [Num 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#028).

shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto
Jacob; the land of Canaan, which at various times he sware to give to
them, and to their posterity:

because they have not wholly followed me; the laws which he prescribed
them, the directions he gave them, and particularly the orders they had
to go up and possess the land at once, [Deu
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#021).

[Numbers 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 32:12</span></span>

Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of
Nun,.... See [Num 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030), whether Caleb
or Jephunneh is called the Kenezite is not so easy to determine; the
latter rather seems to be most correct, for that Caleb should be called
so from Kenaz the father of Othniel, who is said to be Caleb's brother
seems not to be agreeable; since it is not likely that they were his own
brothers, or Caleb would not have given his daughter to him; besides
Jephunneh and not Kenaz is always said to be the father of Caleb, unless
his father can be thought to have two names; it is most likely that
Jephunneh, and so Caleb, might be called the Kenezite, from an ancestor
of theirs of that name: Jarchi says, Caleb was the son-in-law of Kenaz,
and Caleb's mother bore unto him Othniel:

for they have wholly followed the Lord; here what was said of Caleb,
[Num 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024) is said both of him and
Joshua; See Gill on [Num 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024).

[Numbers 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 32:13</span></span>

And the Lord's anger was kindled against Israel,.... For murmuring
against the report of the spies:

and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years; for though it was
but about thirty eight years from that time that they were in the
wilderness, the round number of forty is given; and besides it includes
the time of their first coming into it, which being reckoned, makes the
complete number, within a few months: Kadesh, from whence the spies were
sent, and whither they returned, and where the people murmured, and had
this sentence pronounced on them, that they should not see the land of
Canaan, but wander and fall in the wilderness, seems to have had the
addition of Barnea made unto it on that account, which signifies the son
of him that wandereth:

until all the generation which had done evil in the sight of the Lord
was consumed; as they all were at this time when Moses spake these
words.

[Numbers 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 32:14</span></span>

And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead,.... Succeeded them
in their families, of which they were now the heads; and in their
substance, their flocks, and herds; and he suggests also, in their
manners amid evil dispositions:

an increase of sinful men; this new generation was greatly increased,
for when the number was taken, as it was but a little before this time,
they were pretty near the same number as of those that came out of
Egypt; but then they were not only an increase of men, but of sinful
men, like fathers like sons:

to augment yet the fierce anger of the Lord toward Israel; to make it
greater and fiercer towards that nation than even their fathers had by
their many sins and transgressions.

[Numbers 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 32:15</span></span>

For if ye turn away from after him,.... From following him in the way of
his commandments, from attending his word, worship, and ordinances, and
from walking after him, who went before them in a pillar of cloud and
fire, as it is suggested they would, should they stop short here and not
go over Jordan into the land of Canaan:

he will yet again leave them in the wilderness; as he did at the time of
the affair of the spies, when they were ordered to turn and get into the
wilderness by the way of the Red sea, and where they had been ever since
unto this time, [Num 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025),

and ye shall destroy all this people; be the cause of their destruction,
if the Lord should in such a manner resent this step of theirs, as to
order them back into the wilderness again, though they were now as they
were before, on the border of the land of Canaan.

[Numbers 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 32:16</span></span>

And they came near unto him,.... The heads of the tribes of Gad and
Reuben came a little nearer to Moses, having something more to say unto
him, in order to explain their meaning, and in doing which they used
some degree of freedom and boldness with him, see [Gen
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#018).

and said, we will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for
our little ones not build new ones, but repair the old ones; for there
were cities enough in the country, as before named, and no doubt
sheepfolds too, as the land was a place of cattle, but those were
through the war broken down and demolished, and needed repairing; and
this they proposed to do, and leave their children and their cattle to
the care of their servants, under the protection of the divine
Providence, and did not mean for the present to take up their abode
here.

[Numbers 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 32:17</span></span>

But we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel,....
This they said to free themselves from the charge of cowardice, and that
they did not mean to sit still while their brethren went to war; they
were willing to put on their armour, and be ready to meet the enemy upon
the borders of the land, and engage with them, and to expose their lives
in favour of their brethren:

until we have brought them unto their place; to the land of Canaan, the
place designed for them, and given unto them, to the possession of it,
and a settlement in it:

and our little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities, because of the
inhabitants of the land; where they might be safe from them, which they
proposed to repair and refortify for the security of them, while they
went with their brethren into the land of Canaan, to put them into
possession of that, of which they made not the least doubt; and so
served to clear them of suspicion of any distrust they had of entering
into and possessing the land, which might tend to discourage the people.

[Numbers 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 32:18</span></span>

We will not return unto our houses,.... In the cities built or repaired
by them, or to their families, and their substance, their flocks and
their herds; all which they should leave behind them, and never think of
returning to them:

until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance;
until all the tribes were settled in their respective places, and every
family and everyone in them had their portion assigned them; and
accordingly they did not return until the land was wholly subdued, nor
even until every lot came up, and the land was divided by it, and the
inheritance of the several tribes fixed, and even the cities of the
Levites assigned to them out of the several tribes; see [Jos
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001).

[Numbers 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 32:19</span></span>

For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward,....
This they said, not as being determined whether Moses and the princes
were willing or not to stay where they were, and not pass over Jordan to
inherit any part there, and much less as despising the good land, but as
giving up all pretensions to it, should they be settled where they
desired; they were not of that selfish and covetous disposition as to
desire any part on the other side Jordan, if it was but granted them to
continue on this side, and possess the land they requested:

because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan eastward;
they seem to speak as if they were assured of it, and that it was so
ordered by divine Providence, and wanted nothing but the consent of
Moses, and the princes of the congregation.

[Numbers 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 32:20</span></span>

And Moses said unto them,.... Being better disposed towards them, and
more satisfied with the reasonableness of their request, it being
explained unto him:

if ye will do this thing; which they had promised:

if ye will go armed before the Lord to war; they had said they would go
ready armed before the children of Israel, but Moses expresses it
"before the Lord"; which is more agreeable to their encampment and order
in marching, for not the standard of Reuben but that of Judah went
foremost, yet the standard of Reuben marched directly before the
sanctuary bore by the Kohathites, [Num
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#018), and so might be properly said
to go before the Lord, who dwelt there.

[Numbers 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 32:21</span></span>

And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord,.... Moses
tries them thoroughly, and is very express in his words, requiring them
not only to go armed, or march from the place where they were, towards
the land of Canaan, but to go over Jordan, and not some of them only,
but all, and that before the Lord; though indeed, when the tribes came
to the river Jordan, the ark, which was the symbol of the divine
Presence, went before all the tribes into it, and there stayed till they
passed over, and then these two tribes and the half tribe of Manasseh
passed before the children of Israel, and before the Lord, unto battle,
[Jos 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#011).

until he hath driven out his enemies before him: the Canaanites, who
were the enemies of the Lord, as well as of his people; and because of
their sins, in which they showed their enmity to God, the land spewed
them out, and he drove them out to make way for his people Israel, and
till this was done the tribes of Reuben and Gad were to continue with
them.

[Numbers 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 32:22</span></span>

And the land be subdued before the Lord,.... For the inhabitants fleeing
before his people, and being conquered by them, might be said to be
subdued before the Lord, this being done in his presence, by his power,
and for his people:

then afterward ye shall return: to this side of Jordan, the land of
Jazer and Gilead, to their cities, and families there:

and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel: having fulfilled
all that they promised:

and this land shall be your possession before the Lord; be established
and settled in it as their inheritance, the Lord seeing and approving of
it, and protecting them in the enjoyment of it.

[Numbers 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 32:23</span></span>

But if ye will not do so,.... As they promised they would, and Moses
insisted on it that they should:

behold, ye have sinned against the Lord making such a request, and not
fulfilling the conditions on which it was granted:

and be sure your sin will find you out; fly in their faces, accuse them
in their consciences, charge and load them with guilt, and bring
deserved punishment upon them: sin may be put, as it often is, for the
punishment of sin, which sooner or later will find out and come upon the
impenitent and unpardoned sinner.

[Numbers 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 32:24</span></span>

Build ye cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep,.... For
their safety and security, as they proposed to do:

and do that which proceedeth out of your mouth; all that they had
promised.

[Numbers 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 32:25</span></span>

And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses,
saying,.... In answer to his speech:

thy servants will do as my lord commandeth; both with respect to their
march before the Lord to battle, and with respect to their provision for
their children and flocks.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 33](num033)

</div>
