<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num024)  [Next](num026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 25:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 25

The contents of this chapter are, the sin of the people of Israel, their
whoredom and idolatry, [Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001),
their punishment for it, multitudes being slain, [Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004), whose number is given, [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009), the zeal of Phinehas in slaying
two notorious offenders, [Num 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006),
whose names are observed, [Num 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014)
for which he is commended, and the covenant of priesthood was given and
confirmed unto him, [Num 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#010), and
the chapter is concluded with an order to vex the Midianites, for vexing
Israel with their wiles, [Num 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016).

[Numbers 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 25:1</span></span>

And Israel abode in Shittim,.... A place in the plains of Moab, so
called from the shittim wood, which grew here in great abundance, so
often mentioned in the building of the tabernacle; which was a sort of
white thorn, or rather the acacia tree, since there was scarcely any
thing else grew in the deserts of Arabia; see Gill on [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005) its full name was Abelshittim,
[Num 33:49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#049), here the Israelites abode
even to the death of Moses, for this was their last station in the
wilderness; they were now on the borders of the land of Canaan, and just
ready to enter into it, which is an aggravation of the sins they here
fell into, and are next observed:

and the people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab; and
of Midian also, as appears from [Num
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006) by the advice of Balaam, the
Moabites and Midianites found ways and means to become familiar with the
Israelites, and to introduce their daughters into their company and
conversation, and being ensnared and enamoured with them, they were
drawn to commit lewdness with them, and hereby were led on to commit
other abominations, which brought the divine displeasure upon them; so
that what they dared not attempt by war, and could not effect by
sorceries and divinations, they accomplished by those iniquitous arts,
namely, bringing the wrath, the curse, and plague of God upon them.

[Numbers 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 25:2</span></span>

And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods,.... That
is, the daughters of Moab and Midian, with whom the children of Israel
carried on an unlawful correspondence, invited them, their gallants, to
come and partake of the feasts which attended the sacrifices of their
idols; for part of what was offered to idols a feast was kept with, to
which great numbers were invited, and which was observed with all the
circumstances of joy and pleasure imaginable, and which was very
ensnaring, especially to young people; and the children of Israel being
so much enamoured with the beauty of the Moabitish women, and so strong
were their lusts and passions, that they could not refuse the
invitation:

and the people did eat: of the things sacrificed to idols, and so became
guilty of idolatry, even by so doing, and then when they had eaten and
drank, and were merry, they were led on to other acts of idolatry:

and bowed down to their gods: which was a plain and open act of
idolatry, whereby they testified their faith in their divinity, their
reverence of them, and their homage and obedience to them: Jarchi says,
when the evil concupiscence or lust was strong in them, and they
solicited the daughters of Moab to hearken to them, and comply with
them, they used to take the image of Peor out of their bosom, and said,
worship this, signifying that on that condition they would gratify them;
and thus whoredom led them on to idolatry, and they committed the one
for the sake of being indulged in the other.

[Numbers 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 25:3</span></span>

And Israel joined himself unto Baalpeor,.... The name of an idol; one of
the Baals, Baal being a general name for an idol; and, to distinguish
this from other Baals or idols, it was called Peor, either from its
opening its mouth in prophecy, as Ainsworth; or from some obscene
posture and action used in the worship of it, being, as it is by many
thought to be, the same with Priapus; or rather from the mountain Peor,
where it was worshipped, as Jupiter is called Jupiter Olympius,
Capitolinus, &c. from the mountains where he had a temple, or was
worshipped; or from the name of some great personage, called Lord Peor,
who was deified after his death; hence these Israelites are said to "eat
the sacrifices of the dead", [Psa
106:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#028). Mr. Bedford (t) takes him to
be Mizraim the son of Ham, the Osiris of the Egyptians, and the Priapus
of other Heathens: and Father Calmet (u) is of opinion that he is the
same with Orus, Osiris, and Adonis; and that Pe is only a prepositive
article, and that Or is the name, and no other than Orus; but such a
criticism the word will not bear: this idol, the chief god of the
Moabites, was, in all probability, the same with Chemosh, who is
expressly called the abomination of Moab, [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007) of whom See Gill on [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007) so Chemosh and Peor are thought
to be the same by our English poet (w): to him the Israelites joined
themselves, forsook the true God in a great measure, and were initiated
into the rites of this deity, and constantly attended the worship of it,
and cleaved unto it with their hearts and directions, and joined with
their harlots in all parts of service performed unto it; See Gill on
[Hos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010),

and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel; for no sin is more
provoking to God than idolatry, that being so directly opposite to his
nature, honour, and glory, as well as to his will and worship; and
hereby the end of Balaam and Balak was, in a great measure, answered,
and Balaam obtained that by his evil counsel which he could not by all
his conjuring; this was seen by the plague sent among them; See Gill on
[Num 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#014).

\(t\) Scripture Chronology, p. 267. (u) Dictionary, on word "Baal". (w)
"Next Chemos, the obscene dread of Moab's sons, Peor his other name,
-----" Milton, B. 1. l. 406, 412.

[Numbers 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 25:4</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... Being provoked with the sins of the
people, he called to him out of the tabernacle, or out of the cloud:

take all the heads of the people, the princes of the tribes, not to hang
them, but to judge those that worshipped Peor, as Jarchi interprets it;
though some think that these having sinned, were ordered to be taken and
hanged, and made public examples of; but it can hardly be thought,
though there were some that might be guilty of the above sins, as Zimri,
yet not all of them:

hang them up before the Lord against the sun; that is, those that were
guilty of idolatry: the meaning is, and which all the Targums give into,
that these heads of the people were to assemble at some proper place,
the court of judicature, and order the delinquents to be brought before
them, and try, judge, and condemn those they found guilty, and cause
them to be hanged somewhere near the tabernacle, and before it, having
neglected the worship of God there, and served an idol; and this was to
be done openly in the daytime, that all might see and fear; and if it
was the sun that was worshipped in this idol, as some think, they were
hanged against the sun, to show that the idol they worshipped was not
able to deliver them; but, in the face of it, and as it were in defiance
of it, they were ordered to be hanged up; and this, according to the
Targum of Jonathan, was in the morning against the rising sun, and where
they hung all day, and were taken down at sun setting:

that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel; when
justice had taken place, and proper punishment was inflicted upon the
criminals, whereby a just resentment was made against sin, and God
glorified.

[Numbers 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 25:5</span></span>

And Moses said unto the judges of Israel,.... Either the same with the
heads of the people, or the rulers of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and
tens, according to the distribution by the advice of Jethro:

slay ye everyone his men, that were joined unto Baalpeor; all that were
under their several districts and jurisdictions, that were found guilty
of that crime; these they are ordered to slay, either with their own
hands, or rather cause to be slain by proper persons they should appoint
to be executioners.

[Numbers 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 25:6</span></span>

And, behold, one of the children of Israel came,.... From one of the
cities of Moab or Midian, the latter rather, by what follows; where he
had been, very probably, to an idolatrous feast, and had eaten of the
sacrifices, and worshipped idols, and committed fornication with the
daughters of the land; and not content with indulging himself with those
impurities at a distance and where he was less known:

brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman; into his father's family,
into a tent where his brethren dwelt:

in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the
children of Israel; in the most open and undisguised manner, into the
midst of the camp, passing by Moses, and a great number of the people,
who were gathered together on this solemn occasion, to seek the Lord,
and humble themselves before him:

who were weeping before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation;
the place where the people used to assemble together for religious
exercises; here they were weeping and mourning for the sins and
abominations that were committed among them, and on account of the
punishment inflicted on many of them, by the hand of the civil
magistrate, and because of the plague that was broke out upon them, from
an angry God; by which it appears, that though there were many who had
fallen into those foul sins, yet there were a great number which were
not defiled with them, and sighed and cried for the abominations in the
midst of them: and because the fact here recorded was such an amazing
piece of impudence, the word "behold" is prefixed to the account of it,
it being done in such a public, bold, and audacious manner, and at such
a time, when so many had been hanged up for it, and the plague of God
was broke out among the people on account of it, and good men were
bewailing the sin, and the punishment of it; and if this was on a
sabbath day, as the Samaritan Chronicle (x) relates, it was a further
aggravation of it.

\(x\) Apud Hottinger. Smegma Oriental. l. 1. c. 8. p. 448.

[Numbers 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 25:7</span></span>

And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw
it,.... Saw the man pass by in this impudent manner, and his whore with
him; his spirit was stirred up, he was filled and fired with zeal for
the glory of God, and with an holy indignation against the sin and
sinner, and with a just concern for the honour of the righteous law of
God; and, to prevent others from falling into the same sin, led by the
public example of so great a personage, as it appears afterwards this
man was:

he rose up from among the congregation; who were weeping at the door of
the tabernacle, or from the midst of the court of judicature, set for
trying and judging such persons who were charged with idolatry; for he
was not only the son of the high priest and his successor, but a ruler
over the Korahites, and had, besides his priestly office, a civil
authority, [Ch1 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#020).

and took a javelin in his hand; a spear or pike; the Jews say (y) he
snatched it out of the hand of Moses; and, according to Josephus (z), it
was a sword; but the word rather signifies an hand pike; this being
ready at hand, he took it up and pursued the criminal.

\(y\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 47. fol. 56. 1. (z) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 6. sect.
12.

[Numbers 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 25:8</span></span>

And he went after the man of Israel into the tent,.... Into which he
went with his harlot; the word here used is different from what is
commonly used for a tent: Aben Ezra observes that in the Kedarene or
Arabic language there is a word near to it, which Bochart, putting the
article "al" to it, says (a), is "alkobba", from whence is the word
"alcove" with us; and Aben Ezra says, there was some little difference
between the form of a tent and this, as well as others observe (b) there
was in the matter of it, this being of skins and leather, and the other
of hair, boughs of trees, &c. the author of Aruch (c) says, it was
short, or narrow above and broad below, and interprets it a place in
which whores were put; and so it is used in the Talmud (d) for a brothel
house, and is so translated here by some interpreters (e):

and thrust both of them through; with his javelin, spear, or pike:

the man of Israel, and the woman through her belly; by which, it seems,
they were killed in the very act of uncleanness; this was an
extraordinary action, done by a person of public authority, and under a
more than common emotion of spirit, and not to be drawn into an example
by persons of a private character:

so the plague was stayed from the children of Israel; which had broke
out among them and carried off many; even a disease, the pestilence,
according to Josephus (f); it ceasing upon this fact of Phinehas, shows
that that was approved of by the Lord.

\(a\) "conclave est camerati operis, quo lectus circumdatur", Hierozoic.
par. 1. l. 4. c. 8. col. 1092. Vid. Schultens Animadv. Philolog. in Job.
p. 183. (b) Castel. Lex. Heptaglot. col. 3261. (c) Baal Aruch, fol. 133.
4. (d) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 17. 2. (e) "in lupanar", V. L. "ad
lupanar", Montanus; "in lupanar ipsum", Junius & Tremellius; "in
fornicem", Tigurine version. (f) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 4. c. 6. sect.
12.)

[Numbers 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 25:9</span></span>

And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand. The
apostle says 23,000 [Co1 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008). Moses
includes those that were hanged against the sun, in the time of the
plague, as well as those that were taken off by it, even all that died
on this account; the apostle only those that "fell", which cannot with
propriety be said of those that were hanged, who might be 1000 and so
their numbers agree; but of this and other ways of removing this
difficulty See Gill on [Co1 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008).

[Numbers 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 25:10</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Out of the cloud, or out of the
tabernacle, at the door of which Moses now was, [Num
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006), this was after so many had died
of the plague, and after the fact of Phinehas, by which it was stopped:
saying; as follows.

[Numbers 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 25:11</span></span>

Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,.... His
descent and genealogy is observed as before, partly to show that he was
not a private person, but a man of public authority that did the above
fact; perhaps one of the judges that Moses ordered to slay every man his
man, and therefore what he did by the order of the supreme magistrate;
and partly to show that he was heir apparent to the office of high
priest, who in course was to succeed in it; nor should this action of
his hinder it, but rather serve to secure and confirm it to him:

hath turned away my wrath from the children of Israel; caused the
effects of it to cease, by slaying the two persons, as before related:

while he was zealous for my sake among you; for the glory of God, the
honour of his law, the credit of religion, and the good of his people,
which is a good cause to be zealously affected in, [Gal
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018) in which he was a type of Christ,
whose zeal for the house of God, for the doctrine, discipline, and
worship of it, for the salvation of his people, and the glory of God
thereby, ate him up, [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009) as well
as in his turning away wrath from Israel; sin is the cause of wrath, and
for it is revealed from heaven; the people of God are deserving of it as
others; but Christ has bore it for them, and so has delivered them from
it and all the effects of it, and they are secure from its coming upon
them:

that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy; by the plague
sent among them, being so highly provoked with their shocking
abominations.

[Numbers 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 25:12</span></span>

Wherefore say,.... Moses is bid to tell what follows to Phinehas
himself, for his comfort and encouragement, and to the people of Israel,
that they might take notice of it, and give him honour and respect, as
one highly esteemed by the Lord:

behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace; not only hereby assuring
him that he had nothing to fear from the brethren and relations of the
person he had slain, as Aben Ezra; but that he should enjoy all peace
and happiness, external, internal, and eternal: Baal Hatfurira on the
place says, that "Shalom", peace, is by geometry, or numerically, the
Messiah; who is the peace, the peace maker, and peace giver, and in whom
all the blessings of grace and peace are: and if this covenant is the
same with the covenant of the priesthood in the next verse, it may be so
called, because the priests had a peculiar nearness to God, and enjoyed
his friendship, favour, and peace with him, and because the right
administration of their office was the means of peace between God and
his people; in this also Phinehas was a type of Christ; the covenant of
grace made with him is called the covenant of peace, [Isa
54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010) for in this covenant the scheme
of peace and reconciliation was formed, agreed to, and settled; Christ
was appointed the peace maker, which he agreed to be; and in consequence
of it was sent and obtained peace by the blood of his cross, which is
published in the everlasting Gospel, called therefore the Gospel of
peace.

[Numbers 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 25:13</span></span>

And he shall have it, and his seed after him,.... The covenant, and all
the blessings of it; so the covenant stands fast with Christ, and all
his spiritual seed, [Psa 89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028),

even the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; or this may be read in
connection with the preceding words, and the sense be, and he and his
shall have the covenant of an everlasting priesthood, beside the
covenant of peace before promised to him: the Aaronic priesthood is
called everlasting, because it was to continue, and did continue,
throughout the whole Jewish dispensation, unto the coming of the
Messiah, in whom it had its fulfilling end. Now though Phinehas in
course was to have the priesthood at his father's death, yet it is here
promised him on account of his zeal, both to assure him that he should
survive his father, and that nothing should befall him that should
render him incapable of the priesthood; and moreover, that he should
have a seed in whom it should be continued; there was indeed an
interruption of it in his line for a little while, on some account or
other, it being translated into the family of Eli, a son of Ithamar; but
then it was restored again in the time of Solomon to the family of
Phinehas, where it continued unto the captivity, and even to the times
of Herod, and so of the Messiah: in this also Phinehas was a type of
Christ, the covenant made with him not only being from everlasting and
to everlasting, a covenant that cannot be broken, and will never be
removed; but the priesthood founded on it is so too, being established
by the oath of God, who swore to him, "thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchizedek": Christ's priesthood is an unchangeable one,
and does not pass from one to another; his sacrifice has a perpetual
virtue and efficacy in it to take away sin, and he ever lives to make
intercession for his people, [Heb
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#021),

because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the
children of Israel; by executing judgment upon the delinquents, as
Christ has made atonement for the sins of his people by satisfying law
and justice: and, besides what has been observed, it may be remarked,
that there is an agreement between Phinehas and Christ in his very name;
Phinehas signifies either "the face of him that spares", that is, of
God, that spares; Christ is the face of God, the express image of his
person, even of him, who, though he spared not Christ himself, yet he
spares his people for Christ's sake; or else "he shall look that
spares", or "and spare" (g); that is, God, who looks upon the person,
righteousness, blood, and sacrifice of his Son, and spares his people.

\(g\) Vid. Hiller. Onomastic. Sacr. p. 476.

[Numbers 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 25:14</span></span>

Now the name of the Israelite that was slain,.... By Phinehas, as before
related:

even that was slain with the Midianitish woman; who was slain also, both
together with one thrust:

was Zimri, the son of Sela, a prince of a chief house among the
Simeonites; or a prince of his father's house, or family; there were
five families of the Simeonites, and this man was a prince of one of
them, see [Num 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012) though Josephus
(h), and so the Samaritan Chronicle (i), make him to be a prince of the
tribe of Simeon. His name is mentioned partly to the reproach of him,
and partly for the honour of Phinehas, whose zeal and courage were such,
that he feared not to take away the life of a person of such figure,
authority, and interest among the people.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 6. sect. 10. (i) Apud Hottinger, Smegma Oriental,
l. 1. c. 8. p. 448.

[Numbers 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 25:15</span></span>

And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the
daughter of Zur,.... One of the five kings of Midian, [Num
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#008) and so the Samaritan Chronicle
says (k), it was the daughter of a king that came to a prince of the
tribe of Simeon, and enticed him to eat of her food, and worship her
idols. The Targum of Jonathan says she was called Selonae, the daughter
of Balak, chief of the nation of Moab, whose habitation was in Midian:

he was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian; that is, Zur,
the father of Cozbi, was; there were five sons of Midian, whose names
are given, [Gen 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#004) from whence
Jarchi concludes, that there were five principal families in Midian, and
that this man was the head or chief of one of them, which is not
improbable; and that also makes for the honour of Phinehas, that he
spared not any for their rank and quality, of whatsoever nation they
were.

\(k\) Apud Hottinger, ut supra. (Smergma Oriental, l. 1. c. 8. p. 448.)

[Numbers 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 25:16</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... This was some time after the above
affair happened; how long it was is not certain; and a little time
before the death of Moses, see [Num
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001),

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 25:17</span></span>

Vex the Midianites, and smite them. Go to war with them, and smite them
with the sword; not the Moabites, but the Midianites, though they were
both confederates against Israel; but God had given a charge not to
contend in battle with Moab, [Deu 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009),
they were spared for the sake of Lot, from whom they sprang; and, as
Jarchi says, for the sake of Ruth, who was to come from them; and so in
the Talmud (l); though they did not entirely escape the divine
resentment, as appears from [Deu 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)
but the Midianites were the first that advised to send for Balaam, and
with them he stayed and was entertained, after he had been dismissed by
Balak; and it seems as if it was to them he gave the wicked counsel, to
draw Israel into fornication, and so into idolatry, and thereby bring
the curse of God upon them; which advice they communicated to the
Moabites, and both were concerned in putting it into execution; see [Num
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#004).

\(l\) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 38. 2.

[Numbers 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 25:18</span></span>

For they vex you with their wiles,.... Not with wars, but with wiles,
with cunning stratagems, and artful methods to draw them into sin, that
thereby they might be exposed to the wrath of God:

wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor; the idol Peor,
that is, Baalpeor; which seems to countenance the notion that Peor was
the name of a man, some great personage, who was deified after his
death; now the Midianites beguiled the Israelites, by sending their
daughters among them, with whom they committed fornication, and by whom
they were inveigled to worship the idol Peor:

and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their
sister; their countrywoman, as it was common with eastern people to call
those of the same country with them their brethren and sisters: now the
Midianites beguiled the Israelites, by prostituting a person of such
quality to a prince of theirs, which was setting an example to other
daughters of Midian to follow her, and so hereby many of the children of
Israel were ensnared into whoredom, and into idolatry:

which was slain in the day of the plague, for Peor's sake: or for the
business of Peor, as the Targum of Jonathan, because of the worship of
that idol; not that Cozbi was slain upon that account, but the plague
came upon Israel by reason of their worshipping of it, and it was on the
day that the plague was that she was slain; by which it seems that the
plague lasted but one day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 26](num026)

</div>
