<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num029)  [Next](num031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 30

Mention being made, in the latter part of the preceding chapter, of vows
to be performed to the Lord, besides the sacrifices directed to; here
some account is given of them, and men are charged to fulfil, and not
break them, [Num 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001) but as to women,
if a maid, being in her father's house, made a vow in his hearing, and
he silent at it, her vow stood; but if he disapproved of it, it was null
and void, [Num 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003) and so a wife,
when she vowed a vow in the hearing of her husband, and he said not
ought against it, it was valid; but if he objected to it, it stood for
nothing, [Num 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#006), likewise a widow,
or one divorced, that made a vow in her husband's house, before he died,
or she was put away from him, and he did not contradict it, it remained
in force and to be fulfilled; but if he made it void, it stood not, and
she was forgiven, [Num 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#009) it being
in an husband's power to confirm or make null a vow or oath, made by his
wife to afflict her soul; but if he made any void after he heard them,
and had been silent, he himself was to bear her iniquity, [Num
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#013).

[Numbers 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 30:1</span></span>

And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes,.... Or the princes of
them, who could more easily be convened, and who used to meet on certain
occasions, and on whom it lay to see various laws put in execution:

concerning the children of Israel; how they ought to conduct and behave
in the following case, it being an affair which concerned them all:

saying, this is the thing which the Lord hath commanded; relating to
vows. Aben Ezra is of opinion that this was delivered after the battle
with Midian, of which there is an account in the following chapter, and
is occasioned by what was said, to the tribes of Gad and Reuben, [Num
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#024).

do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth; to which they replied:

thy servants will do as my lord commandeth; upon which the nature of a
vow, and the manner of keeping it, are observed; but the occasion of it
rather seems to be what is said towards the close of the foregoing
chapter, [Num 29:39](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#039), that the various
sacrifices there directed were to be offered in their season, besides
the vows and freewill offerings; and when these were ratified and
confirmed, and when null and void, and to be fulfilled or neglected, is
the principal business of this chapter.

[Numbers 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 30:2</span></span>

If a man vow a vow unto the Lord,.... Which must be in a thing that is
lawful to be done, which is not contrary to the revealed will and mind
of God, and which may tend to the glory of God, the honour of religion,
the service of the sanctuary, the good of a man's self or of his
neighbour; or in things purely indifferent, which may, or may not be
done, without offence to God or man; as that he will not eat such a
thing for such a time, or he will do this or the other thing, as Jarchi
observes; who moreover says, that he may forbid himself what is
forbidden, and forbid what is free and lawful; but he may not make free
or lawful what is forbidden, that is, he may not vow to do a thing which
is contrary to the law of God, such a vow will not stand: and he was to
be of such an age before he could make a vow that would be valid;
according to the Targum of Jonathan, he must be thirteen years of age;
it is said in the Misnah (p),"a son of twelve years and one day, his
vows are examined; a son of thirteen years and one day, his vows are
firm, and they examine the whole thirteenth year before that time;
although they say we know to whose name (or on whose account) we vow or
consecrate, their vow is no vow, nor their consecration no consecration;
but after that time, though they say we know not to whose name (or, on
whose account) we vow or consecrate, their vow is a vow, and their
consecration a consecration:"

or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; to his vow adds an oath
for the greater confirmation of it, and to lay himself under the greater
obligation to perform it:

he shall not break his word; or profane it (q) but punctually perform
it; men should be careful how they vow, and not rashly do it; but when
they have vowed, they ought to perform; see [Ecc
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004),

he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth; it is not
in his power to revoke his vow or make it null: the Misnic doctors (r)
say, a man can loose all vows, excepting his own. R. Judah says, not the
vows of his wife, nor those which are between her and others; that is,
as one of the commentators (s) explains it, such vows which are not made
to afflict, or respect not fasting; but according to the Targum of
Jonathan, though a man cannot loose his vows, or free himself from them,
yet the sanhedrim, or court of judicature, can, or a wise man that is
authenticated thereby, as Jarchi says, or three private persons; but
these are such traditions; which make void the commandment of God, as
our Lord complains, [Mat 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001).

\(p\) Niddah, c. 5. sect. 6. (q) (r) Negaim, c. 5. sect. 5. (s)
Bartenora in Misn. Negaim, c. 5. sect. 5.

[Numbers 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 30:3</span></span>

If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord,.... Who has not passed thirteen
years, as the Targum of Jonathan:

and bind herself by a bond; lay herself under obligation to perform her
vow by an oath: being in her father's house; unto the twelfth year, as
the same Targum; that is, that is under his care, tuition, and
jurisdiction, whether she literally, or properly speaking, is in the
house or no at the time she vows; so Jarchi interprets it of her being
in the power of her father, though not in his house, she being not at
age to be at her own disposal, but at his: wherefore it is added:

in her youth; which, as the same writer explains it, signifies that she
is"neither a little one, nor at age; for a little one's vow is no vow,
and one at age is not in the power of her father to make void her vow:
who is a little one? our Rabbins say, one of eleven years of age and one
day, her vows are examined, whether she knows on whose account she vows
and consecrates, or devotes anything; one vows a vow that is twelve
years and one day old, there is no need to examine them.''He seems to
refer to a passage in the Misnah (t),"a daughter of eleven years and one
day, her vows are examined; a daughter of twelve years and one day, her
vows are firm, but they are to be examined through the whole twelfth
year.''

\(t\) Niddah, c. 5. sect. 6.

[Numbers 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 30:4</span></span>

And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her
soul,.... Her vow, which is binding upon her, or her vow and an oath
annexed to it; which makes it still more strongly binding; and this he
hears himself, or it is reported to him by others: and her father shall
hold his peace at her; shall not reprove her for it, nor contradict her
in it: then all her vows shall stand; be they what, or as many as they
may:

and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand; his
silence being to be interpreted as approving of them, and consenting to
them.

[Numbers 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 30:5</span></span>

But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth,....
Disapproves of her vow, and expresses his dislike of it, and declares it
null and void; which, if done at all, is to be done on the same day he
hears it, and not on another day, as Aben Ezra observes; not the day
following, and much less on a third or fourth day, &c. and it might be
done on a sabbath day (u):

not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she bound her soul,

shall stand; but become null and void, she being at the control of her
father, and having nothing in her own power, and at her own disposal, to
vow or consecrate, but wholly in the power and at the disposal of her
father:

and the Lord shall forgive her; the breach of her vow, it shall not be
imputed to her as a sin:

because her father disallowed her; so that it was no fault of hers that
it was not fulfilled; though she might be blameworthy to make one,
without previously obtaining his consent, and making it rashly without
his previous knowledge, she not being at her own hands; and in this
respect may be said to be forgiven by the Lord, which supposes some
fault committed.

\(u\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 24. sect. 5.

[Numbers 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 30:6</span></span>

And if she had at all an husband with whom she vowed,.... Or "when her
vows were upon her" (w), was either betrothed or married to a man:

or uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; uttered
anything, either with or without premeditation, either with thought and
deliberation, or rashly and imprudently, as the word signifies, yet in
such a manner that it was binding upon her.

\(w\)

[Numbers 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 30:7</span></span>

And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he
heard it,.... The vow she made, and by his silence consented to it:

then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul
shall stand; or she be under obligation to perform them.

[Numbers 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 30:8</span></span>

But if her husband disallow her on the day that he heard it,....
Expresses his dislike of it; and this he does as soon as he hears it, at
least that same day; according to the Jews (x), within the space of
twenty four hours:

then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered
with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect; by
contradicting it, and forbidding the performance of it; or however by
declaring to her, or to others, that it is not agreeable to his mind and
will that it should be fulfilled:

and the Lord shall forgive her; excuse her performance of the vow, and
not impute sin to her on that account, nor punish for the breach of it,
she being under the cover of her husband, and obliged to submit to his
will. According to Jarchi, the Scripture speaks of a woman that vows to
be a Nazarite; her husband hears and makes it void; but she does not
know it, and transgresses her vow, and drinks wine, and is defiled with
the dead, so that she has need of forgiveness, though it is made void;
and if vows made void, he adds, have need of pardon, much more those
that are not.

\(x\) Leo Modena's History of Rites, &c. par. 2. c. 4.

[Numbers 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 30:9</span></span>

But every vow of a widow,.... The Scripture speaks, as Jarchi says, of a
widow from marriage, or that has been married, but a widow from
espousals (or that has been only espoused), the husband dead, the power
is transmitted, and returns to the father; and with respect to such a
case, it is said in the Misnah (y)"if the father (of such a betrothed
person) dies, the power is not transmitted to the husband; but if the
husband dies, the power is transmitted to the father; in this case,
greater is the power of a father than of an husband; in others, greater
is the power of an husband than of a father, because an husband makes
void (the vow of) one at age, but a father does not make void (the vow
of) such an one:"

and of her that is divorced: from her husband on some account or
another; now in each of these cases, the one being loosed from the law
of her husband by death, and the other by a bill of divorce, if they
vowed:

the vows wherewith they have bound their souls shall stand against her;
against either of them, they having none over them to disapprove of,
contradict, and make void their vows.

\(y\) Nedarim, c. 10. sect. 2.

[Numbers 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 30:10</span></span>

And if she vowed in her husband's house,.... Before his death, in his
lifetime, or before divorced: the Targum of Jonathan adds, by way of
explanation, "and not at age for marriage", understanding it of a
betrothed, and not a married person; but Jarchi says, the Scripture
speaks of a married one, which seems most likely:

or bound her soul by a bond with an oath; to fulfil her vow, to abstain
from this, or to do that or the other thing.

[Numbers 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 30:11</span></span>

And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her, and disallowed her
not,.... Heard her make her vow, and bind it with an oath, and was
silent at it, which was consenting to it, and did not contradict her,
nor show any displeasure or resentment at her on account of it; the
Targum of Jonathan adds,"and died before she was at age;''but what
follows held good equally of one that was at age for marriage, and
actually married to him:

then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her
soul shall stand; be ratified and confirmed, and she be under obligation
to make them good.

[Numbers 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 30:12</span></span>

But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard
them,.... Declaring they were contrary to his mind and will, he
disapproved of them, and forbid the carrying them into execution:

then whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or
concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand; though her husband be
dead, or she be divorced from him:

her husband hath made them void, and the Lord shall forgive her: she
will neither incur his displeasure for not fulfilling her vow, nor have
any punishment inflicted on her: the Targum of Jonathan is,"if her
husband makes them void, and she knows it not and transgresses, it shall
be forgiven her by the Lord.''

[Numbers 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 30:13</span></span>

Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul,.... By fasting,
as Aben Ezra observes; as when a vow was made, or a person bound herself
by an oath to abstain from such and such food, or to fast on such a day;
to keep a fast which was not appointed, to set apart a day for fasting,
besides the grand and general fast on the day of atonement: Jarchi from
hence gathers, that a man only makes vows of afflicting the soul, or
vows of fasting; but this is not said by way of limitation and
restriction, but by way of amplification and illustration, giving a
particular instance, by which others may be judged of:

her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void, just as
he pleased; and this power an husband had, to prevent confusion in the
family, and trouble in the affairs of it, by vowing abstinence from such
and such food, or from such and such liquor, and the like; and to
prevent running into expenses he was not able to answer, by vowing and
dedicating, this and the other to holy uses, for sacrifices, and repairs
of the temple, and the like.

[Numbers 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 30:14</span></span>

But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day today,....
Said not one word to her day after day, neither on the day he heard her
vow, nor the day following:

then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon her;
by his silence:

he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her, in the day that he
heard them; for not to contradict them was to confirm them.

[Numbers 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 30:15</span></span>

But if he shall any ways make them void, after that he hath heard
them,.... Some way or other expressing his dislike of them; not at the
time he heard them, but some time afterwards; one day after, as the
Targum of Jonathan:

then he shall bear his iniquity: be accountable for the breach of the
vow, the sin shall be reckoned to him, and he shall bear the punishment
of it, because he ought to have declared is disapprobation of it sooner;
and it may be, his doing it when he did was only in a spirit of
contradiction, or through covetousness; and it would have been more
advisable to have let the vow stand, and therefore acted a criminal
part, and so was answerable for it; the Targum of Jonathan explains
it,"her husband or her father shall bear her iniquity,''supposing her
not to be at age: Aben Ezra gives the reason of it, because she is in
his power.

[Numbers 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 30:16</span></span>

These are the statutes which the Lord commanded Moses between a man and
his wife,.... Relating to vows made by the wife, and confirmed or
disannulled by the husband: Aben Ezra adds, if she is at age or in
puberty, understanding it of a married and not a betrothed wife:

between the father and his daughter; if she is not at age, as the same
writer observes; for if she is at age he has nothing to do with her
vows:

being yet in her youth; not at age, being not twelve years and one day
old:

in her father's house; in his power and jurisdiction, and at his
disposal, and so could make her vows void or firm, as he pleased: this
power of ratifying or disannulling vows an husband had over his wife,
and a father over his daughter, to prevent imprudent and extravagant
vows, and the too frequent use of them, the consequences of which might
be bad in families.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 31](num031)

</div>
