<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num016)  [Next](num018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 17

In this chapter the priesthood of Aaron is further confirmed and
established by the budding and blossom of his rod, as it lay among the
princes of the several tribes, when theirs did not, [Num
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001); which rod of Aaron was ordered
to be laid up before the ark, as a token against the rebels, and to put
an end to all murmurings against Aaron for the future; which was
accordingly done, [Num 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010); upon
which the people expressed their fear of perishing because of their
sins, [Num 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#012).

[Numbers 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 17:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After the plague ceased, for the
further confirmation of the priesthood in Aaron's family, another method
is directed to by the Lord:

saying: as follows.

[Numbers 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 17:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel,.... The principal men among them of
the several tribes:

and take of everyone of them; not of every individual of the people of
Israel, but of their princes, as afterwards explained:

a rod, according to the house of their fathers; or "father", of whom
their house or tribe was called, as Reuben, Simeon, &c. this rod was
either a common walking staff, as some think, or rather the ensign of
their princely office and dignity, peculiar to each tribe; though some
think it was now freshly cut off from an almond tree, and that all the
rods were of one and the same tree; but supposing they were all of the
almond kind, as Josephus (d) thinks, yet being dry rods, and of long
use, served to make the miracle appear the greater:

of all their princes, according to the house of their fathers, twelve
rods; this explains who they were to be taken of, the princes of the
several tribes, whose names are given, [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005); and the number of them twelve,
according to the number of the twelve tribes:

write thou every man's name upon his rod; the name of each prince, or
head of a tribe, either by cutting it into the rod, or fastening a
writing to it, after the manner of those times; as, for instance, the
name of Elizur for the tribe of Reuben; by which it was to be made and
was made to appear, that to none of these tribes belonged the
priesthood, but to the tribe of Levi, and to none of that tribe but the
family of Aaron; whereby it should seem that some of all the tribes made
pretensions to it, as being all holy, and especially the chief firstborn
of every tribe, as such their princes were.

\(d\) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 4. sect. 2.

[Numbers 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 17:3</span></span>

And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi,.... Or upon the
rod that was for the tribe of Levi; the name of "Aaron" was to be
written, not the word "Levi", or a "Levite", as Josephus (e); for that
would not have decided the controversy about the priesthood, which
chiefly lay between the Levites and the family of Aaron, who were of the
same tribe:

for one rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers; one rod
for the head or prince of every tribe, every prince representing his own
tribe he was the head of, and the rod the prince; and though the tribe
of Levi was divided into two families, the family of the priests, and
the family of the Levites; yet, as Jarchi observes, they were but one
tribe, and so one rod for them, as for the other tribes.

\(e\) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 4. sect. 2.

[Numbers 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 17:4</span></span>

And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation,.... In
the most holy place:

before the testimony; that is, the ark in which the testimony or the law
was; here they were laid as in the presence of God, who was in a
miraculous way to decide the controversy by them, and put an end to it;
for upon the ark was the mercy seat, over which were the cherubim, the
seat of the divine Majesty, and where none could come at them, and where
no fraud could be supposed to be committed:

where I will meet with you; not with the people in person, who might not
go at any time into the most holy place; nor with Aaron, who only might
go into it on the day of atonement; but with Moses, the chief ruler and
representative of the whole body of the people, and who might go in
there at any time, to consult with God about matters of moment and
difficulty, and where the Lord had said he would meet him, [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022); and now would, in a miraculous
way, clearly show him, and the people of Israel by him, who was the
priest he had chosen of all the tribes.

[Numbers 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 17:5</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that the man's rod whom I shall choose,....
Or make it manifest that he had chosen him, and so confirm the choice he
had made of him and his family, for the priesthood to be and continue
in:

shall blossom; bud and blossom, and yield fruit, as it afterwards did,
which is here declared beforehand, that the miracle might appear the
greater, exactly answering to a prediction delivered out before of it:

and I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of
Israel, whereby they murmur against you; against Moses for setting up
his brother as an high priest, and establishing the priesthood in his
family; and against Aaron for accepting of it, and officiating in it;
but by this method now taken, God would for ever silence their
murmurings, so that they should never be able, with any face, to object
any more to the authority of the Aaronic priesthood, which should appear
by the predicted miracle beyond all dispute and contradiction.

[Numbers 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 17:6</span></span>

And Moses spake unto the children of Israel,.... What the Lord had bid
him say unto them concerning the rods, which they hearkened unto and
observed:

and everyone of their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince
one; every prince of the several tribes, and so a rod for every tribe,
as well as for each prince:

according to their father's houses, even twelve rods; there being twelve
tribes named after their fathers, or the patriarchs, the twelve sons of
Jacob; and Joseph having two tribes which sprung from him, called after
his two sons Ephraim and Manasseh, there were twelve rods besides that
of Aaron; and so the Vulgate Latin version renders the words with the
next clause,"and there were twelve rods besides the rod of Aaron;''in
all thirteen; though the Jews say there were but twelve with it,
allowing but one rod for Joseph, under whom were comprehended Ephraim
and Manasseh, and reckoning the tribe of Levi one of the twelve so Aben
Ezra observes, that the rod of Levi was among the twelve and Joseph had
but one rod:

and the rod of Aaron was among their rods: in the middle of them, and
was so placed, as Jarchi thinks, that it might not be said, because it
was put on the side of the Shechinah or divine Majesty, therefore it
budded; but being in the middle of them there could be no difference in
that respect.

[Numbers 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 17:7</span></span>

And Moses laid up the rods before the Lord in the tabernacle of witness.
In that part of the tabernacle where the testimony or witness was, that
is, the law, which was in the ark, over which was the mercy seat, with
the cherubim between which Jehovah dwelt, and this was the most holy
place; and the rods being laid here, might be said to be laid before the
Lord, who, by making a difference in one of those rods from the rest,
would decide the controversy about the priesthood, which was the end of
their being laid before him.

[Numbers 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 17:8</span></span>

And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle
of witness,.... Where none but he could go at any time; this was the day
after the rods had been placed there:

and, behold, the rod of Aaron, for the house of Levi; the rod that had
Aaron's name upon it, which was to represent the tribe of Levi, of which
he was:

was budded, and brought forth buds; knobs of blossom, such that are seen
on trees before they open; for the almond tree puts forth its blossoms
before its leaves; though the Targum of Jonathan renders it "branches",
as do some versions; and some think this is to be understood of its
putting out its leaves first, contrary to the nature of the almond tree,
and so makes the miracle the greater; thus Ben Melech:

and blossomed blossoms; open flowers or blossoms, such as appear on the
almond tree in the spring, and look very beautiful:

and yielded almonds; ripe almonds, in their full perfection, as the
Targums of Jerusalem and Jonathan; the latter of which is,"in the same
night it perfected and brought forth almonds:''the word used has the
signification of weaning, and alludes to children grown up to some
ripeness and maturity, [Gen 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#008); the
case seems to be this, that in one part of the rod were buds, swelling
and just putting out, in another part open flowers quite blown, and in
others full ripe fruit: now this clearly showed it to be supernatural,
since the almond tree, though quick and early in its production of buds
and flowers, yet never has those and ripe fruit on it at the same time;
to which may be added, that this was not the time of year the almond
tree blossoms; not the spring, but rather autumn, as it should seem,
since it was after the affair of the spies and the murmurs of the people
on their report; now it was the time of the first ripe grapes, when they
went into the land, and they were forty days searching it, and it was
after their return the insurrections before recorded were: the design of
this was to confirm the priesthood in Aaron's family, and show that it
would continue there, in a flourishing condition, and that there would
be a succession of priests from him to the time of the Messiah, as there
were; and the almond tree having its name in Hebrew from watchfulness
and haste, see [Jer 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011); may denote
the vigilance of the priests in their office, and the haste punishment
makes to come upon such that should oppose them, or usurp the
priesthood, as in the case of Uzziah; so Jarchi remarks: this rod of
Aaron's may be an emblem of the Gospel ministry of that rod that should
come out of Zion, [Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002); which in
the eyes of men is mean and despicable, like a dry stick, but becomes a
fruitful one through the power of divine grace; and an almond tree rod
may denote the vigilance and watchfulness of Gospel ministers over
themselves and others, and their doctrine; and oftentimes whom God puts
into the ministry he early calls them by his grace, and frequently makes
the first part of their ministry most useful, and fruit is brought forth
which remains: moreover, this rod may be considered as a type of Christ;
it being a dry rod or stick, may denote the meanness of his descent and
appearance in the world, and the unpromising aspect of his being the
King, Messiah, and Saviour of men; and being an almond tree rod, may
signify his speedy incarnation in the fulness of time, which the Lord
hastened; his being the firstborn, and his right to the priesthood, and
his vigilance in it; its lying among other rods, and budding, and
blossoming, and bringing forth fruit, may point at Christ's assuming the
common nature or man, his being cut off by death, his resurrection from
the dead, and the fruits arising from thence, justification, peace,
pardon, and eternal life; and as Aaron's priesthood was confirmed by the
budding, &c. of this rod, so the deity and Messiahship of Christ are, by
his resurrection from the dead; See Gill on [Heb
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004).

[Numbers 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 17:9</span></span>

And Moses brought out all the rods from before the Lord, unto all the
children of Israel,.... He brought them out of the holy place, and
showed them to the princes of the several tribes:

and they looked, and took every man his rod; which they knew by their
names upon them; by their own handwriting, as Aben Ezra; for though
Moses is bid to write their names on them, [Num
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#002); yet no more may be meant by that
than that he should order them to be written, and take care that they
were.

[Numbers 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 17:10</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... After the rods had been viewed, and
every prince took his rod, and full satisfaction was given that the
priesthood belonged to Aaron, by the budding and blossoming of his rod,
when the rest remained as they were:

bring Aaron's rod again before the testimony; before the ark, in which
the testimony or law was; here it was placed and continued, but how long
cannot be said with certainty; no doubt for many ages; which increases
the wonder, that it should, as it probably did, continue with its buds,
blossoms, and fruit on it: the apostle speaks of it, as in the holy of
holies, with the ark, the pot of manna, and the tables of the covenant,
[Heb 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004); the Jews say (f), that when
Josiah the king ordered the ark to be laid up in that place which
Solomon had built, that it might not be carried with the captives into
captivity, as it is said, [Ch2 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#003),
"put the holy ark", &c. they hid with the ark the rod of Aaron, and the
pot of manna, and the anointing oil, and which were not in the second
temple; and they say (g), particularly of Aaron's rod, that at the time
it was laid up by Josiah it had its buds and almonds: now this was
ordered to be put in the most holy place before the ark:

to be kept for a token against the rebels; to be a token of their sin
and wickedness in rebelling against God, his ordinance and ministers;
which occasioned this miracle to be wrought, for the confirmation of the
priesthood in Aaron's family, which they opposed, and to be a caution to
others not to attempt anything against it for the future; so Christ and
the Gospel ministry will be swift witnesses against the opposers of him
and that; see [Mal 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005),

and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die
not; quite silence all the murmurings of the people with respect to the
priesthood being so fully convinced by this miracle of the divine
authority Aaron and his family had to exercise the priestly office, and
they only, and so such destruction of the people be prevented as had
been lately made.

\(f\) Kimchi in 2 Chron. xxxv. 3. Maimon. Hilchot. Beth Habechirah, c.
4. sect. 1. (g) T. Hieros. Shekalim, c. 6. fol. 49. 3.

[Numbers 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 17:11</span></span>

And Moses did so; as the Lord commanded him, even so did he. Took
Aaron's rod, and laid it up before the ark for the purpose mentioned,
being a faithful servant to God in all his house.

[Numbers 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 17:12</span></span>

And the children of Israel spake unto Moses,.... The princes of the
tribes, who had seen the miracle of the rod, and knew that it was laid
up in the most holy place, and for what purpose, which gave them a
sensible concern: these, and as many as were acquainted with it,
addressed Moses upon it, as follows:

saying, behold, we die, we perish, we all perish; which being expressed
without the copulative, and in different words, show that they were
spoken quick and in haste, and discover the passion of mind and distress
they were in, and the sense they had of their sin and danger, fearing
they should all die and perish, as many had already; it has respect, as
some think, to punishments past and future, so the Targum of
Jonathan,"some of us have been consumed by flaming fire, and others of
us have been swallowed up in the earth and are lost, and, lo, we are
accounted as if all of us would perish.''

[Numbers 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 17:13</span></span>

Whosoever cometh anything near unto the tabernacle of the Lord shall
die,.... They who before were so bold and daring as to think the
priesthood was common to them with Aaron, or they had as good a right to
it, and might go into the sanctuary of the Lord where he did, are now so
frightened at the rod being laid up as a token against them, that they
thought they must not come near the tabernacle at all, and, if they did,
would be in the utmost danger of death:

shall we be consumed with dying? such violent deaths, until there are
none left of us? but the Syriac and Arabic versions render the words
affirmatively; we are near or about to be consumed; and so the Targum of
Onkelos, lo, we are to be consumed; which agrees best with the preceding
clause, for they would scarcely make a question of what they had
affirmed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 18](num018)

</div>
