<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2001)  [Next](pe2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 PETER 2

This chapter contains a description of false teachers, that were then in
Christian churches, as there had been false prophets among the Jews; and
they are described by the doctrines, which they privily introduced; in
general, damnable heresies; in particular, denying the Lord that bought
them; and by their success, having many followers of them in their
pernicious ways; and by the sad effects following hereupon; with respect
to the way of truth, that was blasphemed; with respect to their hearers,
they, through the covetousness of these false teachers, were made
merchandise of; and with respect to themselves, swift and sure
destruction would be brought upon them, [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001), which is illustrated and
confirmed by the instances of punishment in the angels, the men of the
old world, and the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004) and whereas, in these instances,
notice is taken of the deliverance of some righteous persons, as Noah
and Lot, when wicked men were destroyed; the apostle draws this
conclusion from the whole, that the Lord knows both how to deliver the
saints out of afflictions, and to reserve wicked men until the day of
judgment, then to be punished, [Pe2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009), especially such shall be then
punished, who are described by their impure course of lift, their
contempt of civil government, and their presumption and selfwill, [Pe2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010) which sins of theirs are
aggravated by the different conduct of angels, superior to them; and by
their being like brute beasts, as ignorant as they, and even below them;
whose punishment will be to perish in their corruption, as the just
reward of their unrighteousness, since they are open in sin, take
pleasure in it, and sport themselves with it, and are spots and
blemishes in Christian societies, [Pe2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#011) and these, who are no other than
the false teachers before spoken of, are further described by their
adulterous eyes, which cannot cease from sin; by their beguiling
unstable souls; by the covetous practices their hearts were exercised
with; by their just desert, cursed children; by the course they steer,
forsaking the right way, going astray from it, and following the way of
Balaam in his covetousness, and other wicked practices, for which he was
reproved by his ass; and by various metaphors, which express the
emptiness of these persons, and which also point at their destruction,
and describe their boasts and brags, and the influence they have,
through their lasciviousness and uncleanness, on some persons, who have
been outwardly reformed, [Pe2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014) and
this they obtain over them in a very stupid and senseless way, by
promising them liberty, when through being overcome by them, and drawn
into sin, they were brought into bondage, and become servants of
corruption; and so their case is worse than it was before their
reformation, and profession of religion; and better it would have been
not to have had the knowledge they had, than after it to turn from the
paths of truth and holiness, which is illustrated by a true Scripture
proverb, which expresses the filthy nature of sin, the character of
these men, and their irrecoverable state and condition, [Pe2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019).

[2 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 2:1</span></span>

But there were false prophets also among the people,.... As well as holy
men of God, who gave out prophecies, by the inspiration and impulse of
the Holy Spirit; that is, among the people of the Jews, God's professing
people, whose God was the Lord, and who had chosen them to be a special
and peculiar people, above all people of the earth; and had
distinguished them by his favours from all others: among these, though
the Syriac version reads "in the world", there were false prophets, who
ran, and were not sent; and who prophesied, and the Lord spake not to
them: of these there were many in Jeremiah's time, and in the times of
Ezekiel; and in Ahab's time, besides the four hundred and fifty prophets
of Baal, slain by Elijah, there were four hundred that called themselves
the prophets of the Lord; among whom went forth a lying spirit,
encouraging Ahab to go up to Ramoth Gilead, promising him prosperity and
success; Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah, with whom Micaiah, the true
prophet, had much contention, was at the head of them; and such there
were among that people in all ages, until the times of Christ, and in
his likewise; see [Mat 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015) now from
these, by an easy transition, the apostle proceeds to another part of
his design in this epistle, to describe the characters of false teachers
under the present dispensation, that saints may beware, and avoid their
pernicious principles and practices:

even as there shall be false teachers among you; which need not to be
wondered at, or stumble any, it being no new or strange thing, but what
was always more or less the case of the people of God. This is a
prophecy of what should be, and agrees with the prediction of our Lord,
[Mat 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011) and which regards not only
the times immediately following, in which it had a remarkable
fulfilment, for false teachers now began to arise, and appeared in great
numbers in the age succeeding the apostles, but to all periods of time
from hence, to the second coming of Christ; and these were to spring
from, and be among such that bore the Christian name, and so regards not
Mahometans and Deists; and it is to be observed, that the phrase is
varied in this clause, and these are called not "prophets" but
"teachers": because as prophecy was more peculiar to the former
dispensation, so is teaching to the present:

who privily shall bring in damnable heresies: errors in the fundamental
doctrines of the Gospel; such as relate to a trinity of persons in the
Godhead; and to the person of Christ, to his proper deity, distinct
personality, eternal sonship, and real humanity; and to his office as
Mediator, rejecting him as the true Messiah, and as the only Saviour of
sinners; denying his sacrifice and satisfaction, and the imputation of
his righteousness; and to the Holy Spirit, his deity, personality, and
divine influences and operations: these are "damnable", or
"destructive", or "heresies of destruction"; which lead to eternal
destruction both those that introduce and propagate them, and those that
embrace and profess them; for they remove, or attempt to remove, the
foundation of eternal life and happiness: the manner in which these are
usually introduced is "privily"; at unawares, secretly, under a
disguise, and gradually, by little and little, and not at once, and
openly; and which is the constant character and practice of such men,
who lie in wait to deceive, creep into churches at unawares, and into
houses privately; and insinuate their principles under specious
pretences and appearances of truth, using the hidden things of
dishonesty, walking in craftiness, handling the word of God deceitfully,
and colouring things with false glosses and feigned words: and even
denying the Lord that bought them; not the Lord Jesus Christ, but God
the Father; for the word is not here used, which always is where Christ
is spoken of as the Lord, but and which is expressive of the power which
masters have over their servants (i), and which God has over all
mankind; and wherever this word is elsewhere used, it is spoken of God
the Father, whenever applied to a divine person, as in [Luk
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029) and especially this appears to be
the sense, from the parallel text in [Jde
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004) where the Lord God denied by those
men is manifestly distinguished from our Lord Jesus Christ, and by whom
these persons are said to be bought: the meaning is not that they were
redeemed by the blood of Christ, for Christ is not intended; and
besides, whenever redemption by Christ is spoken of, the price is
usually mentioned, or some circumstance or another which fully
determines the sense; see [Act 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)
whereas here is not the least hint of anything of this kind: add to
this, that such who are redeemed by Christ are the elect of God only,
the people of Christ, his sheep and friends, and church, and who are
never left to deny him so as to perish eternally; for could such be
lost, or deceive, or be deceived finally and totally by damnable
heresies, and bring on themselves swift destruction, Christ's purchase
would be in vain, and the ransom price be paid for nought; but the word
"bought" regards temporal mercies and deliverance, which these men
enjoyed, and is used as an aggravation of their sin in denying the Lord;
both by words, delivering out such tenets as are derogatory to the glory
of the divine perfections, and which deny one or other of them, and of
his purposes, providence, promises, and truths; and by works, turning
the doctrine of the grace of God into lasciviousness, being disobedient
and reprobate to every good work; that they should act this part against
the Lord who had made them, and upheld them in their beings and took
care of them in his providence, and had followed them with goodness and
mercy all the days of their lives; just as Moses aggravates the
ingratitude of the Jews in [Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)
from whence this phrase is borrowed, and to which it manifestly refers:
"do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise! is not he thy
Father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established
thee?" nor is this the only place the apostle refers to in this chapter,
see [Pe2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012) compared with [Deu
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005) and it is to be observed, that
the persons he writes to were Jews, who were called the people the Lord
had redeemed and purchased, [Exo 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013)
and so were the first false teachers that rose up among them; and
therefore this phrase is very applicable to them:

and bring upon themselves swift destruction; either in this life, being
suddenly cut off in the midst of their days, and by the immediate hand
of God, as Arius and other heretics have been; or eternal damnation in
the other, which their tenets lead unto, and which will swiftly come
upon them when they are promising themselves peace and safety.

\(i\) Vid. Ammonium , in voce

[2 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 2:2</span></span>

And many shall follow their pernicious ways,.... Their principles and
their practices, which lead to destruction, The Complutensian edition,
the Alexandrian copy, and six copies of Beza's, and others, read "their
lasciviousnesses"; and so the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "their
luxuries"; and all the Oriental versions seem to have read in like
manner. The Syriac version renders it, "their impurity"; and the Arabic
version, "their unchastities"; and the Ethiopic version, "their lust";
and which seems to have respect to the impure conversation of the
followers of Simon Magus, the Nicolaitans, the Gnostics, Carpocratians,
and others, who indulged themselves in all unnatural lusts and
uncleanness; and generally, when men make shipwreck of faith, they also
do of a good conscience, and become immoral in their conversations; and
yet, as destructive as their principles, and as dishonourable and
scandalous as their practices be, many were, and are their followers; so
it was foretold by Christ, [Mat 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011),
and so it has been, [Rev 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003). The
road both of error and wickedness is a broad one, in which many walk;
and a multitude is no proof of the truth of a church or of the
principles of men, nor to be followed:

by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of; that is,
either Christ, who is truth itself, and the true way to eternal life and
happiness; or the Gospel, the word of truth, which holds forth Christ
the truth, and points to him, and every other truth, and nothing but
truth; or the Christian religion, which is the true way, in opposition
to all sects and heresies; and is what should be blasphemed and spoken
against, either by these men or their followers; for the phrase may be
rendered, "by whom", as it is in the Vulgate Latin version, and the
meaning be, that they should, in a blasphemous way, speak and write
against Christ and his truths, reproach and revile them, and in a
virulent manner oppose them, and trample them under foot: "or for the
sake of them", as other versions read; and as we do; "by reason of
them"; they should be the occasion, by their impure lives, of the name
of Christ, and his doctrines, being blasphemed by profane and
irreligious men; see [Rom 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024). The
Alexandrian copy, and one of Stephens's, read "the glory of truth"; and
so the Ethiopic version, "the glory of his truth".

[2 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 2:3</span></span>

And through covetousness;.... Which is generally a prevailing vice among
false teachers, they having no other end in view than themselves; either
to gain popular applause and vain glory, which they are always covetous
of; or to amass riches to themselves, after which they have an
insatiable desire:

shall they with feigned words; made words, words of their own devising,
and not which the Holy Ghost teacheth; whereby they cover themselves,
and privily introduce their pernicious principles; and therefore new
words and phrases are always to be suspected and guarded against,
especially in articles of moment and importance: or with flattering
words and fair speeches, great swelling words of vanity, having men's
persons in admiration, because of worldly advantage; and in this way
they gain their point:

make merchandise of you; deal with the souls of men, as merchants do
with their goods, carry them to market and sell them; so false teachers
deal with the souls of their followers, draw them, and sell them to
Satan, and they themselves pay for it; see [Zac
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005) but in the issue, and that in a
short time, they will be no gainers by such practices:

whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not: that is, their
condemnation, which God in righteousness has determined, "from the
creation of the world", as the Ethiopic version reads, or from all
eternity, see [Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004), to bring them
into, for their vile principles and practices, is not retarded and
delayed; it does not linger and stay behind, or slacken its pace; it
will not tarry, it will come upon them at the appointed time:

and their damnation slumbereth not; an avenging God, who has appointed
them to damnation for their sins, slumbers not; the justice of God is
not asleep, nor careless and negligent, but is awake, and watches over
them, to bring the evil upon them they have deserved, and is in reserve
for them, and will hasten to perform it; the determined destruction does
not lie dormant, but in a little time will be stirred up, and fall with
dreadful weight on such sinners, as may be concluded from the following
awful instances.

[2 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 2:4</span></span>

For if God spared not the angels that sinned..... By whom are meant the
devil and his angels; who are spirits created by God and as such were
good; their first estate which they left was pure and holy, as well as
high and honourable; they, were at first in the truth, though they abode
not in it; they were once among the morning stars and sons of God, and
were angels of light; their numbers are many, and therefore are here
expressed in the plural number, "angels", though it cannot be said how
large; a legion of them was in one man; one at first might be in the
rebellion, and draw a large number with him into it, at least was at the
head of it, who is called Beelzebub, the prince of devils: what their
first sin was, and the occasion of it, is not easy to say; it is
generally thought to be pride, affecting a likeness to, or an equality
with God; since this was what man was tempted to by them, and by which
he fell, as they are thought to do; and because this is the sin of such
who fall into the condemnation of the devil; [Ti1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006) and is the sin, that goes before a
fall in common; as it did before the fall of man, so it might before the
fall of angels, [Pro 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018). The
passage in [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044) seems most
clearly of any to express their sin, which was "not abiding in the
truth"; in the truth of the Gospel, particularly the great truth of the
salvation of men, by the incarnate Son of God; and which they could by
no means brook and which might spring from pride, they not bearing the
thought that the human nature should be exalted above theirs; hence the
Jews, in opposing Christ as the Messiah and Saviour, are said to be of
their father the devil, and to do his lusts; and Judas that betrayed
him, and fell from his apostleship, and the truth, is called a devil;
and the heresies of men, respecting the person and office of Christ, are
styled doctrines of devils; and men that have professed this truth, and
afterwards deny it, are represented in the same irrecoverable and
desperate case with devils, and must expect the same punishment, [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044), and also it may be observed on
the contrary, that the good angels that stand, greatly love, value,
esteem, and pry into the truths of the Gospel; particularly the scheme
of man's salvation, by the incarnation, obedience, sufferings, and death
of Christ: now these

God spared not; or "had no mercy on", as the Arabic version renders it;
he did not forgive their sin, nor provide a Saviour for them; but
directly, and at once, notwithstanding the dignity and excellency of
their nature, in strict justice, and awful severity, without any mercy,
inflicted due punishment on them; wherefore it cannot be thought that
false teachers, who, as they, abide not in the truth, but deny and
oppose it, should escape the vengeance of God:

but cast them down to hell; they were hurled out of heaven, from whence
they fell as lightning, into the "lowest", or inferior places, as the
Syriac version renders it; either into the air, as in [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002) or into the earth; as in [Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009) or into the deep, the abyss, the
bottomless pit, where they are detained, as in a prison, [Luk
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#031) though for certain reasons, and
at certain times, are suffered to come forth, and rove about in this
earth, and in the air: and these, when removed from their ancient seats
in heaven, were not merely bid to go away, as the wicked will at the day
of judgment; or were "drove" out, as Adam was from the garden of Eden;
but "cast down"; with great power, indignation, wrath, and contempt,
never to be raised and restored again:

and delivered them into chains of darkness: leaving them under the guilt
of sin, which is the power of darkness, and in black despair; shutting
them up in unbelief, impenitence, and hardness of mind; being holden
with the cords of their sins, and in the most dreadful state of bondage
and captivity to their lusts, in just judgment on them; and in the most
miserable and uncomfortable condition, being driven from the realms of
light, deprived of the face and presence of God, in the utmost horror
and trembling, and fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation to consume them; and in utter darkness, without the least
glimmering of light, joy, peace, and comfort; and where there is nothing
but weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth; and being also under the
restraints of the power and providence of God, and not able to stir or
move, or do anything without divine permission; and being likewise, by
the everlasting, unalterable, and inscrutable purposes and decrees of
God, appointed to everlasting wrath and destruction; by which they are
consigned and bound over to it, and held fast, that they cannot escape
it:

to be reserved unto judgment: to the day of judgment, to the last and
general judgment; the judgment of torment, as the Syriac version here
calls it; the words may be rendered, "and delivered them to be kept at
judgment, in chains of darkness"; when they will be in full torment,
which they are not yet in; and then they will be cast into the lake of
fire prepared for them, and be everlastingly shut up in the prison of
hell from whence they will never more be suffered to go out; till which
time they are indeed under restraints, and are held in by Christ, who
has the power of binding and loosing them at pleasure; and who then, as
the Judge of men and devils, will bring them forth, and pass and execute
sentence on them. The Jews give an account of the dejection, fall, and
punishment of the angels, in a manner pretty much like this of Peter's,
whom they speak of under different names; so of the serpent that
deceived Adam and Eve, whom they call Samael, and because of that sin of
his, they say (k) that the Lord

"cast down Samael and his company from the place of their holiness, out
of heaven;''

and of Aza and Azael, angels, who, they say, sinned by lusting after the
daughters of men, they frequently affirm, that God cast them down from
their holiness (l), and that he , "cast them down below in chains" (m);
and that God cast them down from their holiness from above; and when
they descended, they were rolled in the air--and he brought them to the
mountains of darkness, which are called the mountains of the east, and
bound them "in chains" of iron, and the chains were sunk into the midst
of the great deep (n): and elsewhere they say (o), that God cast them
down from their holy degree, out of heaven--from their holy place out of
heaven--and bound them in "chains" of iron, in the mountains of
"darkness".

\(k\) Sepher Bahir in Zohar in Gen. fol. 27. 3. (l) Zohar in Gen. fol.
25. 3. (m) lb. fol. 32. 3. (n) Midrash Ruth in Zohar in Gen. fol. 45. 1.
2. vid. fol. 77. 3. (o) Zohar in Numb. fol. 84. 1. vid. Tzeror Hammor,
fol. 6. 4. & 9. 4. & Raziel, fol. 14. 2. & 18. 2.

[2 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 2:5</span></span>

And spared not the old world,.... In distinction from the present world,
that now is; which was, as it were, formed anew out of that which was
destroyed by the deluge. The Vulgate Latin version renders it, "the
original world"; and the Ethiopic version, "the first world"; it designs
the ancient inhabitants of the world, as it was from the beginning,
before the flood; who, being wicked, were not spared by God, but had
just punishment inflicted on them:

but saved Noah the eighth person; not the eighth from Adam, as Enoch is
said to be the seventh from him, [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014) for he was the tenth; nor is it
to be read with the following clause, "the eighth preacher of
righteousness"; but he was the eighth person, or one of the eight
persons, saved from the flood; see [Pe1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020) hence the Ethiopic version,
rather as a paraphrase than a version, renders it, "but caused to remain
seven souls with Noah; whom he saved"; Hottinger (p) and Dr. Hammond (q)
observe, from the Arabic writers, that the mountain on which the ark
rested, and a town near it, were called Themenim; that is, "the eight",
from the number of persons then and there saved:

a preacher of righteousness; of the righteousness of God, in all his
ways and works, and in case he should destroy the world by a flood, as
he had threatened; and of civil and moral righteousness among men, both
by words, during the building of the ark, and by works, by his own
example, in his righteous life and conversation; and of the
righteousness of faith, or of Christ, by which he was justified and of
which he was an heir, [Heb 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007), the
Jews (r) say that Noah was a prophet; and they represent him also, as a
preacher, and even tell us the very words he used in his exhortations to
the old world (s), saying,

"be ye turned from your evil ways and works, lest the waters of the
flood come upon you, and cut off all the seed of the children of men:''

but though Noah, a preacher of righteousness, was saved, false teachers
cannot expect to escape divine vengeance; who only are transformed as
ministers of righteousness, but in truth are ministers of
unrighteousness; opposers of the righteousness of Christ, and live
unrighteous lives and conversations, and so their end will be according
to their works:

bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly; or "the ungodly of
the world", as "the ungodly of the earth" (t); see [Psa
75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008) though here it indeed means a
whole world of wicked men, all but a very few, which were destroyed by
the flood. This expresses both the wickedness of the men of that
generation, the imagination of the thoughts of whose heart were evil
continually; and whose lives were filled up with uncleanness, violence,
rapine, oppression, injustice, and corruption, of all sorts; and
likewise the large numbers of them, there was a whole world of them; and
yet this did not secure them from the wrath of God, but served to stir
it up the more; wherefore false teachers and their followers must not
build upon their numbers, or hope to be screened from just punishment on
that account; since a world of ungodly men were, for their wickedness,
at once swept away, with a flood of God's bringing upon them; causing
that very useful and serviceable element of water to be the means of
their destruction; for this was not a casual thing, which came of
itself, or by chance, but was of God himself, who broke up the fountains
of the great deep, and opened the windows of heaven, and destroyed at
once all mankind, men, women, and children, and every living creature,
excepting what were with Noah in the ark: and since they were persons of
such a character as here described, it is not to be thought their
punishment is ended here; it is the general notion of the Jews (u), that

"the generation of the flood shall have no part in the world to come,
nor shall they stand in judgment.''

\(p\) Smegma Orientale, p. 251, 252. (q) In loc. (r) Aben Ezra in Gen.
viii. 21. (s) Pirke Eliezer, c. 22. (t) Targum in Psal. xlvi. 8. (u)
Misna Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 3. Vajikra Rabba, sect. 4. fol. 149. 1.
Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 89. 2.

[2 Peter 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 2:6</span></span>

And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes,.... By raining
brimstone and fire upon them from heaven, [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024) which soon reduced them to
ashes, with Admah and Zeboiim, [Deu
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#025), cities delightfully situated,
which were as the garden of God, and the land of Egypt, together with
the inhabitants of them; and after they had received a signal mercy, in
being rescued by Abraham from the kings who had carried them captive;
and though Abraham, the friend of God, interceded for them, and
righteous Lot dwelt among them. The first of these cities is in the
Hebrew language called Sedom; Philo the Jew (w) calls it Sodoma, as in
[Rom 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029) and in the Septuagint on
[Gen 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010) here it is said to be a
city, and Josephus (x) always calls it the city of the Sodomites, but in
[Mat 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015) we read of the land of
Sodom; and so Philo (y) the Jew speaks of the region or country of the
Sodomites; here the word is of the plural number, as in [Mat
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015) as it is also in the Septuagint
in [Gen 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019) and in Philo the Jew
(z), and so is Gomorrah in some copies of this, place, as in [Mat
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015). Solinus, the historian, gives
an account of these cities, in agreement with this;

"a good way off of Jerusalem (he says (a)) is opened a sorrowful gulf,
which the black ground, "in cinerem soluta", "reduced to ashes", shows
it to be touched by heaven; there were two towns, or cities, the one
called Sodom, and the other Gomorrah; where an apple is produced, which,
although it has an appearance of ripeness, cannot be eaten; for the
outward skin that encompasses it only contains a sort of soot, or embers
within, which, ever so lightly squeezed, evaporates into smoke and
dust;''

and so the author of the book of Wisdom 10:7 speaking of the five
cities, on which fire fell, says,

"of whose wickedness, even to this day, the waste land that smoketh is a
testimony; and plants bearing fruit, that never come to ripeness.''

Philo the Jew (b) says, that

"there are showed to this day in Syria monuments of this unspeakable
destruction that happened; as ruins, ashes, sulphur, smoke, and a weak
flame, breaking forth as of a fire burning:''

condemned them with an overthrow; by this sad "catastrophe" God
condemned the sins of those men of Sodom and Gomorrah, and condemned
their persons to everlasting damnation; of which their temporal
punishment was an emblem and figure; see [Jde
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007), the word "overthrow" is generally
used when this destruction is spoken of, [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023) and therefore retained by the
apostle here:

making them ensamples unto those who after should live ungodly; in the
commission of any sins, and be open, bold, and impudent in them, and
declare them as they did; and especially that should live in the
commission of the same sins, those unnatural lusts and uncleannesses,
which to this day go by the name of "sodomy", and "sodomitical"
practices; now the punishment of the inhabitants of these cities was an
ensample to such wicked conduct, showing what they must expect, and was
a representation of those everlasting burnings, which such sinners, as a
righteous retaliation for their burning lusts, shall be cast into. The
Jews say (c) the same of the men of Sodom and Gomorrah as of the old
world;

"the men of Sodom have no part in the world to come, as is said [Gen
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013) "but the men of Sodom were
wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly"; wicked in this world,
and sinners in the world to come;''

See Gill on .

\(w\) De Temulentia, p. 272. (x) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 8. sect. 3. c. 11.
sect. 3. (y) De Abrahamo, p. 381. (z) De Temulentia, p. 272. (a)
Polyhistor. c. 48. (b) De Vifa Mosis, l. 2. p. 662. (c) Misn. Sanhedrin,
c. 11. sect. 3. Vajikra Rabba, sect. 4. fol. 149. 1.

[2 Peter 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 2:7</span></span>

And delivered just Lot,.... Who was a just man, being justified by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to him; and having the new man formed in
him, which is created in righteousness and true holiness; and living
soberly, righteously, and godly, though not without sin: for there is
not a just man that lives and sinneth not; this righteous man was
delivered from the burning of Sodom by the means of angels, [Gen
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#016). The Jews are very injurious to
this good man's character, and give a very different one of him from
this of the apostle's; they call him a wicked man, a perfect wicked man,
as wicked as the inhabitants of Sodom (d); and say, that because they
abounded in sin, therefore Lot chose to dwell among them (e); and affirm
(f), that all the time he was with Abraham, God did not join himself to
him, and did not commune with Abraham on his account; but, when he was
separated from him, did; they call him the evil imagination, and the old
serpent that was accursed, and cursed Lot (g); but Philo the Jew (h)
speaks better of him, and says that he did not embrace and delight in
the iniquities of the inhabitants, though he did not arrive to the
perfection of wisdom; and the author of the book of Wisdom calls him the
"righteous man",

"When the ungodly perished, she delivered the righteous man, who fled
from the fire which fell down upon the five cities.'' (Wisdom 10:6)

as the apostle does here; and very truly, since it follows:

vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; the inhabitants of
Sodom, who had no regard to the laws of God or man, or to the law and
light of nature; but as worse than brute beasts, lived daily in the
commission of unnatural lusts; and therefore their conversation is
rightly said to be filthy, and was a grievous burden to righteous Lot:
for to a good man, not only his own sins, but the sins of others,
whether professors or profane, are a burden, and make him groan under
them, being grievously fatigued with them, as this good man was, and
weary of life because of them, as Rebekah was, through the daughters of
Heth.

\(d\) Tzeror Hammot, fol. 14. 4. & 16. 4. & 20. 2. (e) Jarchi in Gen.
xiii. 10. (f) Zohar in Gen. fol. 57. 2. Jarchi in Gen. xiii. 13. (g)
Zohar in Gen. fol. 56. 1, 2. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 7. 3. & 14. 3. & 20. 2.
Bereshit Rabba, sect. 44. fol. 39. 1. (h) De Vita Mosis, l. 2. p. 662.

[2 Peter 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 2:8</span></span>

For that righteous man dwelling among them,.... Which is sometimes the
lot of good men, to their great sorrow and grief, [Psa
120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005). Upon mentioning those words in
[Gen 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#012) "and pitched his tent
towards Sodom", but the men of Sodom were wicked, &c. says R. Eleazar
(i);

"he is a righteous man that dwells between two wicked men, and does not
learn their works;''

and such an one was Lot, whatever they are elsewhere pleased to say of
him: "in seeing and hearing"; the Vulgate Latin version reads this in
connection with the word "righteous", thus, "in seeing and hearing he
was righteous": he could not bear to see their filthy actions, and hear
their obscene language, but turned away from them, and shut his eyes,
and stopped his ears, by which he appears to be a righteous and good
man; though rather this belongs to what follows, seeing their wicked
practices, and hearing their filthy talk:

vexed his righteous soul from, day today with their unlawful deeds;
either "they vexed" him, as the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions
read; or rather "he vexed" himself; he fretted and teased himself, and
became exceeding uneasy, and was put upon a rack and tortured, as the
word signifies, continually, with their wicked actions; see [Psa
119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158).

\(i\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 38. 2.

[2 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 2:9</span></span>

That "fear him", as the Syriac version renders it; or that "rightly
worship", as the Arabic; such as Noah and Lot, men that know God in
Christ spiritually and experimentally; that believe in him, love him,
fear him, worship him in spirit and truth, and live soberly,
righteously, and godly. This verse is a conclusion from the preceding
instances and examples, respecting both the mercy and justice of God;
the mercy of God in delivering the godly and righteous "out of
temptations"; by which are meant, not the temptations of Satan to sin,
distrust, and despondency, though the Lord knows how, and is both able
and willing to, and does deliver them from them; but afflictions and
tribulations, such as Noah and Lot were exposed to; and which are so
called, because they try the graces, particularly the faith and patience
of the godly; and to deliver from these is the Lord's work: he grants
his presence in them; he supports under them; he sanctifies them to
them, and in his own time delivers out of them; for he knows how, and by
what means, and when to do it, and is both able and willing: he has
determined to do it, for the nature, measure, and duration of
afflictions are fixed by him, and in his providence he does do it, as
the instances before given prove.

And to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. This
is that part of the conclusion from the above premises, respecting the
justice of God; and by "the unjust" are designed, persons without a
righteousness, and that are full of all unrighteousness, and take
pleasure in it, and live unrighteous lives, committing acts of
injustice, both with respect to God and men; and the Lord, that has
reserved the fallen angels in chains of darkness unto judgment, knows
how to reserve "in prison", as the Arabic version renders it, the souls
of those in hell, and their bodies in the grave "unto the day of
judgment"; of the last and general judgment, when Christ shall judge
both quick and dead, and bring every secret thing to light, which that
day shall declare, God has appointed to judge the world in; in order "to
be punished" in soul and body, with everlasting and complete
destruction, which, as yet, is not. This phrase, "the day of judgment",
is used in Judith and is a Jewish one.

"Woe to the nations that rise up against my kindred! the Lord Almighty
will take vengeance of them in the day of judgment, in putting fire and
worms in their flesh; and they shall feel them, and weep for ever.''
(Judith 16:17)

[2 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 2:10</span></span>

But chiefly them that walk after the flesh,.... Not merely after the
dictates of corrupt nature, as all men, and even God's elect do, in a
state of unregeneracy; but "after strange flesh", as [Jde
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007) expresses it, after the flesh of
men:

in the lust of uncleanness; not of fornication and adultery, but of
sodomy, and sodomitical practices; sins exceeding great, not only
contrary to the law and light of nature, but dishonourable to human
nature; and are what prevail where idolatry, infidelity, errors, and
heresies do; and which, as they are sins of the deepest dye, deserve the
greater damnation, and are chiefly and more especially punished by God
with great severity:

and despise government: of parents, to whom these proud boasters and
blasphemers are generally disobedient; and of masters, pretending it to
be contrary to their Christian liberty; and of magistrates on the same
account, and as being a restraint upon their lusts; which is to despise
the ordinance of God, his representatives, and to introduce anarchy and
confusion, and to open a door to all manner of sin; and also the
government of Christ, as head of the church, and King of Zion, whom they
will not have to reign over them, and therefore reject his laws, and
submit not to his ordinances; and likewise the government of the world
itself by God; and so the Ethiopic version renders it, "despise their
Creator"; denying his omniscience and his providence, giving out that he
neither sees, observes, and takes notice of what is done in the world;
nor does he himself do either good or evil, or concern himself about
what is done by men.

Presumptuous are they; bold and daring, not fearing to speak against men
of the most exalted character on earth, and against God himself in
heaven; see [Psa 73:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008).

Selfwilled; pleased with themselves, and their own conceits, their
dogmas and opinions, with their high sense and profound judgment; and
being obstinate in their sentiments, and resolutely bent to retain and
defend them.

They are not afraid to speak evil of dignities; or "glories"; of the
apostles, who were set in the first place in the church, and were the
glory of Christ, [Co1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028); or of
angels, styled thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers; or rather
of civil magistrates, set in high places, and to whom glory and honour
are due; which to do is contrary to the law of God, and of dangerous
consequence, [Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028).

[2 Peter 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 2:11</span></span>

Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might,.... Which is not
to be understood of evil angels, or devils; for, besides that they are
greatly weakened and impaired by their fall, they are the accusers of
men, and railers and slanderers of the best and greatest of men, and the
origin of all the blasphemies that are vented against God or men; but of
good angels, who excel in strength, who are not only guardians to
particular men, and encamp about the saints, but preside over provinces
and kingdoms, for which their power and might do abundantly qualify
them; and in which they are greater, that is, not than the devils, or
than the false teachers, though both are true, but than dominions and
dignities, than kings, princes, and civil magistrates: and yet these

bring not railing accusation against them before the Lord; either
"against themselves", as the Arabic version and one of Beza's copies
read; against one another, against those of their own species, that are
in a higher or lower class or office than themselves; and therefore men
ought not to despise magistracy, or the higher powers that are over
them: or else against the fallen angels, the devils, as should seem from
[Jde 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009), or rather against civil
magistrates, kings, and princes of this world, who, though so much below
them, they vouchsafe to take under their care, and protect them, even
Heathen princes, [Dan 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020); and
though there may be oftentimes many things unbecoming in them, yet they
do not accuse them, or rail against them before the Lord; and even when,
by his orders, they inflict punishment on their persons, as on
Sennacherib, and Herod, and others, yet they do not speak evil of their
office; and therefore, since angels, who are so much above men, even
above the most dignified among them, behave in this manner, it must be
an aggravation of the sin of these persons, who are so much below them,
to speak evil of them.

[2 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 2:12</span></span>

But these, as natural brute beasts,.... So far are these men from acting
like the angels, that they are sunk below their own species, and are
like beasts, and become brutish in their knowledge and behaviour; are
like the horse and the mule, without understanding, act as if they were
without reason; yea, are more stupid and senseless than the ox, or the
ass, which know their owner, and their crib; and even in those things
which they might, and do know by the light of nature, they corrupt
themselves; and being given up to judicial blindness, and a reprobate
mind, call good evil, and evil good, and do things that are not
convenient, and which even brute beasts do not; and like as they are
guided by an instinct in nature, to do what they do, so these men are
led and influenced by the force and power of corrupt nature in them, to
commit all manner of wickedness: and like them are

made to be taken and destroyed; or, as it may be rendered, "to take and
destroy"; as beasts and birds of prey, such as lions, tigers, wolves,
bears, vultures, hawks, &c. to which abusers of themselves with mankind,
ravishers of women, extortioners, oppressors, thieves, robbers, and
plunderers of men's properties, may be compared: or "to be taken and
destroyed"; that is, they are made or appointed to be taken in the net
and snare of Satan, are vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, and are
afore ordained to condemnation and ruin: and this being their case, they

speak evil of the things they understand not; either of angels, of whose
nature, office, and dignity, they are ignorant; and blaspheme them, by
either ascribing too much to them, as the creation of the world, and
divine worship, as were by some ancient heretics; or by speaking such
things of them as were below them, and unworthy of them; or of civil
magistrates, not knowing the nature and end of magistracy and civil
government, and therefore spoke evil of them, when they ought to pray,
and be thankful for them, and live peaceable and quiet lives under them;
or of the ministers of the word, whose usefulness for the conversion of
sinners and edification of saints were not known, at least not
acknowledged by these men; hence they were traduced, and went through
ill report among them, being as unknown by them; or of the Scriptures of
truth, which heretical men do not truly know and understand, but wrest
to their own destruction, or deny; and of the Gospel and the mysteries
of it, which are things not seen, known, and understood by carnal men,
and therefore are blasphemed, reviled, and reproached by them:

and shall utterly perish in their own corruption: of which they are
servants, [Pe2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019), in their moral
corruption, in their filthy and unnatural lusts, which are the cause of
their everlasting perdition and destruction, to which they are
righteously appointed of God.

[2 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 2:13</span></span>

And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness,.... Due punishment,
both in body and soul, for all their injustice to God and men; which
will be a just recompense of reward they shall receive at the righteous
judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his works:
the justice of which appears by what follows,

as they that count it pleasure to riot in the daytime; who place all
their satisfaction and happiness in sensual delight, in rioting and
drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness, day after day; putting away
the evil day far from them, supposing that tomorrow will be as this day,
and that there will be no future judgment nor state; and therefore do
not take the night for their revels, as other sinners do, but being
without all shame, declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not:

spots they are, and blemishes; which defile themselves, their minds and
consciences, their souls and bodies, with sin, and defile others by
their evil communications, and bring dishonour and disgrace upon the
ways, doctrines, and interest of Christ:

sporting themselves with their own deceivings; with their sins and
lusts, by which they deceive themselves and others, it being a sport to
them to commit sin; and in which they take great pleasure and pastime,
and not only delight in their own sins, but in those of others, and in
them that do them. Some versions, as the Vulgate Latin and Arabic,
instead of "deceivings", read love feasts, as in [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012), and so the Alexandrian copy; in
which they behaved in a very scandalous manner, indulging themselves in
luxury and intemperance: to which agrees what follows,

while they feast with you; at the above feasts, or at the Lord's table,
or at their own houses, which shows that they were of them, and among
them, as in [Pe2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001); and carries in
it a tacit reproof for the continuance of them, when they were become so
bad in their principles, and so scandalous in their lives.

[2 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 2:14</span></span>

Having eyes full of adultery,.... For the seventh command is not only
violated by unclean actions, and obscene words, but also by unchaste
looks: and so the Jews explain (k) that precept,

""thou shalt not commit adultery", [Exo
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014); you shall not go after your
hearts, nor after "your eyes"; says R. Levi, the heart and the "eye" are
sin's two brokers.''

Hence we read (l) of , "one that commits adultery with his eyes"; See
Gill on [Mat 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028); compare [Job
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001). Some read the words, "having
eyes full of the adulteress": that is, having a lewd and infamous woman
always in mind and sight, continually looking at her and lusting after
her:

and that cannot cease from sin: which may be understood either of these
wicked men, who are like the troubled sea, that cannot rest, but are
continually casting up the mire and dirt of sin out of their polluted
heart; who live and walk in sin, and are always committing it, their
conversation being nothing else but one continued series of sinning; nor
can they do otherwise, since they are slaves to their lusts, and are
carried away with the force and power of them: or of their eyes, which
were always rolling after unlawful objects; their eyes and their hearts
were only, and always, for their lust, as the prophet says of others,
that they were but for their covetousness, [Jer
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#017); a sin also which reigned in
these men:

beguiling unstable souls: such as were unsteady in their principles, and
unstable in their ways; were like children tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine, not being rooted in Christ, nor established in the
faith; these, as the serpent beguiled Eye, they corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ; imposed false doctrines on them, and
deceived them by false glosses and outward appearances; and by fair
words and good speeches, and by their wanton looks and carnal lusts,
they allured them into the sin of adultery; or ensnared them, drew them
into the net and snare of Satan, and so they were taken and led captive.

An heart they have exercised with covetous practices; an immoderate love
of money, a covetous desire after it, is the root of all evil, the bane
of religion, and source of heresy, and is a vice which has always
prevailed among false teachers; and the character here given well agrees
with Simon Magus, the father of heresies, and his followers: hence care
is always taken to insert, among, the characters and qualifications of
Gospel ministers, that they be not greedy of filthy lucre, [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003); this iniquity, when it is a
reigning one, and is become an habit, as it was in the persons here
described, for it had its seat in their heart, they were habituated to
it, and continually exercised it in a multitude of instances and wicked
practices, is insatiable and damnable:

cursed children; or "children of the curse"; which may be understood
either actively, children that do curse, as children of disobedience are
such as commit acts of disobedience; so these were cursing children,
who, though their mouths might not be full of cursing and bitterness, as
openly profane sinners be, yet they inwardly, and from their hearts,
cursed the true followers of Christ, and their principles; or passively,
cursed children who were under the curse of the law, and from which
there was no redemption for them, but at the last day will have the
awful sentence pronounced on them, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire.

\(k\) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 3. 3. (l) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 23. fol.
165. 1. Vid. A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 3. c. 5.

[2 Peter 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 2:15</span></span>

Which have forsaken the right way,.... The right way of the Lord, the
way of truth, the Gospel of truth; or Christ, who is the way, the truth,
and the life; the true way to eternal life, and which is the right way
to eternal happiness; the way of life, righteousness, and salvation by
Christ, the Christian faith, and the doctrine of it, which they once
professed, but now relinquished:

and are gone astray; from the right way, the way of truth and holiness,
into the paths of error and profaneness:

following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor; which Jude calls his
error, [Jde 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011), and is the path of
covetousness, uncleanness, and idolatry, sins which he was either guilty
of himself, or taught, advised, and seduced others to; see [Rev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014). The Vulgate Latin version reads
"Balaam out of Bosor", taking "Bosor" for the name of a place, of which
"Balaam" was; but not "Bosor", but "Pethor", was the place of Balaam's
residence, [Num 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005). The Arabic and
Ethiopic versions supply, as we do, "the son of Bosor"; and the Syriac
version reads, "the son of Beor", as in [Num
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005); for Beor and "Bosor" are the
same names; the "sheva" being pronounced by "o", as it is by "oa" in
"Boanerges", and the "ain" by "s". Moreover, the letters and are
sometimes used for one another, as in and and and so and especially in
the Chaldean dialect; and Peter now being at Babylon in Chaldea, see
[Pe1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013); it is no wonder that he so
pronounced.

Who loved the wages of unrighteousness: which were the rewards of
divination, [Num 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#007); which were
brought him for his divining or soothsaying, and may well be called
unrighteous wages, since it was for doing unrighteous things, or things
in an unrighteous manner; and these he loved, desired, and greedily
coveted, and fain would he have taken Balak's gold and silver, and have
cursed Israel, but was restrained by the Lord: he showed a good will to
it, in going along with the messengers, and in building altars, and
offering sacrifice in one place after another, in which there was a
great resemblance between him and the men here spoken of.

[2 Peter 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 2:16</span></span>

But was rebuked for his iniquity,.... Which was not merely going along
with the messengers of Balak, for he had leave from the Lord so to do,
[Num 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#020); but going along with them
with a desire to curse Israel, when it was the will of God he should go
and bless them, in order to get Balak's money; so that his governing
iniquity was covetousness, which led him to other sins; and for this he
was rebuked by the angel, [Num 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#032),
as well as reproved by his ass, [Num
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#028), for

the dumb ass, as it was naturally so, the ass on which he rode,

speaking with man's voice; which was supernatural and miraculous, for it
was God that opened the mouth of the ass: the mouth of that ass is said,
by the Jews (m), to be one of the ten things created between the two
evenings on the sixth day of the creation; that is, as the gloss on it
says, concerning which it was decreed, that its mouth should be opened
to speak what this ass said; and the occasion of it may be seen in [Num
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#022). Lactantius (n) observes, that
there are two stars in the constellation of Cancer, which the Greeks
call the "asses"; and which, the poets feign, are those that carried
Liberus over a river, when he could not pass it; to one of which he gave
this for a reward, "ut humana voce loqueretur", "that it should speak
with man's voice"; a fable, no doubt, hatched from the sacred history,
and said in imitation of this ass. Which

forbad the madness of the prophet: and so Balaam, though a diviner and
soothsayer, is called by the Jewish writers (o); who, they say, was
first a prophet, and then a soothsayer, from whom Jerom (p) seems to
have received the tradition; who says, that he was first a holy man, and
a prophet of God, and afterwards, through disobedience, and a desire of
gifts, was called a diviner; for his eyes were opened, and he saw the
vision of the Almighty; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he
prophesied many things concerning Israel, and the Messiah, and others,
[Num 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#004). His madness lay in going
with the messengers of Balak, [Num
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#021), in order to curse Israel,
contrary to the will of God, [Num
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#012); and it is madness in any to
oppose God in his counsels, purposes, providences, and precepts; and
every sin, which is an act of hostility against God, has madness in it;
and this of Balaam's was forbid by his ass, and he was convinced of it.
Very appropriately is mention made of this dumb ass, when the persons
here spoken of were as natural brute beasts, and worse than them, [Pe2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012).

\(m\) Pirke Abot, c. 5. sect. 6. & Jarchi in ib. Sepher Cosri, par. 2.
p. 254. (n) De falsa Religione, l. 1. c. 21. (o) Pesikta, Ilmedenu &
Gerundensis apud Drus in loc. T. Bab Sanhedrin fol. 106. 1. Aben Ezra in
Numb. xxxii. 28. (p) Tradition. Heb. in Genes. fol. 69. D.

[2 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 2:17</span></span>

These are wells without water,.... Which look large and deep, promise
much, and have nothing in them; so these men looked like angels of
light, transformed themselves as ministers of righteousness, had a form
of godliness, and boasted of their great knowledge; promised great
advantages to their followers, but were like deceitful brooks, or dry
wells, and so disappointed those that came to them, and attended on
them; having nothing but the filth and slime of error and iniquity,
being destitute both of the grace of God, comparable to water, and of
the truth of heavenly doctrine, which is like the rain that fills the
wells, pools, and fountains.

Clouds that are carried with a tempest; these false teachers may be
compared to clouds for their number, for many antichrists and false
prophets soon came into the world; and for their sudden rise in the
churches, into which they crept privily and unawares; and because of the
general darkness they spread, for when errors and heresies prevail it is
a dark and cloudy day with the churches, a day of gloominess and
darkness, of thick darkness, a day of trouble, rebuke, and blasphemy;
and because of the height of them, especially light clouds, as these are
compared to, who are high in their own conceits and imaginations, and
think, and give out themselves to be some great persons; and also
because of their sudden destruction, which lingers and slumbers not, but
comes upon them in a moment, and their glory passes away like the
morning cloud: and these may be said to be as clouds "carried with a
tempest": of their own lusts and passions, by which they are governed,
and are led, and carried away with the force of them, and have no power
to resist them, being under the dominion of them, and captives to them;
and of Satan's temptations, who works effectually in them, with all
power, signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, and being taken in his snare, are led captive by him at
his will: Jude says, "carried about of winds", [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012), with every wind of false
doctrine, like meteors in the air; are never at a point, always unsteady
and unsettled, and ready to embrace every new and upstart notion:

to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever; the nature of their
punishment is expressed by "darkness", the blackest darkness, the mist
of darkness, and which Jude calls blackness of darkness, the same with
utter darkness; and which signifies a most forlorn and uncomfortable
condition, and is a righteous judgment, and just retaliation upon them
who studied to darken counsel by words without knowledge; and the
certainty of their punishment is signified by its being "reserved", even
as the happiness of the saints, and the safety and sureness of it are
represented by an inheritance reserved in heaven: and as God has his
treasures, magazines, and stores of grace and mercy, felicity and glory,
for his people; so he has his wrath and vengeance reserved, laid up in
store with him, and sealed up among his treasures, which he will surely
bring forth in his own time: and the duration of this punishment is "for
ever"; it is a worm that never dies, a fire that is never quenched, [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024) [Mar
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044); it is everlasting fire and
burnings, the smoke of which ascends for ever and ever.

[2 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 2:18</span></span>

For when they speak great swelling words of vanity,.... Marvellous
things against the God of gods, great things and blasphemies against
God, his name, his tabernacle, and his saints; see [Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036); or against men, dominions, and
dignities, [Pe2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010); or it may design
their self-applauses and vain glorying in themselves, and their empty
boast of knowledge and learning; and also express the windiness of their
doctrines, and the bombast style, and high flown strains of rhetoric in
which they were delivered; as likewise the flattering titles they
bestowed on men for the sake of their own worldly interest and
advantage; see [Jde 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016) and hereby

they allure, through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness,
those that were clean escaped from them who live in error: that is, from
those who lived in the error of Heathenism or Judaism, from whom, and
which, they were clean escaped; or truly, really, and entirely
delivered, being fully convinced of the falsity thereof, and of the
truth of the Christian religion; though some copies, as the Alexandrian,
and two of Beza's, and two of Stephens's, read, not "truly", but "a
little"; and the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "a very little"; to
which agrees the Complutensian edition; and the Syriac version renders
it "in a few words", or "almost"; and according to the Ethiopic version,
"a few persons" are designed; but be they more or less, and truly, or
but a little, and for a little while, or almost, escaped from their
former errors, in which they were brought up, and lived; yet by the
carnal lusts and liberties, lasciviousness and wantonness, which these
false teachers indulged, they were allured, ensnared, and drawn by them
into their wicked principles and practices.

[2 Peter 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 2:19</span></span>

While they promise them liberty,.... Not Christian liberty, which lies
in a freedom from sin, its dominion, guilt, and condemnation, and in
serving God with liberty, cheerfulness, and without fear; but a sinful
carnal liberty, a liberty from the law of God, from obedience to it as a
rule of walk and conversation, and from the laws of men, from subjection
to the civil magistrate, and from servitude to masters, and obedience to
parents; a liberty to lay aside and neglect the ordinances of the Gospel
at pleasure, and to live in all manner of sin and wickedness; a liberty
which is contrary to the nature, will, and work of Christ, to his
Spirit, and to the principle of grace in the heart, and to the Gospel,
and to the conduct and conversation of real saints. Now this was the
snare by which the false teachers beguiled unstable souls; liberty being
what is greatly desirable to men, and is suited to their carnal lusts
and interests: but a vain promise was this, when

they themselves are the servants of corruption; of sin, which has
corrupted all mankind in soul and body; and particularly the lust of
uncleanness, which these men walked in, and by which they not only
corrupted themselves, but the good manners of others also; and which
tended and led them both to ruin and destruction, signified by the pit
of corruption: and yet these very preachers, that promised liberty to
others, were the servants of sin; they were under the power and
government of sin. They were not only born so, and were homeborn slaves
to sin, but they sold themselves to work wickedness; voluntarily and
with delight, they served divers lusts and pleasures, and were slaves
and drudges thereunto; as likewise to Satan, whose lusts they would do,
and by whom they were led captive; so that their condition was mean,
base, and deplorable, and therefore could never make good their promise,
or give that which they had not themselves: and which is confirmed by
the following reasoning,

for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage: as
this is a certain point in war, that when one man is conquered by
another, he is no longer a free man, but the other's prisoner and
captive, and is in a state of servitude and bondage; so it is when a man
is overcome by sin, which must be understood not of a partial victory or
conquest, for a good man may be surprised by sin, and overtaken in a
fault, and be overcome and carried captive by it for a time, as was the
apostle, see [Rom 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023); and yet not be
a servant of corruption, or properly in a state of bondage to it; but
this is to be understood of a total and complete victory, when a man is
wholly under the dominion of sin, it reigns in his mortal body, and he
obeys it in the lusts of it, and yields his members instruments of
unrighteousness; such a man is neither a free man himself, nor can he
much less promise and give liberty to others.

[2 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 2:20</span></span>

For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,.... The sins
of it, the governing vices of it, which the men of the world are
addicted to, and immersed in; for the whole world lies in wickedness,
and which are of a defiling nature: the phrase is Rabbinical; it is said
(q),

"he that studies not in the law in this world, but is defiled , "with
the pollutions of the world", what is written of him? and they took him,
and cast him without:''

these, men may escape, abstain from, and outwardly reform, with respect
unto, and yet be destitute of the grace of God; so that this can be no
instance of the final and total apostasy of real saints; for the house
may be swept and garnished with an external reformation; persons may be
outwardly righteous before men, have a form of godliness and a name to
live, and yet be dead in trespasses and sins; all which they may have

through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. The Vulgate
Latin, and all the Oriental versions, read, our Lord, and the latter
leave out, "and Saviour"; by which "knowledge" is meant, not a spiritual
experimental knowledge of Christ, for that is eternal life, the
beginning, pledge, and earnest of it; but a notional knowledge of
Christ, or a profession of knowledge of him, for it may be rendered
"acknowledgment"; or rather the Gospel of Christ, which, being only
notionally received, may have such an effect on men, as outwardly to
reform their lives, at least in some instances, and for a while, in
whose hearts it has no place. Now if, after all this knowledge and
reformation,

they are again entangled therein; in the pollutions of the world, in
worldly lusts, which are as gins, pits and snares:

and overcome; by them, so as to be laden with them, and led away, and
entirely governed and influenced by them:

the latter end, or state,

is worse with them than the beginning; see [Mat
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#045). Their beginning, or first
estate, was that in which they were born, a state of darkness,
ignorance, and sin, and in which they were brought up, and was either
the state of Judaism, or of Gentilism; their next estate was an outward
deliverance and escape from the error of the one, or of the other, and
an embracing and professing the truth of the Christian religion, joined
with a becoming external conversation; and this their last estate was an
apostasy from the truth of the Gospel they had professed, a reception of
error and heresy, and a relapse into sin and immorality, which made
their case worse than it was at first; for, generally, such persons are
more extravagant in sinning; are like raging waves of the sea, foaming
out their own shame; and are seldom, or ever, recovered; and by their
light, knowledge, and profession, their punishment will be more
aggravated, and become intolerable.

\(q\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 104. 3. Vid. Bechinot Olam, p. 178.

[2 Peter 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe2 2:21</span></span>

For it had been better for them,.... Not that ignorance is good, or to
be excused; but it would have been a lesser evil, and not so much
aggravated:

not to have known the way of righteousness; the same with "the way of
truth", [Pe2 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002), and "the right way",
[Pe2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015), the Gospel, which points
out the way and method of a sinner's justification before God, which is
not by the works of the law, but by the righteousness of Christ imputed
to them, and received by faith; and which teaches men to live soberly,
righteously, and godly; and a large, notional, though not an
experimental knowledge, these apostates had of the word and doctrine of
righteousness, and indeed of the whole of the Christian religion, which
may truly go by this name:

than after they have known it; owned, embraced, and professed it:

to turn: the Vulgate Latin version, and some copies, as the Alexandrian
and others, add, to that which is behind; to their former lusts, or
errors, or worse, which they had turned their backs upon externally:

from the holy commandment delivered unto them; by the commandment is
meant the Gospel also, see [Pe2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002);
called holy, because of its nature and influence, and in opposition to
the pollutions of the world; and which is the faith once delivered, [Jde
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003), and which they received, as
delivered to them; and, particularly, the ordinances of it, which they
once submitted to, kept, and observed, as they were delivered to them,
but now relinquished, or corrupted: wherefore, it would have been better
for them to have been in their former ignorance, either in Judaism, or
in Gentilism, since proportionate to a man's light is his guilt, and so
his punishment, see [Rom 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012).

[2 Peter 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe2 2:22</span></span>

But it is happened unto them, according to the true proverb,.... Which
is true, both in fact and in the application of it, and which lies in
the Scriptures of truth, at least the first part of it, [Pro
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011).

The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to
her wallowing in the mire; which expresses the filthy nature of sin,
signified by vomit, mire, and dirt, than which nothing is more
abominable and defiling; and also the just characters of these
apostates, who are filly compared to dogs and swine and likewise their
irreclaimable and irrecoverable state and condition, it being impossible
they should be otherwise, unless their natures were changed and altered.
In the Hebrew language, a "sow" is called from the root which signifies
to "return", because that creature, as soon as it is out of the mire and
dirt, and is washed from its filthiness, naturally returns to it again:
so such apostates return to what they were before, to their former
principles and practices: in this manner the Jews explain the proverb,

"Tobiah returns to Tobiah, as it is said, [Pro
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011); as a dog returneth to his vomit
(r).''

\(r\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 16. fol. 158. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 3](pe2003)

</div>
