<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro005)  [Next](pro007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PROVERBS 6

In this chapter the wise man dissuades from rash suretyship; exposes the
sin of idleness; describes a wicked man; makes mention of seven things
hateful to God; exhorts to attend to parental instructions and precepts,
and cautions against adultery. Suretyship is described, [Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001); and represented as a snare and a
net, in which men are taken, [Pro 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#002);
and advice is given what to do in such a case, for safety in it, and
deliverance from it, [Pro 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003); The sin
of slothfulness is exposed, by observing the industry of the ant, [Pro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006); by expostulating with the
sluggard for his continuance in sloth, and by mimicking him, [Pro
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#009); and by the poverty it brings upon
him, [Pro 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011). Then a naughty wicked
man is described, by his mouth, eyes, feet, fingers, and heart, whose
ruin is sudden and inevitable, [Pro
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011). The seven things hateful to God
are particularly named, [Pro 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016). And
next the exhortation in some preceding chapters is reassumed, to attend
to the instructions of parents; which will be found ornamental,
pleasant, and useful, [Pro 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#020).
Especially to preserve from the lewd woman cautioned against, [Pro
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024); whose company is dissuaded from;
on account of the extreme poverty and distress she brings persons to,
and even danger of life, [Pro 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#026);
from the unavoidable ruin such come into, [Pro
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027); from the sin of uncleanness
being greater than that of theft, [Pro
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030); from the folly the adulterer
betrays; from the destruction of his soul, and the disgrace he brings on
himself, [Pro 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032); and from the rage
and irreconcilable offence of the husband of the adulteress, [Pro
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#034).

[Proverbs 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 6:1</span></span>

My son, if thou be surety for thy friend,.... To another; hast engaged
thyself by promise or bond, or both, to pay a debt for him, if he is not
able, or if required; or hast laid thyself under obligation to any, to
see the debt of another paid;

if thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger; or "to" him (b); whom
thou knowest not, and to whom thou owest nothing; and hast given him
thine hand upon it, as well as thy word and bond, that what such an one
owes him shall be paid; a gesture used in suretyship for the
confirmation of it, [Pro 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#018); or,
"for a stranger" (c) And the sense is, either if thou art become bound
for a friend of thine, and especially if for a stranger thou knowest
little or nothing of, this is a piece of rashness and weakness; or, as
Gersom, if thou art a surety to thy friend for a stranger, this also is
a great inadvertency and oversight. It is a rash and inconsiderate
entering into suretyship that is here cautioned against; doing it
without inquiring into, and having sufficient knowledge of the person
engaged for; and without considering whether able to answer the
obligation, if required, without hurting a man's self and family;
otherwise suretyship may lawfully be entered into, and good be done by
it, and no hurt to the surety himself and family. Jarchi interprets it
of the Israelites engaging themselves to the Lord at Sinai, to keep his
commandments.

\(b\) "extraneo", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Baynus, Mercerus, Gejerus, Cocceius, Schultens. (c) "Pro alieno",
Tigurine version; "pro alio peregrino", Michaelis.

[Proverbs 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 6:2</span></span>

Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth,.... Got into a snare out of
which an escape is not easy; art no longer free, and thine own man, but
under obligation to pay the debt if required; by the verbal agreement
made and confirmed by striking hands, and this before witnesses;

thou art taken with the words of thy mouth; as in a net, and held fast
therein and thereby, and cannot get loose without paying the debt, if
the debtor does not, or without the leave of the creditor.

[Proverbs 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 6:3</span></span>

Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself,.... Take the following advice,
as the best that can be given in such circumstances, in order to be
freed from such an obligation, or to be safe and easy under it;

when thou art come into the hand of thy friend; or,

"because or seeing thou art fallen into the hand of thy friend,''

as the Targum; or

"though thou art,'' &c.

as Aben Ezra; which may be understood either of the creditor to whom a
man is bound, or of the debtor for whom he is bound, or of both; for a
surety is in the hands or power of both: he is in the hands of the
creditor, who may demand payment of the debt of him; and he is in the
hands of the debtor, who, if a careless or crafty and deceitful man, may
leave him to the payment of it. The Septuagint and Arabic versions are,

"for thou art come into the hands of evil men for thy friend;''

and the Syriac version,

"seeing for thy friend thou art fallen into the hands of thine enemy;''

and therefore must make the best of it thou canst, and in the following
way:

go, humble thyself; that is, to the creditor, prostrate thyself before
him; lie down upon the ground to be trodden on, as the word (d)
signifies; fall down on thine knees, and entreat him to discharge thee
from the bond, or give longer time for payment, if up; for thou art in
his hands, and there is no carrying it with a high hand or a haughty
spirit to him; humility, and not haughtiness, is most likely to be
serviceable in such a case;

and make sure thy friend; for whom thou art become a surety, as the
Syriac and Arabic versions add; solicit him, as the former of these
versions render it; stimulate him, as the Septuagint; stir him up, urge
him to pay off the debt quickly, and discharge the bond, or give thee
security and indemnity from it. Or, "magnify thy friend" (e); that is,
to the creditor; speak of him as a very able and responsible man, and as
an honest and faithful one, that will pay in due time. Some render it
"magnify", and speak well of the debtor to thy friend, which may please
and appease him: or, "multiply thy friends" (f); get as many as thou
canst to intercede for thee, and get thee discharged from the obligation
by some means or another; to this purpose Jarchi.

\(d\) "praebe conculcandum te", Montanus, Vatablus, Michaelis. (e)
"evehe proximum tuum", Tigurine version; "magnifica", so some in
Vatablus. (f) "Multiplica amicos tuos", so some in Bayne.

[Proverbs 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 6:4</span></span>

Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids. Until the
above things are done; which denotes of what consequence and importance
they are; and that persons in such circumstances should not be careless,
dilatory, and unconcerned; but should use great diligence, and leave no
stone unturned, or method untried, to extricate themselves; see [Psa
132:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#004).

[Proverbs 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 6:5</span></span>

Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter,.... As such a
creature, which is very swift, when it is got into the hand of the
hunter, will strive and struggle to get out; so should a man try all
ways and means to get out of his suretyship engagements, especially when
he finds himself liable to danger by it; this he should do "immediately"
and "out of hand" (g), as the phrase here used sometimes signifies with
the Jewish writers;

and as a bird from the hand of the fowler; another metaphor, signifying
the same thing.

\(g\) "statim", De Dieu; "subito", Noldius, p. 859. No. 1630. "ilico,
repente", so some in Eliae Tishbi, p. 143.

[Proverbs 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 6:6</span></span>

Go to the ant, thou sluggard,.... That art become surety for another,
and got into a snare and net, and yet takest no pains to get out. Or
this may be directed, not to the surety, but the debtor; who, through
his slothfulness, has contracted debts, and uses no industry to be in a
capacity to pay them. Or, it may be, this has no connection with the
former; but the wise man proceeds to a new subject, and to dissuade from
idleness, which brings ruin on families, and leads to all sin; and, for
the instruction of idle and slothful men, proposes the example of the
ant, and sends them to it to learn industry of it (h);

consider her ways; what diligence and industry it uses in providing its
food; which, though a small, weak, feeble creature, yet will travel over
flints and stones, climb trees, enter into towers, barns, cellars,
places high and low, in search of food; never hinder, but help one
another in carrying their burdens; prepare little cells to put their
provisions in, and are so built as to secure them from rain; and if at
any time their corn is wet, they bring out and dry it, and bite off the
ends of it, that it may not grow. These, with others, are taken notice
of by Frantzius (i); and some of them by Gersom on the place;

and be wise; learn wisdom of it, and be wiser than that, as the
Septuagint and Arabic versions: this is a mortification of proud men,
that would be reckoned wise, to be sent to so despicable a creature to
get wisdom from.

\(h\) So Horace gives it as an example of labour----"Parvula (nam
exemplo est) magni formica laboris", &c. Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 1. v. 33,
34, 35. & Phocylides, v. 152-159. (i) Hist. Animal. Sacr. par. 5. c. 8.
Vid. Aelian. Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 25. & l. 6. c. 43.

[Proverbs 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 6:7</span></span>

Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler. None to guide and direct her
what to do; nor any to overlook her, to see that she does aright, or to
oblige her to work, and keep her to it; nor any to call her to an
account, and correct her for doing amiss; and nevertheless diligent and
industrious, doing everything of herself, by the instinct of nature,
readily and willingly: and yet how slothful are men; who, besides the
dictates of nature, reason, and conscience, have parents, masters,
ministers, and magistrates, to guide, direct, exhort, instruct, and
enforce! so Aristotle (k) says of the ant, that it is without any ruler
or governor.

\(k\) Hist. de Animal. l. 1. c. 1.

[Proverbs 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 6:8</span></span>

Provideth her meat in the summer,.... Against the winter, of which it is
mindful, when it never comes out of its place, having in the summer time
got a sufficiency laid up in cells for its use: she toils in the heat of
summer to get in her provision for the winter, being sensible that
nothing is to be gotten then; she works at it night and day while the
season lasts; so diligent is it in laying up its stores at the proper
opportunity (l);

and gathereth her food in the harvest; the time when corn is ripe, and
is shed on the earth; this it gathereth, and lays up in its repositories
against a time of need. The seeds it gathers and lays up; it bites off
the chit or bud end of them, that they may not grow, as Pliny (m) and
others observe, but be a winter store; hence its name in Hebrew is
"nemalah", from "namal", "to cut off"; it being done by biting. Yea,
according to Aelianus (n), it seems to have some sense of futurity with
respect to famine, which being near, it will work exceeding hard to lay
up food, fruits, and seed; and, according to Virgil (o) and others, it
seems to presage old age, and therefore provides against it. An
instruction this to work, while persons are in health, and have youth on
their side; that they may have not only a sufficiency for present use,
but to lay up against a time of sickness and old age. The Septuagint and
Arabic versions add,

"or go to the bee, and learn what a worker she is, and what an admirable
work she performs; whose labours kings and private persons use for
health: she is desirable to all, and famous; and though weak in
strength, honouring wisdom is advanced.''

But this is not in the Hebrew text; but perhaps being written in the
margin of some copy of the Septuagint as a parallel instance, was by
some unskilful copier put into the text of the Greek version, from
whence the Arabic version has taken it; it crept in very early, for
Clemens of Alexandria makes mention of it (p).

\(l\) "Ac veluti ingentem formicae farris acervum", &c. Virgil. Aeneid.
l. 4. v. 402, &c. So Horat. Satyr. 1. v. 36. (m) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c.
30. Plutarch. vol. 2. de Solert. Animal. p. 968. (n) Vat. Hist. l. 1. c.
12. (o) "Inopi metuens formica senectae", Georgic. l. 1. v. 186. So
Horace, ut supra. Juvenal. Satyr. 6. v. 360. (p) Stromat. l. 1. p. 286.

[Proverbs 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 6:9</span></span>

How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard?.... Or "lie" (q) in bed, indulging
in sloth and ease; while the industrious ant is busy in getting in its
provisions, even by moonlight, as naturalists (r) observe;

when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? and be about thy lawful calling?
doing the duties of religion, and the business of life; providing things
honest in the sight of all men; things necessary for thyself and family,
and wherewith to do good to others; exercising a conscience void of
offence both to God and men. Time should not be slept away, to the
neglect of the affairs of life, nor of the concerns of the immortal soul
and a future state; men should not be slothful in things temporal or
spiritual: whatever may be the proper time to awake and arise out of
sleep in a morning, which seems to be according to a man's
circumstances, health and business; it is always high time for the
sinner to awake out of the sleep of sin, and arise from the dead; and
for the drowsy saint to arise out of his lethargy and carnal security.

\(q\) "jacebis", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Gejerus; "cubabis",
Piscator, Cocceius. (r) Aelian. de Animal. l. 4. c. 43.

[Proverbs 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 6:10</span></span>

Yet a little sleep, a little slumber,.... Or, "little sleeps, little
slumbers" (s). These are the words of the sluggard, in answer to the
call of him to awake and arise, desiring he might not be disturbed, but
be suffered to sleep on longer: there is a very beautiful climax or
gradation in the words, aptly expressing the disposition and actions of
a sluggard; he first desires a "few sleeps" more, some sound sleeps one
after another; which is quite agreeable to his character: and if he
cannot be allowed them, then he requests a "few slumbers" at least, some
dozings, till he can get himself thoroughly awake; and if these cannot
be granted, yet he prays however that this might be admitted,

a little folding of the hands to sleep; or, "to lie down" (t); a few
tossings and tumblings upon the bed more, with his hands folded about
his breast; a sleeping gesture, and the posture of sluggards. The
Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "a little thou wilt embrace
the breast with the hands"; and the Syriac version, "and a little thou
wilt put thine hand upon thy breast". The Jewish commentators understand
this as a direction and command to sleep and slumber but little, since a
little sleep is sufficient for nature; or otherwise poverty will come,
&c. but the former sense is best.

\(s\) "parvis somnis, parvis dormitationibus", Pagninus; "pauculis
somnis, pauculis dormitationibus", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (t)
"cubando", Junius & Tremellius; "cubare", Piscator; "ad cubandum",
Cocceius.

[Proverbs 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 6:11</span></span>

So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth,.... Either swiftly and
suddenly, as a traveller makes haste to get to his journey's end, and
comes upon his family or friends at an unawares; or though he moves
gradually, by slow paces and silent steps, yet surely: and so it
signifies that poverty should come upon the sluggard very quickly, and
before he was aware: and though it might come by degrees, yet it would
certainly come;

and thy want as an armed man; or, "thy wants as a man of shield" (u):
denoting many wants that should come rushing in one upon another, like a
man armed with shield and buckler; appearing with great terror and
force, not to be resisted. It denotes the unavoidableness of being
brought into penury and want by sloth, and the terribleness of such a
condition. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions, add,

"but if thou art not slothful, thy harvest shall come as a fountain (as
the inundation of a fountain, Arabic); but want shall flee as an evil
racer (as an evil man, Arabic; far from thee, Vulgate Latin):''

but this is not in the Hebrew text.

\(u\) "tanquam vir clypei", Montanus; "vir clypeatus", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Proverbs 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 6:12</span></span>

A naughty person, a wicked man,.... Or, "a man of Belial, a man of
iniquity" (w). The former signifies an unprofitable man, a man good for
nothing, that is of no use to God or man; or one that is lawless, that
has thrown off the yoke of the law, and will not be subject to it;
Belial is the name of the devil; and here it may design such as are his
children, and will do his lusts: the latter phrase signifies one that is
wholly given up to work wickedness. The characters well agree with the
the lawless one, the man of sin and son of perdition, antichrist, [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). Who

walketh with a froward mouth; speaking perverse things, things contrary
to the light of nature and reason, to law and Gospel; uttering lies, and
deceit, and blasphemies against God and man; to which he has used
himself, and in which he continues, as the word "walketh" signifies: so
antichrist has a mouth opened in blasphemies against God and his saints,
[Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005).

\(w\) "homo Belijahal, vir iniquitatis", Montanus, Vatablus, Baynus,
Michaelis.

[Proverbs 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 6:13</span></span>

He winketh with his eyes,.... Not through natural infirmity, but
purposely and with design; with one of his eyes, as Aben Ezra, as is
usual with such persons: it is the air and gesture of a sneering and
deceitful man, who gives the wink to some of his friends, sneering at
the weakness of another in company; or as signifying to them some secret
design of his against another, which he chooses not to declare in any
other way;

he speaketh with his feet; the motions of the feet have a language; the
stamping of the feet expresses rage; here it seems to intend the giving
of a him to another, by privately pressing his foot with his, when he
should be silent or should speak, or do this or the other thing he would
have him do;

he teacheth with his fingers; by stretching them out or compressing
them; and so showing either scorn and contempt (x), or rage and fury.
The whole of it seems to design the secret, cunning, artful ways, which
wicked men have to convey their meanings to one another, without being
understood by other persons; they have a language to themselves, which
they express by the motions of their eyes, feet, and fingers: and this
character of art and cunning, dissimulation and deceit, fitly agrees
with the man of sin, [Th2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010). So
mimics are said to speak with their hands; some have been famous in this
way (y).

\(x\) "In hunc intende digitum", Plauti Pseudolus, Act. 4. Sc. 7. v. 45.
"----aliis dat digito literas", Ennius. (y) Vid. Barthii Animadv. ad
Claudian. de Consul. Mallii Paneg. v. 311.

[Proverbs 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 6:14</span></span>

Frowardness is in his heart,.... Or perverse things; evil habits and
principles of sin; all manner of wickedness, errors and heresies; things
contrary to right reason, repugnant to the will and law of God, and the
reverse of sound doctrine; all evil thoughts and evil things; see [Mat
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019);

he deviseth mischief continually; against his neighbours, and especially
against good men; he is continually planning schemes, contriving
methods, ways, and means, how to disturb, distress, and ruin men; being
a true child of Belial, or of the devil, his heart is the forge where he
is continually framing wickedness in one shape or another; and the
ground which he is always ploughing up and labouring at to bring forth
sin and wickedness, and with which it is fruitful;

he soweth discord; or "strifes" (z): the Syriac version adds, "between
two"; which Jarchi interprets between a man and his Maker; rather
between a man and his neighbour; between one friend and another; between
husband and wife, parents and children, brethren and brethren,
magistrates and subjects; between kings and princes of the earth in
which sort of work the man of sin, antichrist, has been very busy. The
Targum is, "he casteth out strifes", as firebrands among men. The words
in the Hebrew text are, "he sendeth out discord", or "strife" (a); these
are the messengers sent out by him to make mischief.

\(z\) "contentiones", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Mercerus, Gejerus; "jurgia", V. L. "lites", Baynus, Cocceius; "litigia",
Schultens. (a) "mittet", Pagninus, Montanus; "immittit", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus, Gejerus, Schultens, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 6:15</span></span>

Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly,.... Unthought of and
unexpected: he that deviseth mischief to others secretly shall have no
warning of his own ruin, nor time and means of preventing it; the
destruction of antichrist will be sudden, and of all wicked men at the
coming of Christ, [Th1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003);

suddenly shall he be broken without remedy; or, "and there shall be no
healing" (b): his bones will be broken to pieces, and there will be no
cure for him; or he shall be like an earthen vessel, which, when broke,
cannot be put together again. The ruin of wicked men is sudden,
inevitable, and irreparable; so antichrist will "come to his end, and
none shall help him", [Dan 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045).

\(b\) "et non sanitas", Pagninus, Montanus; "curatio", Junius &
Tremellius; "medicina", Piscator, Cocceius.

[Proverbs 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 6:16</span></span>

These six things doth the Lord hate,.... That is, the six following,
which are all to be found in a man of Belial, a wicked man before
described. There are other things besides these that God hates, and
indeed more so; as sins against the first table, which more immediately
strike at his being, horror, and glory; these being such as are against
the second table, but are mentioned, as more especially appearing in the
character of the above person; and must be hateful to God, as contrary
to his nature, will, and law;

yea, seven are an abomination unto him; or, "the abomination of his
soul" (c); what his soul abhors, or he abhors from his very heart:
meaning not seven others, but one more along with the six, which make
seven; a like way of speaking, see in [Pro
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015). Nor is the word "abomination"
to be restrained to the "seventh", or "hatred" to the "sixth"; but they
are all to be supposed to be hateful and abominable to the Lord; though
some think the cardinal number is put for the ordinal, "seven" for the
"seventh"; as if the seventh, which is sowing discord among brethren,
was of all the most abominable, [Pro
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#019); it being what was last mentioned
in the character of the wicked man, [Pro
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014); and which seems to have given
occasion to, and for the sake of which this enumeration is made.

\(c\) "abominatio ejus animae", Montanus, Vatablus, Mercerus, Cocceius,
Michaelis, Schultens.

[Proverbs 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 6:17</span></span>

A proud look,.... Or, "eyes elated" (d); scorning to look down upon
others; or looking upon them with disdain; or reckoning them as unworthy
to be looked upon, having an high opinion of their own worth and merit.
Pride is the first of the hateful things mentioned; it being the first
sin committed, as is probable, the sin of the angels, and of the first
man; and is a predominant evil in human nature, and is directly opposite
to God and to his nature, and against which he sets himself; for "he
resisteth the proud", [Jam 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006); the
pride of the heart shows itself in the eyes, or by the looks of a man;
Gersom says, the phrase denotes impudence and haughtiness;

a lying tongue; that is the second of the hateful things; a tongue
speaking falsehood, knowingly and willingly, with an intention to
deceive others; to hurt the character of a neighbour, or to flatter a
friend, is a most detestable evil; it ought to be so to men, it must be
so to God, who is a God of truth: nor is there anything in which a man
more resembles the devil, who is the father of lies;

and hands that shed innocent blood; human blood; and that of persons who
have not been guilty of any capital sin, for which they ought to die by
the laws of God or men, and yet shed or poured out as common water; such
hands must be defiled, and such men must be hateful to God, they
destroying his image, and being like to the devil, who was a murderer
from the beginning. These "three" sins are plainly to be seen in the son
of Belial, antichrist, who exalts himself above all that is called God,
the kings and princes of the earth; he and his followers speak lies in
hypocrisy; and is the whore that is drunk with the blood of the saints,
[Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004).

\(d\) "oculi clati", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 6:18</span></span>

An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations,.... Or, "thoughts of
wickedness" (e); which are framed and formed in the heart: and this
being the source and fountain of all wickedness, is placed in the midst
of these hateful and abominable things; See Gill on [Pro
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014); evil thoughts and designs, both
against God and men, are intended, which are forged and fabricated in
the wicked heart of man; and may respect the depths of Satan in the
antichristian beast of Rome, [Rev
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024);

feet that be swift in running to mischief; to commit all manner of sin
with greediness, especially murder; see [Pro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016).

\(e\) "cogitationes iniquitatis", Montanus; "cogitationes vanitatis",
Cocceius.

[Proverbs 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 6:19</span></span>

A false witness that speaketh lies,.... Or, "that speaketh lies, even a
false witness" (f); and so this is distinguished from a lying tongue,
the second of these evils: this is the sin of bearing false witness
against one's neighbour, a breach of the eighth command. It may be
rendered, "he that bloweth lies" (g); that raises lies, and spreads them
abroad, and swears to them, to the damage of others. This makes the
sixth; and the seventh follows,

and him that soweth discord among brethren; whether in a natural
relation, or in a civil society, or in a religious community.

\(f\) So Vatablus, Mercerus, &c. (g) "qui efflat mendacia", Piscator,
Michaelis.

[Proverbs 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 6:20</span></span>

My son, keep thy father's commandment,.... These are not the words of
David to Solomon continued from [Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004); but the words of Solomon to his
son; and not to his son only, in a strict natural relation, but to
everyone that came to him for and put himself under his instruction; and
to everyone that stood in such a relation to a religious father; for not
the divine Being, the Father of all, is here meant, according to some
Jewish writers; though the commandment no doubt is the commandment of
God taught by godly parents; or such a system of precepts that is
founded upon and agrees unto the revealed will of God, and which being
so should be laid up and kept in the heart, and not forgotten; and
should be observed and attended to and obeyed throughout the whole
course of life, as if it was the commandment of God himself; and indeed
it is no other than that which pious parents train up their children in
the knowledge of, instil into them, and urge upon them the observance
of;

and forsake not the law of thy mother; the same as before, and which is
mentioned to show that the same respect is to be had to a mother as to a
father, the commandment and law of them being the same, and they
standing in the same relation; which yet children are apt to make a
difference in, and while they stand in awe of their father and his
precepts, slight their mother and her directions, which ought not to be.
Some understand this of the congregation of Israel, as some Jewish
writers; and others of the church of God, the mother of us all.

[Proverbs 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 6:21</span></span>

Bind them continually upon thine heart,.... Not upon the head or arm, as
the words of the law were to be bound, [Deu
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#003); to which there seems to be an
allusion; and which may confirm the sense of the words given, that this
respects the law of God itself, and the precepts of it, instructed in by
parents; but they should be bound upon the heart, and have an abiding
place in the understanding, affections, memory, and will;

and tie them about thy neck; as an ornament, instead of a necklace of
pearl, or chains of gold; they should be so far from being thought
burdensome and troublesome, that they should be reckoned comely and
graceful; see [Pro 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009).

[Proverbs 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 6:22</span></span>

When thou goest, it shall lead thee,.... The law of God taught by
parents; this directs man in the path of duty and business of life;
teaches him what way to shun, and which to walk in; it leads out of the
paths of sin, and into the way in which he should go, which is most
conducive to his good, and to the glory of God; it will lead him safely,
so that he shall not stumble, [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003);

when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; from terrifying dreams, evil
spirits, dangers by fire or thieves; one that observes it
conscientiously may lie down and sleep, secure of the guardianship of
divine Providence, and not fear any evil; or "shall watch over thee" (h)
in the night season;

and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee; familiarly; and instruct
what to do, and how to behave the day following; or "it shall go out
with thee" (i), into the fields for a morning's walk, and assist in
meditation. Jarchi interprets this of sleeping by death, and of awaking
at the resurrection of the dead.

\(h\) "excubabit apud te", Cocceius; "excubias aget super te",
Michaelis, Schultens. (i) "illa ipsa spatiabitur tecum", Schultens.

[Proverbs 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 6:23</span></span>

For the commandment is a lamp,.... The law of God is a lamp or candle to
see to work by and to walk by; it enlightens the eyes and directs the
feet, and makes working more pleasant, and walking more comfortable; and
indeed wit, bout it a man knows not rightly what to do or where he
should walk, or where he is walking; see [Psa
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105);

and the law is light; it makes things clear and manifest, what is right
and what is wrong; it enlightens the eyes of the understanding, whereby
persons come to see both their sin and their duty; and it directs them
to avoid the one and do the other; see [Psa
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008);

and reproofs of instruction are the way life; kind reproofs given by
parents agreeable to the word of God, which instruct what should be
shunned and what should be performed, when attended to, put men in the
way of an honourable and useful life; and are the means of preserving
them from a scandalous and useless one.

[Proverbs 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 6:24</span></span>

To keep thee from the evil woman,.... This is one use of the profit
arising from attending to the instructions of parents, and to the law of
God, as taught by them; to preserve from fornication and adultery, one
of its precepts expressly forbidding adultery and all corporeal
uncleanness; and the whole of it directing to an observance of all
duties respecting God and our neighbour, which requires diligence and
industry, and prevents idleness, that inlet to all sin, and especially
to uncleanness (k);

from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman; the same with the
evil woman, the lewd and adulterous one; see [Pro
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#016). Jarchi interprets this of
idolatry; the character well agrees with the idolatrous church of Rome,
or antichrist, represented by a whore, [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001); as this woman is called "the
woman of evil" (l), for so it may be rendered, one very evil, given up
and abandoned to sin; so antichrist is called "the man of sin", [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003); and as this woman is said to have
the "smoothness of a strange tongue" (m), as the words may be
translated, and are by the Targum; so the religion of this false church
is delivered in a strange language the people understand not, by which
they are kept in ignorance and deception; now the word of God read and
explained in the mother tongue, and especially the Gospel part of it,
the doctrine of wisdom, is a means of preserving persons from the errors
and heresies, superstition and idolatry, of the church of Rome, and from
being carried away with their false glosses, and gaudy worship, and all
its deceivable ways of unrighteousness.

\(k\) "Otia si tollas periere cupidinis arcus", Ovid. de Remed. Amor. l.
1. v. 139. Quaeritur Aegistheus, "quare sit factus adulter?--in promptu
causa est, desidiosus erat". Ibid. v. 161, 162. (l) "a muliere mali",
Baynus, Mercerus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis. (m) "a lenitate linguae
extraneae", Montanus; "a laevitate linguae peregrinae", Michaelis; "ex
lubrica glabritie linguae peregrinae", Schultens.

[Proverbs 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 6:25</span></span>

Lust not after her beauty in thine heart,.... Do not look upon it with
the eye, nor dwell upon it in the thought; the one will lead on to and
kindle last in the heart, and the other will cherish it and blow it up
into a flame; and lust thus conceived and nourished in the heart is no
other than committing adultery, [Mat
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028);

neither let her take thee with her eyelids; let her not take thee from
instruction with them, so Aben Ezra, from attending to that; or let her
not take thy wisdom from thee, so Jarchi; or rather let her not take
thee as in a net, with the sparkling of her eyes, with the wanton and
amorous glances of them; so the Syriac version, "let her not captivate
thee", &c. which applied to the antichristian church, may signify the
outward pomp and grandeur of it, its pretensions to antiquity, to the
apostolic see, to infallibility, miracles, great devotion, &c. which are
taking to men, and are the Circean cup with which she bewitches and
allures, [Rev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004). The Targum is,

"let her not seduce thee,'' &c.

[Proverbs 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 6:26</span></span>

For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of
bread,.... To be glad of one, and to beg for one, for the least morsel;
it is expressive of the extreme poverty and want which harlots bring men
to, who strip them of all their substance, and then send them going to
get their bread as they can; thus the prodigal, having spent his
substance with harlots, was so reduced as to desire the husks which
swine ate, [Luk 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#013); so spiritual
fornication or idolatry leaves men without bread for their souls, brings
them into spiritual poverty, and even to desperation and death;

and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life; or "soul" (n); not
content with his precious substance, his jewels, his gold and silver;
having stripped him of his goods and livelihood, though some think that
is here intended; she lays snares for him, and draws him into those
evils which bring him into the hands of her husband, who avenges himself
by slaying the adulterer; or into the hands of the civil magistrate, by
whom this sin of adultery was punished with death; nay, is the occasion
of the ruin of his precious and immortal soul to all eternity: the
precious souls of men are part of the wares of antichrist, [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013).

\(n\) "animam", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Proverbs 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 6:27</span></span>

Can a man take fire in his bosom,.... A whore is compared to fire, and
is so called by the poets (o); and it is a saying of Pythagoras,

"it is a like thing to fall into fire and into a woman (p);''

the Hebrew words "esh", "fire", and "ishah", "a woman", have some
affinity in sound; and the phrase of taking it "into the bosom" fitly
expresses the impure embraces of a harlot;

and his clothes not be burned? he cannot, it is impossible; and equally
vain is it to think that a man can commit whoredom and it not be known,
or he not hurt by it in his name and substance, or in his body, soul,
and life.

\(o\) Plauti Bacehides, Act. 4. Sc. 9. v. 15. "Accede ad ignem hunc",
Terent. Eunuehus, Act. 1. Sc. 2. v. 5. (p) , apud Maximum, Eclog. c. 39.

[Proverbs 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 6:28</span></span>

Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned? He cannot; if he
sets his feet upon them, and continues them ever so little on them, they
will be burnt, and much more if he walks upon them; and so if a man
gives way to the burning lusts of his heart after a whorish woman, and
commits adultery with her, though not with frequency, he will not escape
punishment in one shape or another; and much more if he continues such a
lewd course of life; such practices are extremely dangerous (q), and
there is no possibility of being unhurt by them: see [Job
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#012); the lake of fire and brimstone,
everlasting burnings, will be the portion of those that commit
fornication with the whore of Rome, [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010).

\(q\) "Periculosae plenum opus aleae tractas: et incedis per ignes
suppositos cineri doloso", Horat. Carmin. l. 2. Ode. 1.

[Proverbs 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 6:29</span></span>

So he that goeth into his neighbour's wife,.... To converse with her, or
lie with her, as the Targum; for it means not barely going into her
house or chamber, or into her company, though without any ill design at
first, which yet may be dangerous; but committing adultery with her, as
this phrase is often used, [Gen 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#031);

whosoever toucheth her; by impure dalliances, and especially by carnal
copulation with her, in which sense it is used; see Gill on [Co1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001);

shall not be innocent; or free (r) from disgrace and infamy, from loss
of substance or health; from punishment in this life, either by the
jealous husband or civil magistrate; and in the world to come by the
Lord himself; for "whoremongers and adulterers God will judge", [Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004).

\(r\) "non insons, vel immunis", Schultens; so Gejerus.

[Proverbs 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 6:30</span></span>

Men do not despise a thief, if he steal,.... They do not discommend or
reproach him for it, or fix a mark of infamy upon him, or expose him to
public shame by whipping him; but rather excuse him and pity him when it
appears what his case is, what put him upon it, and that he had no other
intention in it than to do as follows;

to satisfy his soul; his craving appetite for food, having nothing to
eat, nor no other way of getting any: the words should be supplied thus,
"for he does this to satisfy his soul"; or, as the Syriac version, "for
he steals to satisfy his soul": and so they are a reason why men do not
despise him, nor use him ill, because it is done with no other view; not
with a wicked design to hurt his neighbour, nor with a covetous intent
to increase his own substance in an unlawful way, but only to satisfy
nature in distress; and another reason follows, or the former confirmed;

when he is hungry; or for "he is hungry" (s); pressed with famine; the
temptation is great, nature urges him to it; and though it is criminal,
men in such cases wilt not bear hard upon him for it. The Targum is,

"it is not to be wondered at in a thief that he should steal to satisfy
his soul when it is hungry.''

The Vulgate Latin version is,

"it is not a great fault when anyone steals, for he steals to fill a
hungry soul;''

it is a fault, but it is not a very heinous one, at least it is not so
heinous as adultery, for the sake of which it is mentioned, and with
which it is compared: the design of the instance is to show the adultery
is far greater than that; and yet in our age we see that the one is
severely punished even with death for trifling things, when the other
goes unpunished.

\(s\) "quia esurit", Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 6:31</span></span>

But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold,.... According to the law
in [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001); in case of theft double
was to be restored, if the theft was found alive in his hand; and in
some cases fourfold and fivefold. Aben Ezra observing that double and
fivefold being near together in the law, joins them, and so makes
sevenfold. Some think Solomon has reference to a law in other nations,
which obliged to a sevenfold restoration; or that the penalty was
increased in his time, but neither appears; rather the meaning is, that
a thief should make restoration according to law as often as he is found
guilty, be it seven times, or seventy times seven, [Mat
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021); or the sense is, that be should
make perfect restoration, full restitution as the law requires: but then
this finding: him is not to be understood of finding him in the fact,
stealing to satisfy hunger, for then to insist upon a legal restitution,
as it is incompatible with such a man's circumstances, so would
contradict what is before said, that such an one is not usually
reproached and found fault with; but the sense is, if it should be found
otherwise, or it should be found that he has food to satisfy his soul,
as Gersom observes, and has no need to steal; or if he is found in a
man's house, then he shall make restitution as the law directs, even a
full one, [Exo 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002);

he shall give all the substance of his house: to pay the sevenfold, or
to make full restitution; nay, if necessary, he himself may be sold, as
the above law requires.

[Proverbs 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 6:32</span></span>

But whoso committeth adultery with a woman,.... Which is a greater
degree of theft than the former, it being the stealing of another man's
wife;

lacketh understanding; or "an heart" (t); the thief lacks bread, and
therefore steals, but this man lacks wisdom, and therefore acts so
foolish a part; the one does it to satisfy hunger, the other a brutish
lust;

he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul; is liable to have his life
taken away by the husband of the adulteress; so according to Solon's law
(u) the adulterer taken in the act might be killed by the husband: or by
the civil magistrate; for according to the law of. Moses he was to die,
either to be strangled or stoned; see Gill on [Joh
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005); and besides, he not only ruins
the natural faculties of his soul, besotting, corrupting, and depraving
that, giving his heart to a whore, but brings eternal destruction on it;
yet so foolish is he, though it issues in the ruin of his precious soul;
"he does this" (w), for so the first part of this clause, which stands
last in the original text, may be rendered.

\(t\) "deficit corde", Pagninus, Montanus; "caret corde", Mercerus,
Gejerus; so Michaelis. (u) Plutarch. in Vita Solon. p. 90. (w) "ipse
faeiet illud", Montanus; "ipse faciet hoc", so some in Vatablus; "is id
faciet, sive facit", Cocceius; "ille facit id", Michaelis; "is patrabit
illud", Schultens.

[Proverbs 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 6:33</span></span>

A wound and dishonour shall he get,.... A wound, stroke, or blow, either
from the husband of the strumpet, as was often the case (x) in later
times; or from the civil magistrate, being ordered by him to be beaten
(y) or stoned; or from God himself inflicting diseases on him; see [Gen
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017); where the same word is used as
here: and "dishonour" from men; for though they do not despise a thief
in circumstances before related, yet they will despise an adulterer, and
speak reproachfully of him, whenever they have occasion to make mention
of him;

and his reproach shall not be wiped away; as long as he lives, though
his life may be spared; yea, it shall even continue after death; and
though he may repent of his sin and reform, as in the case of David.

\(x\) "Secat ille cruentis verberibus", Juvenal. Satyr. 10. v. 316. Vid.
A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 17. c. 18. Horat. Satyr. l. 1. Sat. 2. v. 41,
42. (y) Valer. Maximus, l. 6. c. 1. s. 13.

[Proverbs 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">pro 6:34</span></span>

For jealousy is the rage of a man,.... Fills a man with rage against him
of whom he is jealous; which keeps boiling within him, till he has an
opportunity of venting it: and very severe it is; it is strong as death,
and cruel as the grave;

therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance; when he has an
opportunity of avenging himself; whenever he finds the adulterer in his
house, or catches him and his wife in bed together, he spares not to
take away his life, and sometimes the life of both of them; instances of
this nature history furnishes us with: or he will spare no cost and
pains to prosecute him before a civil magistrate, and bring him to
public justice; prayers and entreaties, bribes and gifts, wilt be of no
avail, as follows.

[Proverbs 6:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">pro 6:35</span></span>

He will not regard any ransom,.... So that his case is much worse than,
a thief's; if he is taken, he makes restitution according to law, and he
is freed, and no more is said and done to him; and, at most, it is but
parting with all the goods in his house; but in this case it will not
do. In the Hebrew text it is, "he will not accept the face of any
ransom" (z); that is, as the Targum paraphrases it,

"he will not accept the face of anyone that gives a gift:''

he will have no respect unto him for the sake of the gift; whatever gift
is offered, be it what it will, for the ransom of his life from death,
it will be disregarded;

neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts; increase
them, and keep continually giving; nothing but the life of the adulterer
will satisfy him, which he will either take away himself, or obtain it
in a way of legal prosecution. How foolish therefore is the man that
will expose his name and credit, his health and substance, his life in
this world, and his soul in another, to utter ruin, for the sake of
gratifying a sordid lust! This may be interpreted of God, who is a
jealous God in matters of worship, and will not suffer idolatry to go
unpunished, which is spiritual adultery.

\(z\) "non accipiet facies", Montanus; "non acceptabit faciem ullius
redemptionis", Mercerus, Gejerus; "ullius lytri", Cocceius, Michaelis,
Schultens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 7](pro007)

</div>
