<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro000)  [Next](pro002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO PROVERBS 1

After the inscription, which gives the title of the book, and describes
the author by his name, descent, and dignity, [Pro
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001), follows the scope and design of
it, which is to teach men wisdom and knowledge; even such as are simple
and foolish, and particularly young men; nay, hereby wise men may grow
wiser, and attain to an higher degree of learning, [Pro
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#002); and the "first" doctrine taught
in it is the fear of the Lord, or devotion to God; which is the
beginning of knowledge, though despised by fools, [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007). The next is obedience to parents;
whose instructions, attended to, are more ornamental than chains of
gold, [Pro 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008). And then follows a
dissuasive from bad company; in which the arguments made use of by
wicked men to draw in others with them, and the danger of compliance,
are most strongly and beautifully represented, [Pro
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010). When Wisdom, who is the
instructor and teacher throughout the whole, is introduced as calling
upon the simple and the scorners to leave their sins and turn to her,
with a promise of the Spirit to them, [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); but they slighting and rejecting
her call, are threatened with just and irrevocable rum and destruction,
[Pro 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024). And the chapter is closed
with a promise of safety and rest to those that hearken to her, [Pro
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#033).

[Proverbs 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 1:1</span></span>

The proverbs of Solomon,.... Who is said to make three thousand
proverbs, [Kg1 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#032); but whether any
of them are contained in this book cannot be said: however, it is
certain that they are not all in it, since, if you except the first
"nine" chapters, which are the introduction to the Proverbs, there are
but six hundred and fifty-nine verses in it; and if they are taken in,
they make but nine hundred and fifteen, which are not a third part of
the proverbs said to be made by him: however, here are as many and such
as God thought fit should be preserved for instruction in all future
ages. It was usual with the ancients in all countries, when any truth
was found, and established by experience, to wrap it up in a few apt
words, with or without a figure; that it might be the better understood
and more easily retained, and which were always venerable and greatly
attended to: and of this kind are these proverbs; only with this
difference, that these are of divine inspiration, and the others not.
The word used for them comes from one which signifies "similitude" and
"dominion" (g); because many of them are similes or comparisons, and are
delivered out in figurative expressions, in metaphors and allegories,
and the like; and have all of them a commanding power, authority, and
influence upon the mind, obliging to an attention to them. The name of
Solomon is put to them, the more to recommend them; who had a wise and
understanding heart, as large as the sand of the sea, and was wiser than
all men, [Kg1 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#029); and was an eminent
type of Christ, who spake in proverbs also, [Joh
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025). He is further described by his
pedigree and office,

the son of David, king of Israel; a wise son of a wise father, and king
over a wise and understanding people. These titles are added for the
further commendation of the book; and it may be observed that they are
such as belong to the Messiah, Solomon's antitype, one that is greater
than he, [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

\(g\) A rad. "dominatus est----lvmn comparatus, similis, consimilis
factus est", Buxtorf. "Mirum est quod radix significans antoritatem cum
imperio, significat etiam parabolas vel sermones figuratos----verba quae
vocantur, habent autoritatem, nobis ideam immittunt, dicentis ut nos
supereminentis, saltem sapientia, ingenio, doctrina; nos persuadent et
pondere suo, quasi imperio noe ducunt". Gusset. Ebr. Comment. p. 845.

[Proverbs 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 1:2</span></span>

To know wisdom and instruction,.... That is, these proverbs were made,
and written, and published, to make known or to teach men wisdom and
knowledge; not only in things moral, and therefore these proverbs are by
some called Solomon's "ethics"; and indeed they do contain the best
system of morality in the whole world; nothing like it is to be
extracted out of all the writings of the Heathen poets and philosophers:
nor only in things civil; for which reason they may be called his
"politics", seeing they are instructive to kings and civil magistrates,
and to subjects; and also his "economics", seeing they furnish out rules
for husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and servants,
worthy of their attention and observance: but also they are a means of
and are designed to teach spiritual and evangelical wisdom and
knowledge; things relating to Jesus Christ, the wisdom of God, and the
way of life and salvation by him, the knowledge of which is life
eternal. These words, with others that follow, seem to be synonymous,
and signify much one and the same thing; and are used to show that the
most consummate wisdom and comprehensive knowledge may be attained by
means of this book; which, like the rest of Scripture, with a divine
blessing, is able to make a man "wise unto salvation"; and is
"profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for
instruction in righteousness", [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015); where the apostle seems to
allude to this text: since "wisdom" here may stand for "doctrine" in
general; and "instruction" may signify the means of attaining to it; and
it may be observed, that the word is used for "discipline" and
"correction", as well as "instruction". If these words are to be
distinguished, the first, "wisdom", may design a wise scheme and plan of
truths, and the theory of them and the latter, "instruction", the
learning it and putting it into practice; and for both theory and
practice this book is useful;

to perceive the words of understanding; which flow from a good
understanding, and give a right understanding of things; so that a man
may be able to distinguish between light and darkness, truth and error,
right and wrong; particularly the doctrines of the Gospel may be meant,
which are eminently so, and exceed the understanding of a natural man,
and which are only understood by a spiritual man; the means of knowing
which are the Scriptures, under the guidance and direction of the Spirit
of God.

[Proverbs 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 1:3</span></span>

To receive the instruction of wisdom,.... Or "prudence" (h); of wise and
prudent men; and especially of Christ himself, who bears those names,
whose instructions this book is full of; and the design of which is to
engage the attention of men to them, and prevail upon them to receive
them, and act conformably to them. Which instructions respect the
following things; and which are added by way of illustration and
amplification, viz.

justice, and judgment, and equity; that which is just in itself, and
according to the nature of God and his will; and is judged so by right
reason; and is equitable between man and man, and agrees with the law of
God. These three, R. Levi Ben Gersom says, signify one and the same
thing; true righteousness, doing that which is just to God and man;
which the doctrines of grace, or the instructions of wisdom, teach men
to do; concerning which many rules may be collected from this book.

\(h\) "prudentiae", Munster, Vatablus.

[Proverbs 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 1:4</span></span>

To give subtlety to the simple,.... Men of mean abilities, weak
capacities, shallow understandings, incautious, credulous, and easily
imposed upon: these, by attending to what is herein contained, may
arrive to a serpentine subtlety; though they are simple and harmless as
doves, may become as wise as serpents; may attain to an exquisite
knowledge of divine things and know even more than the wise and sage
philosophers among the Gentiles, or any of the Rabbins and masters of
Israel; or any of the princes of this world, whose wisdom comes to
nought; and become very cautious and circumspect how they are drawn
aside by the old serpent the devil, or by such who lie in wait to
deceive; and perform their duty both to God and man;

to the young man knowledge and discretion; or "thought" (i); who wants
both: this book will teach him the knowledge of things moral, civil, and
religious: to think and act aright; how to behave and conduct himself
wisely and discreetly before men; and be a means of forming his mind
betimes for piety and religion; and of furnishing him with rules for his
deportment in future life, in all the periods of it; and in whatsoever
state and condition he may come into. A "young man may cleanse his way",
[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009), reform his manners, behave
with purity and uprightness, by taking "heed" to the things herein
contained.

\(i\) "cogitationem", Pagninus, Mercerus; "bonam cogitationem",
Michaelis.

[Proverbs 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 1:5</span></span>

A wise man will hear,.... With great attention, and hearken to the
proverbs and wise sayings herein delivered; for here are many things
entertaining to men of years and wisdom, as well as instructive to young
men and simple ones;

and will increase learning; or "add" (k) to his stock of learning; or,
as the Targum,

"will add knowledge;''

see [Pe2 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005); or, "will be wiser", as
the Vulgate Latin version. This is said to show the excellency of this
book, and the extensive usefulness of it; indeed wise men will get
knowledge where fools cannot, and increase learning where others can get
none: there are few books but a wise man will get something out of; and
especially such a book as this, and as the Scriptures are;

and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels; a man of a
spiritual understanding arrives to the knowledge of the wise counsels of
God; the doctrines of the Gospel, which are the "whole counsel" of God;
are recondite wisdom, the hidden wisdom of God, which no wisdom of man
is comparable to. It is the wisest scheme that was ever formed, and
which the wit of man could never have devised, even salvation by Jesus
Christ; and which was laid in God's "counsels of old", which are
"faithfulness" and "truth"; the knowledge of which is attained unto by
one that is spiritually wise. Moreover, a man that thoroughly
understands the things contained in this book is fit to be a counsellor
of others in things human and divine; in things moral, civil, and
spiritual: he is fit to be in the cabinet council of princes, to be a
counsellor of kings; yea, to have the reins of government in his hands.
"He shall possess government"; so the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and
Arabic versions: or, "he shall possess the helm" (l); sit as a pilot
there, as the word may signify, and steer the ship aright in which he
is; whether it be his family, or the church of God, or a city or
corporation, or a kingdom: this book, rightly understood by him, will
furnish him with rules to do all things well and wisely.

\(k\) "addet", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Cocceius, Michaelis,
Schultens. (l) "gubernacula possidebit", V. L. "metaphora a nauclero
desumpta", Schultens.

[Proverbs 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 1:6</span></span>

To understand a proverb, and the interpretation,.... This may be
connected either with the first verse, "the proverbs of Solomon", &c.
are written, as for the above ends and purposes, so for these; or with
[Pro 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005), a wise and understanding
man, by hearkening and attending to what is here delivered, will not
only attain to wise counsels, but to the understanding of proverbial
sayings, and to see into the "elegancy" (m), the eloquence and beauty of
them, as the word signifies; and be able to interpret them to others in
a clear, plain, way and manner;

the words of the wise, and their dark sayings; the words and doctrines,
not of the wise philosophers and sages of the Heathen world, but of men
truly wise and good; and especially of the wise inspired writers of the
Scriptures, whose words come from one Shepherd, [Ecc
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#011); and the enigmas or riddles
contained in their writings, which are so to a natural man, obscure
phrases and expressions, things hard and difficult to be understood, yet
to a spiritual man, that judgeth all things, plain and easy, [Co1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014).

\(m\) "facundiam", Montanus; "eloquentiam", Tigurine version;
"elocutionem", Mercerus, Gejerus.

[Proverbs 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 1:7</span></span>

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge,.... Here properly
the book begins, and this is the first of the proverbs, and an excellent
one; it is such an one as is not to be found in all the writings of the
Heathens. By "the fear of the Lord" is not meant a servile fear, a fear
of punishment, of hell, wrath, and damnation, which is the effect of the
first work of the law upon the conscience; but a filial fear, and
supposes knowledge of God as a father, of his love and grace in Christ,
particularly of his forgiving love, from whence it arises, [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004); it is a holy, humble, fiducial
fear of God; a reverential affection for him, and devotion to him; it
includes the whole of religious worship, both internal and external; all
that is contained in the first table of the law, and the manner of
performing it, and principle of acting: this is the first of all
sciences to be learned, and it is the principal one; it is the basis and
foundation of all the rest, on which they depend; and it is the head,
the fountain, the root an source, from whence they spring; and unless a
man knows God, knows God in Christ, and worships him in his fear, in
spirit and in truth, according to his revealed will, he knows nothing as
he ought to know; and all his knowledge will be of no avail and profit
to him; this is the first and chief thing in spiritual and evangelical
knowledge, and without which all natural knowledge will signify nothing;
see [Job 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028);

but fools despise wisdom and instruction; the same with "knowledge"
before; they do not desire the knowledge of God, and of his ways and
worship, but despise it, make no account of it, but treat it with
contempt; especially the knowledge of God in Christ, in which lies the
highest wisdom, for this is "life eternal", [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003); they despise Christ "the Wisdom
of God", and the Gospel, and the truths of it, which are "the hidden
wisdom" of God; and all "instruction" into it, and the means of it; they
despise the Scriptures, which are able to make a man "wise unto
salvation"; and the ministry of the word, and the ministers of it: such
sort of "discipline" (n) was this, as the word signifies, they dislike
and abhor; and especially "correction" or "chastisement" (o), which is
also the sense of it; suffering reproach and affliction for the sake of
wisdom, a profession of Christ and his Gospel; and they are fools with a
witness that despise all this; such fools are atheists, deists, and all
profane and wicked men. The Septuagint render it, "the ungodly"; and
such sort of men are all along meant by "fools" in this book.

\(n\) "disciplinam", Tigurine version, Piscator, Cocceius, Schultens,
(o) "Castigationem, correctionem", Vatablus.

[Proverbs 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 1:8</span></span>

My son, hear the instruction of thy father,.... This is not to be
understood of God the Father of mankind, and of that law which he has
given them, as Jarchi and Gersom interpret it, but of Solomon and his
son in a literal sense; and of anyone that came to him for instruction,
any pupil, hearer, or reader of his; and it is a direction to all
children to hearken to the instruction of their parents, and obey their
commands; so, next to the fear and worship of God, he exhorts to
obedience to parents, and proceeds just in the same order and method in
which the decalogue or ten commands were written; the first table
respects God and his worship, and the second follows, which begins with
"honour thy father and thy mother", &c. [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012), which, the apostle says, is
"the first commandment with promise", [Eph
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001);

and forsake not the law of thy mother; meaning not the congregation of
Israel, the old synagogue, or Jewish church, as Jarchi; and so in the
Talmud (p) it is interpreted of the congregation of Israel, as is "thy
father" in the former clause of the divine Being; nor the operative
faculty of the human understanding, as Gersom; but the mother of
Solomon's son; and any and every mother of a child, who having an equal
or greater tenderness for her offspring, and a true and hearty regard
for their welfare, will instruct them in the best manner she can, give
the best rules, and prescribe the best laws she can for their good; and
which ought to be as carefully attended to and obeyed as those of a
father; and she is particularly mentioned, because the law of God
equally enjoins reverence and obedience to both parents, which human
laws among the Gentiles did not; and because children are too apt to
slight the directions and instructions of a mother; whereas they carry
equal authority, and have in them the nature of a law, as those of a
father.

\(p\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 102. 1.

[Proverbs 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 1:9</span></span>

For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head,.... The
instructions and laws of parents being attended unto and obeyed by
children, render them more lovely and amiable than any beautiful
ornament whatever that can be put upon their heads;

and chains about thy neck; be that unto them as chains of gold are to
the neck, beautify and adorn them; so good works, done in obedience to
God and parents, are ornaments of great price, and preferable to any
outward adorning whatever; see [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009). The allusions are unto, and the
metaphors taken from, those things which are most pleasing and
acceptable to children, as fine top knots and golden chains.

[Proverbs 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 1:10</span></span>

My son, if sinners entice thee,.... Endeavour to seduce thee from thy
parents, and draw thee aside from them, from listening to their
instructions, advice, and commands; and make use of all plausible
arguments to persuade thee to join with them in the sins they are
addicted unto, and are continually employed in: for this is not to be
understood of such who are sinners by nature, and through infirmity of
the flesh, as all men are; but of notorious sinners, who are guilty of
the grossest enormities, who live in sin, and give up themselves to work
all manner of wickedness; sin is their trade and business, and the
constant course of their lives; they are hardened, impudent, and daring,
and not content to sin themselves, but do all they can to draw in
others; and to preserve youth from filling into such bad company is this
exhortation given in this tender, affectionate, and moving manner; next
to the fear of God, and regard to parents, is this caution given to shun
the company of wicked men, which young men are liable to be drawn into,
and is of fatal consequence;

consent thou not; yield not to their persuasions, listen not to their
solicitations, show no liking and approbation of them, assent neither by
words nor deeds; do not say "thou wilt"; say "I will not", and abide by
it; be deaf to all their entreaties, and proof against all their
persuasions.

[Proverbs 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 1:11</span></span>

If they say, come with us,.... Leave your father's house, and the
business of life in which you are; make one of us, and become a member
of our society, and go along with us upon the highway;

let us lay wait for blood; lie in ambush under some hedge or another,
waiting till a rich traveller comes up and passes that way, and then
rise and shed his blood in order to get his money; and the same word
signifies both "blood" and "money", and wait is laid for one for the
sake of the other;

let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause; or "let us hide"
(q), the Vulgate Latin version adds "snares"; so Vatablus and others, as
the fowler does for birds; or "let us hide ourselves" (r); in some
private place, waiting "for the innocent", the harmless traveller, who
has done no injury to any man's person or property; thinks himself safe,
and is not aware of any design upon him; going about his lawful
business, and having done nothing to provoke such miscreants to attempt
his life or take away his property: and which they do "without cause" as
to him; "freely" (s) as to themselves; and "with impunity" (t), as they
promise themselves and one another; all which senses the word used will
bear.

\(q\) "abscondamus", Michaelis. (r) "Abscondamus nos", Pagninus,
Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "abscondamus nosmetipsos",
Baynus. (s) "gratis", Pagninus, Montanus, Michaelis, Schultens. (t)
"Impune", Junius & Tremellius, Amama.

[Proverbs 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 1:12</span></span>

Let us swallow them up alive as the grave,.... The innocent person, and
those that are with him, his servants; our gang is so numerous that we
can very easily dispatch him and all his attendants, and bury them out
of sight at once, as if they were swallowed up alive in a grave, and so
no more to be seen or heard of; and consequently we shall be in the
utmost safety and security, there being no traces of what is done, nor
any left to make a relation of it, or to give any information of us, or
to pursue us;

and whole, as those that go down into the pit; who though whole and in
perfect health, shall in a moment be destroyed and cast into the pit,
being first plundered of all the riches they have about them; for this
swallowing them up alive and whole, which is an allusion to a beast of
prey swallowing up another creature all at once, not only intends their
cruelty in taking away life, but their rapaciousness in seizing upon
their substance.

[Proverbs 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 1:13</span></span>

We shall find all precious substance,.... Among one or another we meet
with; gold and silver and precious stones, everything that is valuable;
not considering that hereby they were in danger of losing the more
precious substance, their immortal souls; and the most precious
substance of all, the enjoyment of God, and happiness with him to all
eternity, which is the "more enduring substance": the things of this
world, properly speaking, are not substance, though wicked men so judge
them; they are things that are not; nor are they "precious", in
comparison of spiritual and heavenly things; but they are what carnal
men set a high price and value upon, and risk the loss of their name,
lives, and souls for;

we shall fill our houses with spoil; Aben Ezra interprets this of
garments; but it may not only design the garments taken from the persons
robbed and killed; but also their money, commodities, and goods they
were travelling with, which in time would be so large as to fill
everyone of their houses; covetousness lies at the bottom of all this
wickedness; the love of money is the root of all evil.

[Proverbs 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 1:14</span></span>

Cast in thy lot among us,.... Or "thou shall cause thy lot to fall among
us" (u); though just entered, as soon as any booty is taken thou shalt
cast lots with us, and have thy full share with those that have been
longer engaged;

let us all have one purse; or "we will all have one purse" (w); will
throw all our booty, taken by us into one common stock, and live upon it
comfortably and merrily. Jarchi represents it as putting it to the young
man's option, to do which he would, either to cast lots and take his
share separately, or let it be put altogether, and so partake jointly
with the rest. According to Gersom the sense is, that there should be
such an exact division made, that there should not be more in one purse
than in another; their shares should be equally divided by lot, and
their purses should be alike; one should not have more than another:
these are the arguments used by wicked men to allure and ensnare young
men to join with them in their sinful ways and practices; from which
they are dehorted, as follows.

\(u\) "sortem tuam conjicies", Junius & Tremellius; "projicies",
Mercerus, Baynus; "jacies", Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens. (w) "erit
nobis omnibus", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version; so Cocceius,
Schultens, and the Targum.

[Proverbs 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 1:15</span></span>

My son, walk not thou in the way with them,.... In the same way as they
do, which is the broad way that leads unto destruction; set not one foot
in it; make no trial of it, whether it will be pleasant and profitable
walking in it; the experiment will be dangerous;

refrain thy foot from their path; their manner and course of life; do
not follow it, nor join them in it; when there is an inclination or a
temptation to it, withstand it; stop in time, do not proceed, but draw
back, and go on in the way thou hast been trained up in, and remember
the instructions of thy parents.

[Proverbs 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 1:16</span></span>

For their feet run to evil,.... To the evil of sin, to commit robberies
and murder, and all manner of iniquity; they are eager upon it, and in
haste and swift to do it, [Pro 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#018)
(x); being carried away with their inordinate affections, which are as
feet to the soul; and drawn aside with their lusts, and pushed on by
Satan, and, encouraged by one another, and so rush on headlong to the
evil of punishment also; and which is a reason why their ways and paths
should be abstained from, because they bring upon them swift
destruction; it is to their own hurt they run, as Jarchi interprets it;
though the first sense seems best to agree with what follows;

and make haste to shed blood; the blood of innocent persons, in order to
get their substance, to cover their iniquity and shame, and that no
information may be given of them; this is mentioned as having something
very horrible in it, in order to deter from joining with them.

\(x\) "Velox ad facinus", Claudian. in Rufin. l. 1. v. 240.

[Proverbs 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 1:17</span></span>

Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird. Or "without
cause" (y), as the word is rendered in [Pro
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#011); and so the words are an
illustration of the preceding; showing that the blood of innocent
persons is shed without cause, no injury being done by them to those
that do it, but is shed without any provocation at all; just as the net
is spread for the innocent bird, which has done no harm to the fowler
that seeks to take it; so Gersom: or else the sense is, that though the
net is spread by the fowler even in the sight of the bird, yet it is in
vain to the bird, though not to the fowler; it is so intent upon the
corn that is spread about, that it takes no notice of the net, and so is
caught in it; and thus it is with those men that are bent upon their
sinful practices, upon theft and murder, though their ruin and
destruction are before their eyes; and they daily see their companions
in iniquity come to an untimely end; they know that they are liable to
suffer death by the hand of the civil magistrate, and to be followed by
the justice and vengeance of God, and suffer eternal punishment; yet
take no warning hereby, but rush on to their own ruin, as follows.

\(y\) "sine causa", Vatablus, Mercerus, Gejerus.

[Proverbs 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 1:18</span></span>

And they lay wait for their own blood,.... While they lie in wait for
the blood of others, they lie in wait for their own; and when they shed
the blood of innocent persons, it in the issue comes upon their own
heads, and is the cause of their own blood being shed; vengeance pursues
them, and justice will not suffer them to live;

they lurk privily for their own lives: while they are lurking in secret
places to take away, the lives of others, they are laying snares for
their own souls; and the consequence of it will be, that they will be
brought to a shameful and untimely end here, or, however, to everlasting
ruin and destruction hereafter.

[Proverbs 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 1:19</span></span>

So are the ways of everyone that is greedy of gain,.... That is set upon
getting riches in an unlawful way, by robberies and murder; his ways
will end in the loss of his own blood and life, and in the loss of his
immortal soul; this will be what his wicked ways and course of life will
bring him to, and what will his gain profit him then? it would be of no
use and service to him could he have gained the whole world;

which taketh away the life of the owners thereof: or who, even every one
of those that are greedy of gain, and will be rich at any rate; such
stick not to take away the life of the proper owners of that gain, or
money they are greedy of, in order to get it into their own possession;
and such wicked practices cannot fail of meeting with a just recompence
of reward: or "which" covetous gain, or gain gotten in such a wicked
manner, will be the cause of the life of the injurious masters and wrong
possessors of it being taken away from them, either by the hand of the
civil magistrate, or by God himself. These sins of robbery and murder
are particularly instanced in, not only because other sins lead unto
them, as sabbath breaking, drunkenness, and lewdness, and issue in
temporal and eternal ruin; but because they were very common among the
Jews at the time that Wisdom, or Christ, was here on earth: to which
time the whole passage refers, as appears from the following verses; and
that those sins were frequent then is manifest both from Scripture; see
[Mat 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038); and from the confessions
of the Jews, who say (z) that forty years before the destruction of the
temple the sanhedrim were obliged to remove from place to place, because
that murderers increased, and they could not judge and condemn them, for
fear of being murdered themselves; and it was because of this great
increase they were obliged to stop the beheading of the red heifer (a).

\(z\) T. Bab. Avodah Zarah, fol. 8. 2. (a) Misnah Sotah, c. 9. s. 9.

[Proverbs 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 1:20</span></span>

Wisdom crieth without,.... Here the person instructing throughout this
whole book is represented under the name of "Wisdom"; by which we are to
understand not the attribute of divine wisdom displayed in the works of
creation; nor the light of nature in man; nor the law of Moses given to
the Israelites; nor the revelation of the divine will in general, as it
is delivered out in the sacred Scriptures; nor the Gospel, and the
ministry of it, in particular; but our Lord Jesus Christ; for the things
spoken of Wisdom, and ascribed to it in this book, especially in the
eighth and ninth chapters, show that a divine Person is intended, and
most properly belong to Christ; who may be called "Wisdoms" (b), in the
plural number, as in the Hebrew text, because of the consummate and
perfect wisdom that is in him; as he is a divine Person, he is "the
Logos", the Word and Wisdom of God; as Mediator, "all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid" in him, [Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003); and, as man, "the Spirit of
Wisdom" rests upon him without measure, [Isa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002). This, with what follows to the
end of the chapter, is a prophecy of the ministry of Christ in the days
of his flesh, and of the success of it; and of the calamities that
should come upon the Jews for the rejection of him: and Wisdom is here
said to "cry", as Christ did, [Joh
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028); the word signifies to cry both
in a sorrowful way, as Jesus did when he cried to Jerusalem, weeping
over it, [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037); and in a joyful
one, which well suits with the Gospel, as preached by him; a joyful
sound expressed by piping, in opposition to John's ministry, which was a
mournful one, [Mat 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017); for crying
here means no other than the preaching of the word; which is such a cry
as that of heralds, when they publicly proclaim peace or war; so Wisdom
or Christ, is said to "proclaim liberty to the captives", and "the
acceptable year of the Lord", [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). This cry was made "without" the
city of Jerusalem, and without that part of the country which was
properly called Jewry; Christ first preached in the land of Galilee; or
this may mean the Gentile world, where Christ preached, though not in
person, yet by his apostles, whom he sent into all the world to preach
the Gospel to every creature;

she uttereth her voice in the streets: of the city of Jerusalem, and
other places; nor is this contrary to [Mat
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#019); which is to be understood of
crying in a bawling and litigious way, of lifting up the voice in
self-commendation, neither of which Christ did; and yet might cry and
utter his voice in the streets, that is, publicly preach his Gospel
there, as he did; and he also sent his servants into the streets and
lanes of the city to call in sinners by the ministry of the word, [Luk
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#021); which perhaps may be meant of
places in the Gentile world; nor is this sense to be excluded here; it
may be figuratively understood of the public ministration of the word
and ordinances in the church called the streets and broad ways of it,
[Sol 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002).

\(b\) "sapientiae", Montanus, Vatablus, Mercerus, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 1:21</span></span>

She crieth in the chief place of concourse,.... Where a multitude of
people meet together; the Targum is,

"on the top of palaces;''

but rather it is to be understood of the synagogues of the Jews, where
Christ frequently preached; and which, from hence, they build in the
highest part of the city (c); and best of all the temple, whither the
tribes of Israel went up to worship in great bodies, and to which the
Jews daily resorted; here Christ taught publicly, as he himself says,
[Joh 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020);

in the opening of the gates; either of the city, at which people went in
and out in great numbers; or of the temple, where they passed and
repassed continually on account of worship; see [Joh
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023); in allusion hereunto the public
worship of God's house is signified by the gates of Zion, and also of
Wisdom, [Psa 87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002);

in the city she uttereth her words; the doctrines of the Gospel; even in
the city of Jerusalem literally, and in other cities of Judea and
Galilee, the singular being put for the plural; and figuratively in the
church of God, often compared to a city; and so all these expressions of
"without", in the "streets", in the "chief place of concourse", "the
opening of the gates", and "the city", may denote in general the
openness and publicness of the Gospel ministry, both by Christ in his
apostles, in Judea, and in the Gentile world; more especially the
former;

saying, as follows.

\(c\) Maimon. Hilchot Tephillah, c. 11. s. 2.

[Proverbs 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 1:22</span></span>

How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity?.... Simple foolish
things, agreeably to their character, being weak simple men, men of weak
capacities and shallow understandings; and such were the first persons
that were called by Christ through the ministry of the word, even
effectually; they were babes and sucklings in comparison of others, by
whom they were despised as illiterate and ignorant of the law; see [Mat
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025); though it may respect the Jews
in general, who were externally called by Christ, and were a simple and
foolish people, addicted to silly customs and usages, to the traditions
of the elders, and loved the folly and darkness of them, and to continue
in them, rather than the light of the Gospel, [Joh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019);

and the scorners delight in their scorning; at Christ, because of the
meanness of his parentage and education; at his disciples and followers,
at his doctrines and miracles, sufferings and death;

and fools hate knowledge? the knowledge of Christ, and of God in Christ;
the knowledge of the Gospel, and the truths of it; they hated the light
of it, and did not care to come to it, but rather loved the darkness of
the law, and even of error and infidelity; they hated Christ, the
teacher of true and useful knowledge; they hated his person, though
without a cause; they hated him in his offices, as a Prophet to instruct
them, as a Priest to be the propitiation for them, and as a King to rule
over them; such "fools" were they, and who are therefore expostulated
with by Wisdom or Christ; which expostulations show their continuance in
these things, and the danger they were in by them, the pity and
compassion of Christ as man and a minister of the word, and the fervour
and importunity of his ministrations.

[Proverbs 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 1:23</span></span>

Turn ye at my reproof,.... Or rather "to my reproof", for the words are
not an exhortation to the conversion of the heart, or to him repentance;
but to an attendance to the external ministry of the word preached,
which reproves of sin, righteousness, and judgment; and does not design
the turning of the heart to it, which is God's work, but the turning of
the face and ears to hear it; and so the Targum,

"turn your face to my reproof,''

and not your backs, as they did, showing a dislike of it; or, as Aben
Ezra,

"turn ye to hear my reproof;''

turn your ears and listen to it, and do not pull away the shoulder, or
stop your ears that you may not hear it;

behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you; not "upon you", but "unto
you": for the Holy Spirit of God is not here designed, and the effusion
of his gifts, ordinary and extraordinary, or of his special grace; but
the mind of Wisdom, or Christ, as the word is used in [Pro
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#011). Some interpret it, "here, my
will" (d); the external revelation of his will made in the ministry of
the word, by whom "grace and truth", the doctrines of grace and truth,
"came" in their full extent, [Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017); for as the doctrines of "grace
were poured into his lips", [Psa 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002),
so they were poured out by them again, out of his heart, as out of a
fountain or well, as the word (e) here used signifies; which denotes the
large and abundant revelation of the Gospel by Christ, and is mentioned
as an encouragement to men to attend unto it; which sense is confirmed
by what follows;

I will make known my words unto you; the doctrines of the Gospel, words
of grace and wisdom, and such as never man spake as Christ did, his
enemies being witnesses; the words of peace and reconciliation, of life
and righteousness, and of eternal salvation, which were made known in a
ministerial way by Christ and his apostles; but the Jews were such fools
as to hate and despise the knowledge of these things; wherefore it
follows:

\(d\) So some in Ben Melech. (e) "fluere, vel scaturire faciam", Baynus;
"scatebrae instar effundam", Cocceius, Michaelis; "scaturiam",
Gussetius; "ebulliam", Schultens; so Ben Melech.

[Proverbs 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 1:24</span></span>

Because I have called, and ye refused,.... This is to be understood not
of the internal call of Wisdom, or Christ, which is by the special grace
of his Spirit; is according to an eternal purpose, the fruit of
everlasting love, peculiar to God's elect, and by a divine power; and is
also a call to special blessings of grace, and to eternal glory; and
which is always effectual, unchangeable, and irreversible, and can never
be refused, rejected, and resisted, so as to become void and of no
effect: but of the external call by the word, to the natural duties of
religion, and to an attendance on the means of grace; which may be where
no election goes before, no sanctification attends, nor salvation
follows, [Mat 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016); and this may be
refused and rejected, as it often is; as when men, notwithstanding that
call, do not attend on the ministry of the word, or, if they do, it is
in a negligent careless way; or, they show an aversion to it, despise,
contradict, and blaspheme it, as the Jews did, who were the persons
first called to hear it; see [Mat
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002);

I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; this is a gesture of
persons calling to others, as orators and preachers, requiring silence
and attention; and when eager and fervent, and importunate in their
discourses; it is attributed to Christ, [Isa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002); but, notwithstanding all
Wisdom's eagerness, zeal, warmth, and importunity, expressed by words
and gestures, it was all disregarded; no attention was given to it,
which is here complained of.

[Proverbs 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 1:25</span></span>

But ye have set at nought all my counsel,.... The same with "the counsel
of God", [Act 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027). The whole Gospel,
and all the truths of it; the entire scheme of salvation by Jesus
Christ, which is the produce of divine wisdom, and is according to the
counsel of the divine will, and his eternal purpose in Christ Jesus;
this the Jews set at nought, made no account of, but despised and
rejected, as they did Christ, the author of it, [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011); as also his ordinances, which go
by the same name, because of the wisdom and will of God in them;
particularly baptism, rejected by the Scribes and Pharisees, [Luk
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030);

and would none of my reproof; would not hearken to it, nor take it, nor
receive any instruction from it nor caution by it; did not like it, but
contemned it, and trampled upon it; see [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037).

[Proverbs 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 1:26</span></span>

I also will laugh at your calamity,.... By way of retaliation, measuring
measure for measure; even as they scorned him, and delighted in their
scorning, now he in his turn will "laugh" at them and their distress;
which act is ascribed to the Lord by an anthropopathy; see [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004); signifying that he should not at
all pity them, show no compassion to them, and have no mercy upon them;
but rather express a pleasure and delight in displaying the glory of his
justice in their destruction: the plain sense is, that no favour would
be shown them, [Isa 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#011). The word
translated "calamity" signifies a "vapour" (f), or cloud; denoting it
would be a very dark dispensation with the Jews, as it was when "wrath
came upon them to the uttermost", [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016); even on their nation, city, and
temple; as in their last destruction by the Romans, which is here
intended;

I will mock when your fear cometh; which is the same thing in different
words; for by "fear" is meant the dreadful calamity on which brought
dread, terror, and consternation with it, and of which they had fearful
apprehensions beforehand: wherefore this is mentioned among the signs of
Jerusalem's destruction, "men's hearts failing them for fear", [Luk
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026).

\(f\) "significat vaporem", Vatablus, Mercerus, Amama.

[Proverbs 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 1:27</span></span>

When your fear cometh as desolation,.... When such will be the calamity
that will occasion this fear, that it shall be like some desolating
judgment, as famine, sword, and pestilence, which lays all waste: and
such was the destruction of the Jews by the Romans; it not only laid
Jerusalem and the temple waste, but the whole country of Judea. These
are the "desolations" said to be "determined", or "the consummation and
that determined", which should be "poured upon the desolate", [Dan
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026);

and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; suddenly and unthought of,
fierce, and boisterous, throwing down and carrying all before it: so the
said destruction did; it threw down the walls and houses of the city of
Jerusalem, and the temple, and its fine buildings, so that not one stone
was left upon another not thrown down, [Mat
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002);

when distress and anguish cometh upon you; as they did at that time with
a witness, when Jerusalem was besieged by the Romans: what with the
sword of the enemy without, and the famine within; together with the
vast number of cutthroats and seditious persons among themselves; it was
such a time of distress and tribulation as never was from the beginning
of the world, nor ever will be, [Mat
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022). Josephus's history of those
times is a proper comment on these words.

[Proverbs 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 1:28</span></span>

Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer,.... As he called
them, and they refused to answer to his call, [Pro
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024); so it was just in him to return
no answer to them, when they called on him to deliver them from the
Romans, and save them from ruin: for this was what they called out for,
and what they expected, that the Messiah would come and deliver them;
this was what they buoyed themselves up with, and made them so desperate
to the last;

they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; this is the very
thing that Christ told the Jews, and much in the same words with these,
[Joh 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034); for when he was gone, and
they were in distress, then they sought after the Messiah, in the
desert, and in the secret chambers, and in this and the other place,
where they were told he was; but, alas! they could not find him: the
true Messiah, whom they had rejected, was come and gone, and would
return no more, until his second coming to judgment; or, however, till
he came in his kingdom and power, to their ruin and destruction; of
which coming of his the Scriptures often speak.

[Proverbs 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 1:29</span></span>

For that they hated knowledge,.... Spiritual and evangelical; the
knowledge of the Scriptures, of the promises and prophecies of them
respecting the Messiah, though they were called upon and exhorted to
"search" them; the knowledge of the Messiah, his person, offices, and
grace; the knowledge of his Gospel, and the doctrines of it; see [Pro
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022);

and did not choose the fear of the Lord; which is the beginning of
knowledge, [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007); instead of
choosing, they cast off the fear of the Lord; and by their rejection of
the Messiah, and their usage of him, it plainly appeared that the fear
of God was not before their eyes nor upon their hearts; nor did they
choose or care for the pure, spiritual, and evangelical worship of God,
introduced in the Gospel dispensation; the ordinances of Christ they did
not choose to submit to; and would neither go into he kingdom of God or
Gospel church state themselves, nor suffer those that were entering to
go in, [Mat 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013); but rather chose
their superstition and will worship, according to the tradition of the
elders, by which they made the word and worship of God of none effect.

[Proverbs 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 1:30</span></span>

They would none of my counsel,.... Neither his doctrines nor his
ordinances; nor would they attend to the wholesome counsel and advice he
gave them in his sermons upon the mount, and in other discourses of his
at other times and places;

they despised all my reproof; for their hypocrisy, uncleanness,
covetousness, and other sins they were addicted to; see [Mat
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001); but they "derided" him for it,
[Luk 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014); where the same word is
used as is by the Septuagint here. These things are repeated from [Pro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025), to observe their ingratitude,
and how just was their ruin, and what the true cause of it.

[Proverbs 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 1:31</span></span>

Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way,.... Their evil
ways; be punished according to their deserts, and receive the just
reward of their iniquities; see [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010);

and be filled with their own devices; or "counsels" (g): their device
and counsel was to put Christ to death; to deliver him to the Roman
governor, that he might be crucified, as he was: and they afterwards had
their bellyful of crucifixion, as the word (h) used signifies; such vast
numbers of them were crucified by the Romans before the walls of the
city, five hundred a day, and sometimes more; insomuch that room was
needed for crosses, and crosses for bodies (i).

\(g\) "de consiliis suis", Pagninus, Montanus; "ex consiliis suis",
Junius & Tremellius, &c. (h) "saturabuntar", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus,
Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c. (i) Josephus de
Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 11. s. 1.

[Proverbs 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 1:32</span></span>

For the turning away of the simple shall slay them,.... Or be the cause
of their being slain; even their turning away from Christ, their
aversion to him; their turning their backs on him, and a deaf ear to
him; their turning away from his Gospel, and putting it from them,
thereby judging themselves unworthy of everlasting life: in all which
they showed themselves to be the "simple" and "foolish" persons they
were; and for which wrath and ruin came upon them, and they were slain
with the sword and famine, and by one another. Some render it, as Aben
Ezra, "the rest" or "quietness of the simple" (k), &c. taking up their
rest in themselves, and in their observance of ceremonies and
traditions; and crying Peace, peace, when sudden destruction was at
hand: or a stubborn hardened rest in sin, a seared conscience; having no
sense of guilt, nor fear of punishment; living in carnal security till
death should seize upon them;

and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them; that is, the abuse of
it; leading them to commit sins, which bring destruction upon them; or,
seeing sinners live with impunity, and prosper in the world, take
encouragement from thence to indulge themselves in sin, which is their
ruin; or, being in prosperity, think it will always be well with them,
and therefore put away the evil day far from them, which comes upon them
at an unawares; which was the case of the Jews.

\(k\) "requies", Vatablus, Baynus, Mercerus, Gejerus; "quies", Junius &
Tremellius; so some in Ben Melech.

[Proverbs 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 1:33</span></span>

But whoso hearkeneth unto me,.... To Wisdom, or Christ; to the cry and
call above; to the voice of his Gospel, not only externally, but
internally; so as spiritually and experimentally to understand it, to
distinguish it from the voice of a stranger; so as to approve of it, and
receive it in the love of it, and to delight and take pleasure in it; so
as to feet the power of it, and believe it; not only give an assent unto
it, but by faith receive it, and appropriate the things of it to a man's
self: and also to the voice of his precepts, his ordinances; so as to
yield a cheerful obedience to them, from a principle of love, with a
view to his glory, and without trusting to and depending upon it. Such

shall dwell safely; as they must indeed, since they dwell in God; in his
heart, "the secret place of the most High"; and in his everlasting and
unchangeable love, wherefore they are not consumed; and in the covenant
of his grace, which is firm, and sure, and immovable; and in his power,
by and in which they are kept, as in a garrison, fortress, or strong
hold: and they dwell in Christ the Rock of ages, against which the gates
of hell cannot prevail, and on which their souls are built; and so
remain safe amidst the floods, storms, and tempests, that beat upon
them; the refuge to which they flee, the strong hold to which they turn,
and whither they run and are safe; the ark in which they ride safely,
amidst all the waves and billows of affliction and tribulation; their
place of defence, where they are safe from Satan; and are in his hands
out of which none can pluck them, the Lord their righteousness, by whom
Judah is saved, and under whom Israel dwells safely; being by his
righteousness secure from divine justice, from the curse of the law, and
from wrath to come: besides, such have the Spirit dwelling in them, who
is greater the he that is in the world; who when he, the enemy, comes in
upon them as a flood, the Spirit of the Lord lifts up a standard against
him; angels are their guardians, encamp about them; and they are the
inhabitants of a strong city, which has salvation for walls and
bulwarks; and especially they will dwell safely in the other world, in
those mansions and everlasting habitations in Christ's Father's house he
is preparing for them; which are sure dwellings, as well as quiet
resting places, as follows;

and shall be quiet from fear of evil; as they may be in the present
life, under a comfortable sense of the blood, righteousness, and
sacrifice of Christ: which, when applied and laid hold on by faith,
speak peace to the conscience, and yield quietness of mind; so that such
have no reason to be afraid of the evil one, Satan, who cannot devour
and destroy them; nor of the evil of sin; for, though they may and
should be afraid to commit it, yet not of being conquered by it, and
coming under the dominion of it, nor of being brought by it into a state
of condemnation; nor of the evil of judgments upon a wicked world; nor
of death and a future judgment; nor of hell, and everlasting damnation:
and hereafter such will enter into peace, and be free from all evils,
natural, moral, or spiritual; and from the fear of them, being out of
the reach of them all. The safety and protection of those that hearken
to Christ, and believe in him, here promised, had a remarkable
accomplishment in the believing Jews; who, a little before the
destruction of Jerusalem, were warned to go out from thence to a place
called Pella, beyond Jordan (l) as they did, and where they were safe.

\(l\) Euseb. Eccel. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 2](pro002)

</div>
