<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro028)  [Next](pro030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#001)

[Proverbs 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 29:1</span></span>

He that being often reported hardeneth his neck,.... Or "a man of
reproofs" (d); either a man that takes upon him to be a censurer and
reprover of others, and is often at that work, and yet does those things
himself which he censures and reproves in others; and therefore must
have an impudent face and a hard heart a seared conscience and a stiff
neck; his neck must be an iron sinew and his brow brass: or rather a man
that is often reproved by others by parents by ministers of the Gospel,
by the Lord himself, by the admonitions of his word and Spirit and by
the correcting dispensations of his providence; and yet despises and
rejects all counsel and admonition, instruction and reproofs of every
kind, and hardens himself against them and shows no manner of regard
unto them. The metaphor is taken from oxen, which kick and toss about
and will not suffer the yoke to be put upon their necks. Such an one

shall suddenly be destroyed; or "broken" (e); as a potter's vessel is
broken to pieces with an iron rod, and can never he put together again;
so such persons shall be punished with everlasting destruction, which
shall come upon them suddenly, when they are crying Peace to themselves
notwithstanding the reproofs of God and men;

and that without remedy; or, "and there is no healing" (f); no cure of
their disease, which is obstinate; no pardon of their sins; no recovery
of them out of their miserable and undone state and condition; they are
irretrievably lost; there is no help for them, having despised advice
and instruction; see [Pro 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#012).

\(d\) "vir increpationum", Vatablus, Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus; "vir
correptionum", Piscator, Michaelis; "vir redargutionum", Schultens. (e)
"conteretur", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, &c. "confringetur",
Schultens; so Baynus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius. (f) "et
non (erit) sanitas", Pagninus, Montanus, Baynus; "non sit curatio",
Junius & Tremellius; "medicina", Piscator.

[Proverbs 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 29:2</span></span>

When the righteous are in authority,.... Or "are increased" (g); either
in number or in riches, or in power and dominion; are set in high
places, and have the exercise of civil government and the execution of
the laws in their hands; for the protection of good men in their civil
and religious privileges, and for the punishment of evil men; for the
encouraging of all that is good, and for the discouraging of everything
that is bad;

the people rejoice; the whole body of the people, because of the public
good; a state is happy under such an administration; everyone feels and
enjoys the advantage of it; see [Kg1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020);

but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn; or "groan" (h), or
"will groan", under their tyranny and oppression, and because of the sad
state of things; the number of good men is lessened, being cut off, or
obliged to flee; wicked men and wickedness are encouraged and promoted;
heavy taxes are laid upon them, and exorbitant demands made and cruelty,
injustice, and arbitrary power exercised; and no man's person and
property safe; see [Pro 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#011).

\(g\) "cum augentur", Junius & Tremellius; "cum multiplicati fuerit, vel
multiplicantur", Vatablus, Baynus, Cocceius, Michaelis; "in multiplicari
justos", Montanus. (h) "gemet", Pagninus, Montanus, V. L. "gemit",
Michaelis; "ingemiscit", Schultens; so the Tugurine version, Mercerus;
"suspirat", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Proverbs 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 29:3</span></span>

Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father,.... He that is a philosopher,
especially a religious one, that not only loves and seeks after natural
wisdom, but moral wisdom and knowledge; and more particularly
evangelical wisdom, Christ the Wisdom of God, who is to be valued and
loved above all things; the Gospel of Christ, which is the wisdom of God
in a mystery; and the knowledge of it which is the wisdom which comes
from above and is pure and peaceable; and which lies much in the fear of
God, and in the faith of Jesus Christ, attended with all the fruits of
righteousness: such a son makes glad his father, both because of his
temporal good, since he does not waste but improve the substance he has
given him; and because of his spiritual and eternal welfare; and since
instead of being a reproach he is an honour to him; see [Pro
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#001);

but he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth his substance: his
father has given him, and comes to want and beggary; all which is a
grief to his parents: or, "that feeds harlots" (i); who live in a
riotous and voluptuous manner, and soon drain a man of his substance,
and bring him to a morsel of bread; see [Luk
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#013); and such a son grieves his
father, seeing he spends his substance and damns his soul.

\(i\) "nutrit", V. L. "pascit", Pagninus, Piscator, Gejerus, Schultens;
"pascitur", Michaelis; "pascens", Montanus, Mercerus.

[Proverbs 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 29:4</span></span>

The king by judgment establisheth the land,.... By executing, judgment
and justice among his subjects, he establishes the laws of the land, and
the government of it; he secures its peace and prosperity, and preserves
his people in the possession at their properties and privileges; and
makes them rich and powerful, and the state stable and flourishing, so
that it continues firm to posterity; such a king was Solomon, [Ch2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#008);

but he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it; that, is, a king that does
so; Gersom observes that he is not called a king, because such a man is
not worthy of the name, who takes gifts and is bribed by them to pervert
judgment and justice; whereby the laws of the nation are violated, and
the persons and properties of his subjects become the prey of wicked
men; and so the state is subverted and falls to ruin: it is in the
original text, "a man of oblations" (k); the word is generally used of
the sacred oblations or offerings under the law; hence some understand
it of a sacrilegious prince who of his own arbitrary power converts
sacred things to civil uses. The Targum, Septuagint, Syriac and Arabic
versions render it, a wicked and ungodly man; and the Vulgate Latin
version, a covetous man; as such a prince must be in whatsoever light he
is seen, whether as a perverter of justice through bribes, or as a
sacrilegious man; though it may be rendered, "a man of exactions" (l),
for it is used of the oblation of a prince which he receives from his
people, [Eze 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009); as Aben Ezra
observes; and so it may be interpreted of a king that lays heavy taxes
upon his people, and thereby brings them to distress and poverty, and
the state to ruin.

\(k\) "vir oblationam", Montanus, Baynus, Grotius, Gejerus, Schultens.
(l) "Vir exactionum", Mercerus; "qui levat exactiones", Munster; "qui
tributa imponit", so some in Vatablus; "qui tribbuta extorquet",
Tigurine version.

[Proverbs 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 29:5</span></span>

A man that flattereth his neighbour,.... That speaks smooth things to
him gives him flattering titles, speaks fair to his face, highly
commends him on one account or another:

spreadeth a net for his feet; has an idle design upon him, and therefore
should be guarded against; his view is to draw him into a snare and make
a prey of him; he attacks him on his weak side, and hopes to make some
advantage of it to himself; wherefore flatterers should be avoided as
pernicious persons; or he spreads a net for his own feet, and is taken
in the snare which he had laid for his neighbour; or falls into the pit
he dug for him, as Gersom observes; see [Psa
140:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#005).

[Proverbs 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 29:6</span></span>

In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare,.... Or, according
to the accents in some copies, "in the transgression of a man is an evil
snare", as Aben Ezra observes the words may be read; there is a snare in
sin to man himself; one sin leads on to another, and a man is snared by
the works of his own hands, and is implicated and held in the cords of
his own iniquity, and falls into the snare of the devil, out of which he
is not easily recovered; and the transgression of one man is a snare to
another; he is drawn into sin by ill examples; and, by indulging himself
in sin, the evil day comes upon him unawares as a snare; and sooner or
later he is filled with horrors of conscience, anguish, and distress;

but the righteous doth sing and rejoice; not at the snares of others,
their sin or punishment; for such a man rejoices not in iniquity, though
he sometimes does at the punishment of sinners, because of the glory of
the divine justice; and Gersom thinks this is here meant; see [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010); but rather, as he also
observes, the righteous man rejoices at his deliverance from the snares
of sin and Satan, and of the world; he rejoices in the righteousness by
which he is denominated righteous; not his own, but the righteousness of
Christ, it being so rich and glorious, so perfect and complete; he
rejoices in salvation by him it being so suitable, so, real, so full, so
free, and so much for the glory of God; he rejoices in the pardon of his
sins through the blood of Christ, and in the expiation of them by his
sacrifice; he rejoices in his person, in the greatness, fitness,
fulness, and beauty of it; he rejoices in all his offices he bears and
executes, and in all the relations he stands in to him; he rejoices in
his word and ordinances, in the prosperity of his cause and interest, in
the good of his people, and in hope of the glory of God; and even sings
for joy in the view of electing, redeeming, and calling grace, and
eternal life and happiness; he has peace of conscience now, fears no
enemy, nor any danger, and expects a life of glory in the world to come;
and oftentimes sings on the brink of the grave, in the view of death and
eternity.

[Proverbs 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 29:7</span></span>

The righteous considereth the cause of the poor,.... Not his poverty and
distress, so as to relieve him, which yet he does, [Psa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001); nor the person of the poor in
judgment, and which he ought not to do; for as he should not regard a
rich man's person, and favour him, because he is rich; so neither a poor
man, because he is poor, through an affectation of mercy, [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015); but the cause of the poor, and
the justice of that, and do him justice, though a poor man. This is to
be understood chiefly of a civil magistrate, a judge righteous; who will
take notice of and regard a poor man's cause, and take a good deal of
pains and care that he is not injured. Or, "knoweth the judgment of the
poor" (m) he acquaints himself with his case, makes himself thoroughly
master of it, searches out his cause as Job did, [Pro
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#016);

but the wicked regardeth not to know it; or, "does not understand
knowledge" (n) of the poor man's cause and case; and there being no
money to be had, he does not care to consider it, and look into it, and
get knowledge of it, and do him justice; he will not take his cause in
hand, or plead it.

\(m\) "novit justus causan pauperum", V. L. "cognoscit", Pagninus,
Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c. "novit et curat
justus judicum pauperum", Michaelis; "cognoscit justus litem tenuiem",
Schultens. (n) "non intellilget scientiam", Paguinus, Montanus;
"intelligit", Mercerus, Piscator, Gejerus, Michaelis, Schultens.

[Proverbs 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 29:8</span></span>

Scornful men bring a city into a snare,.... Such as despise dominion,
speak evil of dignities; proud and haughty men, that speak Loftily, and
with a contempt of their superiors; or who make a mock at religion, and
scoff at all that is good and serious; these bring the inhabitants of a
city into a snare, to rebel against their governors, and so into
mischief and ruin: or, they "burn a city", as the Septuagint and Syriac
versions (o); they inflame it, or blow it up into a flame; raise a
combustion in it, and fill it with strifes and contentions; and bring
down the wrath of God upon it, like fire: or, they "blow upon a city"
(p); raise storms and tempests in it; turn all things upside down, and
throw it into the utmost confusion, or blow it up;

but wise men turn away wrath; the wrath of men, by their wise counsels
and advice, and appease tumults and seditions, and restore things to a
quiet and settled state; or the wrath of God, by interposing with their
prayers between him and a sinful people, as Moses did, [Psa
106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023).

\(o\) "Inflammant urbem", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (p) "suffiant,
vel periflant civitatem", Gejerus; "diffiant civitatem", Gussetius, p.
667. "exsuffiant civitatem", Cocceius, Schultens.

[Proverbs 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 29:9</span></span>

If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man,.... Enters into a
controversy with him, either by word or writing, in order to convince
him of his folly and wickedness, of his errors and mistakes;

whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest; that is, either whether the
fool is angry with the wise man, and rages at him and abuses him, and
calls him names, or laughs at him, and scoffs at all his arguments,
reasons, and advice; yet the wise man does not cease from proceeding in
the contest with him; or he is not dejected and cast down, and
discouraged; or, as the Targum is,

"he is not broken;''

but patiently bears his wrath fury, his scoffs and jeers: or else
whether the wise man deals roughly or gently with the feel, in a morose
or in a mere jocose way: it has no upon him; he is never the better for
it; he does not acquiesce or rest in what he says like the Pharisees in
Christ's time, who are compared to surly children: who, when "piped to,
danced not"; and, when "mourned to, lamented not"; see Gill on [Mat
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016), and See Gill on [Mat
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017). The design of the proverb is to
show, that all labour to reclaim a fool from his folly is lost, let a
man take what methods he will, [Pro
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022).

[Proverbs 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 29:10</span></span>

The bloodthirsty hate the upright,.... Cain did Abel; and as the wicked
world hate all good men, and persecute them, even unto death;

but the just must seek his soul; either the soul of the bloodthirsty,
and that either the good of their souls; seek their spiritual welfare,
and pray for it, even though they are so cruel and inhuman: or just
magistrates will seek after such persons, to punish them for shedding
the blood of the upright. Or else the meaning is, that just persons seek
the soul of the upright, and make inquisition for the blood of such, to
punish for it; which comes to the same sense, as Aben Ezra observes: or
rather, such seek to defend and preserve the soul or life of upright men
from those that hate and persecute them. Jarchi illustrates it by [Sa1
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#023); the Targum is,

"men that shed blood hate integrity; but the upright seek it.''

[Proverbs 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 29:11</span></span>

A fool uttereth all his mind,.... At once; tells all he knows, all that
is in his breast; whatever he thinks, and all that he intends to do;
what or whom he loves or hates. Or, "a fool brings out all his wrath";
so the Targum, Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions: he cannot
restrain it, nor hide it; it breaks out at once, even all of it, and is
soon known, as in [Pro 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#016);

but a wise man keepeth it in till afterwards; reserves his mind, and
thoughts, and designs, to himself; and does not discover them until a
proper opportunity offers, when to disclose them is most to advantage;
or he restrains his wrath and anger, defers showing it to a proper time,
when it may answer a better purpose, and he may do it without sin.

[Proverbs 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 29:12</span></span>

If a ruler hearken to lies,.... To men that tell them in order to soothe
and flatter him, or to hurt the character and reputation of others, that
they may raise their own: rulers should not listen to and encourage such
sort of persons; for, as lying lips do not become a prince, so it is not
right to have liars about him; David would not suffer such to dwell in
his court, [Psa 101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007);

all his servants are wicked; or the greatest part of them: for a ruler
of such a disposition will take none but such into his service, that
flatter him, and calumniate others; and such a conduct, being pleasing
and agreeable to him, is a temptation to his ministers to act the same
wicked part; as is a prince, such are his courtiers; his example has a
great influence upon them.

[Proverbs 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 29:13</span></span>

The poor and the deceitful man meet together,.... Or "the usurer" (q);
who by usury, by fraud and deception, is possessed of the mammon of
unrighteousness, and is become rich; he and the poor man meet together;
and so the sense is the same as in [Pro
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#002); See Gill on [Pro
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#002);

the Lord lighteneth both their eyes; with the light of natural life, and
with the light of natural reason, [Joh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004); and so is the same as being "the
Maker of them all", in the above place; or he bestows his providential
favours on both; causes his sun to shine upon the rich and poor, the
wicked and the righteous, [Mat 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045).
Or it may be understood of the light of grace; for though, for the most
part, God chooses and calls the poor of the world, and lightens their
eyes with the light of his grace, when not many wise and noble are
called and enlightened; yet this is not restrained wholly to men of one
and the same condition of life; yea, God sometimes calls and enlightens
publicans, tax gatherers, and extortioners, as Matthew and Zacchaeus.

\(q\) "vir usurarum", Mercerus; "foenerator", Piscator, Tigurine
version; "usurarius", Munster.

[Proverbs 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 29:14</span></span>

The king that faithfully judgeth the poor,.... That truly executes
justice and judgment among all his subjects, particularly the poor, who
are too often neglected, because they cannot afford persons to plead
their cause: such a king was Solomon; and especially the Messiah, of
whom he was a type, [Psa 72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001);

his throne shall be established for ever; be secure to him as long as he
lives, and to his posterity after; justice to all men, and mercy to the
poor, are the support of a prince's throne; see [Pro
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028).

[Proverbs 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 29:15</span></span>

The rod and reproof give wisdom,.... Are the means of giving wisdom to a
child, reproved by its parent with the rod; and of driving out
foolishness from him, and of making him wiser for the time to come; he
shunning those evils for which he was before corrected, [Pro
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#015); So the children of God grow
wiser by the corrections and chastisements of their heavenly Father,
which are always for their good; and he is a man of wisdom that hearkens
to the rod, and to him that has appointed it, and learns the proper
instructions from it, [Mic 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009);

but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame; a child that
has the reins thrown upon his neck, is under no restraint of parents,
but suffered to take his own way, is left to do his own will and
pleasure; he does those things which his parents are ashamed of, one as
well as another; though the mother is only mentioned, being generally
most fond and indulgent, and most criminal in suffering children to have
their own wills and ways; and so has the greater share in the shame that
follows on such indulgences.

[Proverbs 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 29:16</span></span>

When the wicked are multiplied,.... Or "are in authority" (r); as the
word is rendered, [Pro 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002);

transgression increaseth; among the common people, being encouraged by
their wicked rulers, whose examples they follow; or as the wicked
themselves increase, in numbers, in age, in power, and riches, their
sins increase too;

but the righteous shall see their fall, from their places of authority
and power, of honour, riches, and grandeur, into a low and despicable
condition, into ruin and destruction; and that with pleasure, because of
the glory of God, his wisdom, justice, truth, and faithfulness,
displayed therein; see [Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010).

\(r\) "dominantibus impiis"; some in Mercerus; "quum praesunt impii",
Tigurine version.

[Proverbs 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 29:17</span></span>

Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest,.... Ease of mind,
satisfaction and contentment, freedom from all anxious thoughts and
cares; the correction being taken in good part, and succeeding according
to wish and design;

yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul; by his tenderness to his
parents, obedience to them, and respect for them; by his prudent
behaviour among men; by his sobriety, diligence, and industry in his
calling; by his fear of God, and walking in his ways; than which nothing
can give a greater delight and pleasure to religious parents.

[Proverbs 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 29:18</span></span>

Where there is no vision, the people perish,.... That is, "no prophecy",
as the Vulgate Latin version renders it; and which is often the sense of
the word, as the vision of Isaiah is the prophecy of Isaiah; and, in the
New Testament, prophesying is often put for preaching; and here vision,
or prophecy, signifies the public ministering of the word and
ordinances, and want of persons to administer them; no expounder, as the
Septuagint version; or interpreter, as the Arabic. This was the case in
the latter end of Eli's life, [Sa1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001); in Asa's times, and before, [Ch2
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#003); in the Babylonish captivity,
[Eze 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026); in the times of Antiochus,
[Psa 74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009); when John the Baptist and
Christ first came preaching the word, [Mat
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036); and now is the case of the Jews,
and will be till the time of their conversion. So it was in the Gentile
world, before the Gospel was brought into it, [Act
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030); and so it now is in those
places where the seven churches of Asia were; and in all Asia, which
once heard the word of the Lord, even all that large country; and now it
is not heard at all in it, but covered with Mahometan darkness. And this
is the case in all Popish countries, subject to the see of Rome, where
the word of God is not preached to the people, nor suffered so much as
to be read by them; and even in reformed churches, for the most part,
only a little morality is preached, and not the Gospel of Christ; so
that here the people are perishing for lack of knowledge, [Hos
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006); and when the witnesses will be
slain, who now prophesy in sackcloth, there will he an entire stop put
to prophesying or preaching for a while; but, when they shall rise, the
earth will be filled with the knowledge of God, through the ministry of
the word. Now, where there is no preaching, men perish in their sins;
the word being the ordinary means of grace, of regeneration, conversion,
faith, and salvation; without which, men know nothing of Christ, of
peace, pardon, righteousness, and eternal life by him: and where there
is preaching, yet it not being of the right kind, there is no spiritual
knowledge spread by it, no food for souls under it; they perish with
hunger, as the prodigal did, or are in starving and famishing
circumstances; no comfort for the people of God, who perish in their
comforts under such a ministry, [Co1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011); and poison is spread among
others; false doctrine eats as a canker, and destroys souls. Again,
where there is right vision and prophecy, or true preaching of the word,
and that is despised and neglected, men perish notwithstanding; as the
Jews of old, and all deniers and contemners of the word now, [Act
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041); and this seems to be intended
here, as appears by the following clause. The word translated "perish"
has various senses, which agree with the text. It may be rendered, "the
people become idle", or "cease" (s); from the performance of good works,
grow dissolute in their manners, and licentious in their practices: or
"they become refractory" (t); fierce, obstinate, and ungovernable, and
rebel against their superiors: or they are "made naked" (u); stripped of
their ornaments; of their privileges, civil as well as religious, which
is often the case where no vision is; as well as of all virtue and
morality, and of the blessing and protection of God;

but he that keepeth the law, happy is he: not the moral law, which no
man can keep perfectly, but the law of faith. It may be rendered, "happy
is he that observes doctrine" (w); the doctrine of the Gospel, where it
is preached; that attends to it, values and esteems it, receives it by
faith, and with meekness; blessed is he, blessed are his eyes and ears;
he sees wondrous things out of this law or doctrine, and he hears and
knows the joyful sound, which brings salvation and eternal life unto
him!

\(s\) "feriabitur", Montanus. (t) "Rebellis erit", Pagninus;
"retroagitur", Mercerus; "defecit, recedit", Vatablus; "refractarius",
Gejerus. (u) "Nadatur", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Michaelis;
"denudatur", Cocceius; "cessabit et otiosus erit, deficiet et retrocedit
atque denudatur", Baynus. (w) "qui observat legem", i. e. "verbum Dei",
Cocceius; "doctrinam", Amama.

[Proverbs 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 29:19</span></span>

A servant will not be corrected by words,.... Not by them only,
especially one that is of a servile, surly, and untractable disposition;
otherwise a good servant, and well disposed to his master, and willing
to serve him, and promote his interest, a word is sufficient for such an
one; when he is bid to go, he goes; or to come, he comes, [Mat
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009); or if he has done wrong, and his
fault is told him, he will amend another time; whereas a rough ill
natured servant will not regard words, but must have blows to correct
him;

for though he understand; what his master says, and what is his will,
and knows he has done wrong, and ought to do otherwise, which is an
aggravation of sin:

he will not answer; own his fault and promise to do better for the
future; through the surliness of his nature, and contempt of his master,
whom he does not think worthy of an answer: so the Vulgate Latin version
renders it, "he despises to answer"; thus Job was used by his servants,
[Job 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016); There is an answering
which is forbidden servants, [Tit 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009);
but this what becomes them, and is expressive of their respect and
reverence to their masters, and their ready, hearty, and cheerful
obedience to them; and which especially should be in Christian servants
to Christian masters, [Ti1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001).

[Proverbs 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 29:20</span></span>

Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words,.... Swift to speak either
before God or men; that takes upon him to speak upon a subject, or
return an answer to a question, before he has thoroughly thought of it,
and well considered it, and digested what he should say; see [Ecc
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002); or "hasty in matters" (x); in his
business; runs rashly and precipitately into things, without duly
considering within himself what is right and proper to be done, and
without taking the advice of others;

there is more hope of a fool than of him; of one that has not the gift
of elocution, or not so much sagacity in business, and yet takes time to
think, and advises with others.

\(x\) "praecipitem in negotiis suis", Vatablus, Piscator; "in rebus
suis", Mercerus.

[Proverbs 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 29:21</span></span>

He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child,.... In a very
tender and affluent way uses him with great familiarity; makes him sit
at table, with him, feeds him with dainties, and clothes him in the most
handsome manner, as if he was one of his own children:

shall have him become his son at the length: he will expect to be used
as a son; he will not care to do any servile work, or anything,
especially that is hard and laborious; he will be for supplanting the
son and heir, and think to inherit all himself; or, however, become
proud, haughty, and saucy. Jarchi interprets this of the evil
imagination, or the corruption of nature, which is in a man from a
child; which, if cherished and not subdued, wilt in the issue rule over
a man: and some apply it to the body; which, if delicately pampered, and
not kept under, will be master of the soul, instead of servant to it,
and its members be instruments of unrighteousness.

[Proverbs 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 29:22</span></span>

An angry man stirreth up strife,.... In families, neighbourhoods,
communities, churches, and commonwealths; that is, one that is given to
anger, and gives way to it, in whom it prevails and rules;

and a furious man aboundeth in transgression; or, "a master of wrath or
fury" (y); one much addicted to it: or, "the husband of wrath": wedded
to it, as a man to his wife: or, as the Vulgate Latin version renders
it, "who is easy to be angry"; is easily provoked, wrath rises up in him
at once; this leads him on to many sins, as cursing, swearing, murder,

\(y\) "dominus furoris", so Vatablus, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 29:23</span></span>

A man's pride shall bring him low,.... As the pride of Adam, in
affecting to be as gods, knowing good and evil; he lost the image of
God; was brought into a state of darkness and ignorance, into debt and
to a dunghill, to beggary and rags; filled with loathsome diseases, and
left in thraldom and bondage to sin and Satan; and so all his posterity
were brought into the same low estate. This might be exemplified in
particular persons, in Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, and others; and,
as will be in that monster of pride, the man of sin and antichrist; who
will be humbled and brought low in the midst of his pride and boasting,
[Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007);

but honour shall uphold the humble in spirit; not who are humble in
appearance only, or merely in words, having a show of humility, a
voluntary and affected one; but really in their hearts; whose spirits
are humble and contrite; who are so in spiritual things, and are made so
by the Spirit of God: they are such who are truly sensible of sin; of
their folly, and want of spiritual knowledge; of their impotence, and
weakness to do anything that is spiritually good; of their spiritual
poverty, and want of righteousness; who see that salvation is all of
grace; and that whatever they have is owing to the grace of God; that
they are deficient in all their duties, and these insufficient to
justify them before God; who submit to the righteousness of Christ, and
give all the glory of salvation to the grace of God. These, as they are
honourable, being clothed with humility, which is itself an ornament of
great price; so they are honoured with more grace from the Lord; they
are beautified with the garments of salvation; they have the honour to
have the spiritual and gracious presence of God, and fellowship with
him, who dwells with such as are of an humble spirit: these are the meek
and lowly, that shall inherit the new earth, and reign as kings with
Christ in it; and the poor in spirit, to whom the kingdom of heaven
belongs: and this honour is durable, they shall always abide in it; the
grace they have, which makes them glorious, springs up unto eternal
life; and the glory they shall have is an eternal weight of glory, a
crown of glory that fadeth not away: for so the words may be rendered,
"the humble in spirit shall lay hold on glory" (z) or "honour"; possess
it and enjoy it: or rather "shall retain" (a) it; shall hold it fast, as
the word is translated in [Pro 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018);
The sum of the proverb, in both parts, is the same with the words of
Christ, often used by him, [Mat 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012).

\(z\) "assequetur gloriam", Montanus; "potietur gloria", Vatablus. (a)
"Tenebit honorem", Piscator; "tenebit gloriam", Mercerus, Cocceius,
Michaelis; "apprehendit gloriam", Shultens.

[Proverbs 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 29:24</span></span>

Whoso is partner with a thief,.... That robs and steals, and raises away
another man's property; which to do is sinful and contrary to the law of
God, and punishable by it; and so it is to join with him in the theft,
or to devise, or consent unto it; or to receive the stolen goods, or to
hide and conceal them; or to hide the thief, or the theft, and not
declare them; see [Psa 50:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018). Such an
one

hateth his own soul; that is, he is not careful of it, he is not
concerned for its welfare as he should be; for otherwise no man,
properly speaking, hates his own flesh or body, and much less his soul;
but he is negligent of the good of it, and, for the sake of the mammon
of unrighteousness, runs the risk of the ruin of it; by which he shows
that he loves the world more than his own soul; when the profit of the
whole world is nothing to the soul of man, [Mat
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026); see [Pro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036);

he heareth cursing, and bewrayeth it not; or "does not declare it" (b);
he heareth the cursing of those that have lost their goods, and yet he
does not declare where they are, and who is the author of the theft,
though he knows; or, being suspected of being concerned in it, or, at
least, of knowing who did it, be is had before a civil magistrate, and
an oath is given him, which he takes, and yet he conceals the matter:
which is an aggravation of his sin, and brings ruin to his soul. So the
Targum,

"an oath is determined (or brought to him) and he confesseth not.''

Some understand this of a distinct evil, of hearing cursing and
swearing, and taking the name of God in vain, and blasphemy against him;
yet, through fear of incurring the displeasure of men, and being
reckoned a busy body, or through indifference and want of zeal for the
glory of God, do not discover it, or inform of it, to a proper person,
for the punishment of such; see [Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001); and render the words (c), as "he
that is partner with a thief hateth his own soul; so he that heareth
cursing, and betrayeth it not."

\(b\) "et non indicat", Junius & Tremellius, Mercerus, Cocceius,
Schultens, Michaelis. (c) So Gejerus.

[Proverbs 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 29:25</span></span>

The fear of man bringeth a snare,.... Either that which is subjectively
in man; not a divine fear, or the fear of God, that grace which is put
into the heart, for that leads to no snare, but tends to life; but a
human fear, a servile one, a distrust of the power and providence, grace
and goodness, of God, which has torment in it; which brings into
bondage, and into many distresses and difficulties, and is opposed to
trust in the Lord: or objectively, which has man for its object; a fear
of losing the favour and friendship of men, of not having honour and
applause from them; and a fear of their reproaches and reviling; of the
wrath of men, of persecution from them, and of sufferings by them, even
death itself; which has been sometimes a snare to ministers of the word,
to drop or conceal some truths of it; and to professors of religion, not
to embrace, own, and profess them; as many, through fear of the Jews,
would not profess Jesus to be the Messiah, though they knew he was, [Joh
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#013); yea, such a fear has been a
snare to the best of men, and leads into temptation and sin; as
particularly Abraham and Peter, [Gen
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#012);

but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe; that trusts in
the Lord as the God of nature and providence, and the God of all grace,
for all mercies, spiritual, temporal, and eternal, and leaves himself
and case with him; such an one is safe from men, and the fear of them,
and from snares and temptations, and sin and mischief, which come by
them: or, "shall be lifted up on high" (d); he is upon a high rock, firm
and sure; he dwells on high, his place of defence is the munition of
rocks; he is in a high tower which is impregnable, in a city of refuge
where he is safe; he is as immovable as Mount Zion; he is above the fear
of man, or danger from him; he is out of the reach of all his enemies,
men or devils; see [Pro 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010).

\(d\) "sublevabitur", V. L. "elevabitur", Pagninus, Montanus;
"exaltabitar", Vatablus; "in edito collocatur", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "sublimabitur", Cocceius, Michaelis; "celsa in arce
locabitur", Schultens, so Ben Melech.

[Proverbs 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 29:26</span></span>

Many seek the ruler's favour,.... Or "face" (e); are very desirous of
being admitted into his presence, and of having his company and
conversation; of having an opportunity to ask a favour of him, and of
receiving honour from him, and of gaining him on their side, to take
their part in a cause depending; see [Pro
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#006);

but every man's judgment cometh from the Lord; who has the hearts of
kings and rulers in his hand, and directs them in bestowing their
favours, and in determining causes; so that all things are ultimately
from the Lord; and therefore it is best to seek unto him, and trust in
him: or the state and condition and circumstances of men, as to riches
and honour, and the like, are all from the Lord, according as he sees
fit; who sets up one and pulls down another, according to his pleasure.

\(e\) "faciem", V. L. Pagninus, Vatablus, Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, so Michaelis, Schultens.

[Proverbs 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 29:27</span></span>

An unjust man is an abomination to the just,.... Not his person, but his
actions, his unrighteous actions, his ungodly life and conversation;
which a man, holy, just, and good, loathes and abhors, and cannot
forbear expressing his abhorrence of; and therefore shuns his company,
and will have no fellowship with him. And, on the other hand,

he that is upright in the way is abomination to the wicked; that man
that is upright in heart and life, that walks according to the rule of
the divine word, in the path of holiness, in the way of truth and
righteousness, he is abhorred by a wicked man; he cannot have any
pleasure in his company; he is under some awe and restraint which is
disagreeable to him; and he cannot bear the reproofs he gives him;
besides, if he is silent, his whole life and conversation carries in it
a tacit reproof, conviction, and condemnation of him. There always has
been a mutual enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 30](pro030)

</div>
