<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro010)  [Next](pro012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)

[Proverbs 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 11:1</span></span>

A false balance is abomination to the Lord,.... Under which are included
all false weights and measures, and all fraudulent practices in commerce
and dealing; which are forbidden by the Lord, and are abominable to him,
as being injurious to the estates and properties of men: and more
especially must be abominable in professors of religion, as being
contrary to the grace of God; for though there may be common honesty
where there is not the grace of God, yet there cannot be the true grace
of God where there is not honesty; for the grace of God teaches to deny
all such worldly lusts;

but a just weight is his delight; or a "perfect stone" (c); the ancient
practice being to make use of stones for weights; Now to give just
weight, and also just measure, and to do justly in all civil dealings
with men, is what God requires, and is well pleasing in his sight (d);
see [Lev 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#035). This may be understood
of balances and weights in religious affairs; the balance of the
sanctuary is the word of God, with which all doctrines are to be
weighed, and, if found wanting, they are to be rejected; this is
agreeable to the will of God: false balances are abominable to him; such
as carnal reason, vain philosophy, and the traditions of men, used by
antichrist and his followers; the harlot, described in some preceding
chapters, opposed to Wisdom or Christ, who directs to the search of the
Scriptures, and the use of them to try doctrines by, [Joh
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039); see [Act
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011).

\(c\) "lapsis perfectus", Montanus, Gejerus. (d) , &c. Phocylid. Poem.
Admon. v. 12, 13.

[Proverbs 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 11:2</span></span>

When pride cometh, then cometh shame,.... The one follows the other, or
rather keep pace together; as soon as one comes, the other comes; as in
the case of the angels that sinned, Adam and Eve, Haman, Nebuchadnezzar,
and others; and will be the case of the Romish antichrist, who, while
vaunting and priding himself in his glory and grandeur, will fall into
shame, disgrace, and destruction, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007);

but with the lowly is wisdom; or wisdom shall come, as Jarchi: the
consequence of which is honour and glory; as with Christ, who is meek
and lowly, are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; so with his
humble followers, who reckon themselves the least of saints, and chief
of sinners, and own that it is by the grace of God they are what they
are, is true wisdom; they are wise unto salvation, and in the way to
honour and glory; such humble souls shall be exalted, [Luk
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011).

[Proverbs 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 11:3</span></span>

The integrity of the upright shall guide them,.... The Spirit of God is
the best guide of an upright man; he leads into all truth, and unto the
land of uprightness, and continues to be a guide, even unto death; and
it is right to walk after him, and not after the flesh: and besides him,
the upright man has the word of God as a lamp to his feet, and a light
to his paths, which he does well to take heed to; and next to that is
the sincerity and uprightness of his heart, which will not suffer him,
knowingly and willingly, to go aside into crooked paths, or to do amiss:
integrity of heart and innocency of hand go together; such are the
followers of the Lamb, as described, [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004); see [Psa
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021);

but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them; the perverse
ways, words, and actions of such as transgress the law of God, deal
treacherously with God and men, as the word (e) signifies, shall be
their ruin: the perverse doctrines and worship of the man of sin, and
his followers, shall bring destruction upon them, [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004). The word for "perverseness" is
only used here and in [Pro 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#004); and
there plainly signifies the perverseness of the tongue or speech, and so
may have respect to corrupt doctrine.

\(e\) "perfidosorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "perfidorum",
Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 11:4</span></span>

Riches profit not in the day of wrath,.... When God takes away the soul,
and summons to judgment, and brings to it; and as riches profited not
Rome Pagan, in the day of the Lamb's wrath upon it; so neither will they
profit Rome Papal, when it will come in remembrance before God, to give
it the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath; see [Rev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015);

but righteousness delivereth from death; from the curse of a corporeal
death; from the power of a spiritual one; and from dying the second or
an eternal one; See Gill on [Pro 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#002);
the Targum is,

"from an evil death.''

[Proverbs 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 11:5</span></span>

The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way,.... Or "make it
plain" (f); that is, the righteousness of those who are perfect in
Christ, complete in him, perfectly justified by his righteousness; that
righteousness makes their way plain; it is the direct way, the highway,
the pathway to eternal life and happiness; see [Pro
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#028);

but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness; or, "in his wickedness"
(g): in his own wicked way, which he has chosen and delights to walk in;
he shall stumble therein, and fall into ruin and destruction, into hell
and damnation: or by means or because of it he will fall; his wickedness
will be the cause of his fall; as it will be the cause of the fall of
Babylon, [Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002).

\(f\) "rectam facit", Cocceius; "complanat viam ejus", Schultens. (g)
"in impietate sua", Tigurine version, Montanus, Baynus, Michaelis;
"improbitate sua", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "in injustitia sua",
Cocceius; "in improbitate sua turbulenta", Schultens.

[Proverbs 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 11:6</span></span>

The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them,.... From death, as
in [Pro 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004); and from falling by sin,
totally and finally; or into it, so as to perish eternally; as well as
it shall deliver those out of Babylon, who are the Lord's people, that
will be found therein when that is about to fall; see [Rev
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004);

but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness; in the very
act of sin, and be punished for it; taken in it as in a net, and which
they have spread for others, or as in a pit, which they have dug for
others; taken as wild beasts are taken, to be destroyed; and that in the
very midst of their wickedness, when fighting against God and the Lamb,
as the beast and false prophet will, [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020).

[Proverbs 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 11:7</span></span>

When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish,.... His
expectation of a longer life, of getting more riches, attaining to more
honour, enjoying more pleasure here, and of having happiness hereafter,
and of being delivered from wrath to come; he will then find, when he
comes to die, that his expectations in this world are vain, and those
which respect happiness in another world are ill-grounded; or when he
dies, the expectation of others that depended on him, trusted in him,
and looked for great things from him, will then be at an end;

and the hope of unjust men perisheth; which is as the giving up of the
ghost, and expires when a man does; it is only in this life, or however
it ceases when that does; he has no hope in his death, as the righteous
man has; if he does not live without hope in the world, he has none when
he goes out of it, or that will be of any use unto him: moreover, the
hope of "unjust" men to oppress and injure others ceases when they die,
[Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017). The word rendered unjust
men is by some (h) understood of strength, substance, riches; and so the
meaning may be, that such a hope that is placed in strength and riches
perishes at death. Jarchi interprets it of children, which are a man's
substance; as if the sense was, that the hope of the children of such
persons is then cut off.

\(h\) "expectatio virium", Gejerus; "spes in viribus collocata",
Michaelis; "spes confidentium in divitiis", Munster; so some in
Vatablus; "divitiarum", Pagniaus, Baynus; "roborum", Montanus, Amama.

[Proverbs 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 11:8</span></span>

The righteous is delivered out of trouble,.... One after another he
comes into, if not in this life, yet at death; which is to him a perfect
deliverance out of all tribulation; see [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014); or when the wicked die, as in
[Pro 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#007), then the righteous are
delivered from the trouble they gave them, or designed to give them;
though it seems rather to design deliverance from trouble in the first
sense, since it follows,

and the wicked cometh in his stead; as Haman did in the room of
Mordecai, and was hanged upon the gallows the other was delivered from,
and he had prepared for him, [Est
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#010); and as Daniel was delivered from
the lion's den, and his enemies thrown into it, [Dan
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024); and as in the latter day the
righteous will be delivered from all their persecutors, and antichrist
will be destroyed with the breath of Christ's mouth, and the brightness
of his coming; and then they that destroyed the earth shall be destroyed
themselves, [Rev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018).

[Proverbs 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 11:9</span></span>

An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour,.... Deceives him
with his flatteries and lies, and draws him into destructive schemes and
practices; or "corrupts" him, as the word (i) signifies, and as the
Targum renders it, with false doctrines; so, with fair words and good
speeches, such who lie in wait to deceive impose upon the simple and
credulous; and false teachers, with their damnable heresies, bring swift
destruction on men; and particularly antichrist and his emissaries,
through speaking lies in hypocrisy, corrupt and destroy many, [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001);

but through knowledge shall the just be delivered; from the hypocrite
and deceitful worker, and from being corrupted and destroyed by the
words of his mouth: Jarchi says, through the knowledge of the law, which
warns against him; but rather through the knowledge of the Gospel, which
the just man has; for as by this such escape the pollutions of the
world, so likewise they are delivered, are kept and secured, from the
error of the wicked: through a man's knowledge of himself, of his
descent from Adam, of the corruption of his nature, of the plague of his
heart, and the exceeding sinfulness of sin; of his lost and undone
state; of his impotency to that which is good, of his incapacity to
fulfil the law, and atone for sin; and of the insufficiency of his own
righteousness to justify him before God; he is delivered and preserved
from giving into the notions of the purity of human nature, the power of
free will, and the doctrine of justification by works: through his
knowledge of the person of Christ; of his offices and relations; of him
as a Saviour; of the efficacy of his blood, the excellency of his
righteousness, and the completeness of his sacrifice; and through the
knowledge of God in Christ, and of the Spirit and of his operations of
grace, as well as of the sacred Scriptures in general; he is safe from
being carried away with any errors concerning any of the divine Persons,
particularly concerning the deity, sonship, and satisfaction of Christ;
in short, as ignorance is the mother of devotion, superstition, and
error, in the church of Rome, spiritual experimental knowledge of the
above things is the best preservative from all errors and heresies which
corrupt and destroy the souls of men, to be found in that apostate
church, or elsewhere.

\(i\) "corrumpet", Schultens; so Pagninus, Montanus; "corrumpit",
Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus, Gejerus.

[Proverbs 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 11:10</span></span>

When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth,.... As it
always does, even in the worst of times; in times of public calamity and
distress, and when enemies rise up on all hands; it is well with them in
life, in death, and to all eternity; see [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010); but there are particular times
when it goes well with them, which is matter of joy to others; when they
prosper in the worm, increase in riches and honour, and are advanced to
places of authority and trust; just magistrates in a city or
commonwealth are a blessing, and so cause joy; see [Pro
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002); and when it goes well with them
in spiritual things, they increase in gifts and grace, the humble hear
of it and are glad; the city or church of God, the community of the
saints, rejoice: and as it went well with them in Constantine's time,
when Paganism was destroyed and persecution ceased; and at the time of
the reformation, when the pure doctrines of the Gospel were revived,
which were both times of joy to the city of God; so in the latter day,
when the Lord's people will be righteous, the church will be the joy of
many generations; and when the kingdom shall be given to the saints of
the most High, and the kingdoms of the world become the Lord's and his
Christ's, there will be great voices in heaven, rejoicings in the
church, and a new song sung, [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021);

and when the wicked perish, there is shouting; as there will be great
rejoicings, shoutings, and hallelujahs, when Babylon is fallen, [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020).

[Proverbs 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 11:11</span></span>

By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted,.... That is, either
by the blessings with which they are blessed; and these are either
temporal or spiritual: when good men are blessed with temporal
blessings, the place where they live is the better it; and especially
the poor, for they do not eat their morsel alone; and where there are
many of these, and in prosperous circumstances, it is the exaltation and
glory of a city taken in a literal sense; and which is the more blessed
for their sakes, as well as they themselves are a blessing to it: and as
the upright are blessed with spiritual blessings, with blessings indeed,
with the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God; when they are fruitful
and flourishing in grace, the city or church of God is in an exalted
state: or rather this is to be understood of the blessings with which
the upright bless others; and may be interpreted of the blessed deeds or
good works which they do, and which are profitable to men; or of their
blessed counsel and advice which they give on emergent occasions, and
which proves salutary, and for the good of the city; or rather for their
blessed prayers which they put up for the peace and prosperity of it,
and which succeed. So by the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, or by the
blessed doctrines of his apostles, those upright and sincere ministers
of the word, the city of the living God was greatly exalted in their
times; as it also was in the times of Constantine, and at the
reformation; and this now is a reason why the city rejoices at its going
well with the righteous, whether in temporals or spirituals. So Aben
Ezra thinks the words have a connection with the former;

but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked; by the corrupt
communication which proceeds out of their months; by their obscene and
filthy talk the inhabitants of a place are corrupted; evil
communications corrupt good manners; by their swearing and cursing,
their oaths and imprecations, by their lying and perjury, they bring the
judgments of God upon a city, to the overthrow of it. So by false
doctrines, as the faith of particular persons is subverted, so whole
cities, or visible congregated churches, have been corrupted and
destroyed, as with the Arian heresy and others.

[Proverbs 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 11:12</span></span>

He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour,.... Not only in his
heart, but by giving him opprobrious language; he speaks contemptibly of
him, either because he thinks he is wiser than his neighbour, and
therefore calls him fool at every turn; as those who are most destitute
of wisdom conceit they have the largest share of it, and despise others;
or else because he is richer than his neighbour, as the poor is
generally despised by the rich; or because he fancies he is holier than
he, as the Pharisee who trusts in himself that he is righteous, and
despises others: or a man "that wants a heart" (k), as it may be
rendered; that wants a good one, or wants grace in his heart; he
despises the counsel and advice, the admonitions and instructions, which
his neighbour gives him for his good;

but a man of understanding holdeth his peace: and will not despise his
neighbour, or give him ill language, because he is not so wise, or so
rich, or so righteous as he; if he cannot speak any good of him, he will
not speak evil of him; or he holds his peace, is silent, and will not
answer the man void of wisdom, that despises and reproaches him; he will
not render railing for railing; when he is reviled he will revile not
again; and by so doing he shows himself to he a man understanding, or of
intellects; a wise and prudent.

\(k\) "carens corde", Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus; "destitutus est
corde", Schultens.

[Proverbs 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 11:13</span></span>

A talebearer revealeth secrets,.... The Arabic version adds, in the
congregation, openly and publicly; that goes about with tales from place
to place, who is like a walking merchant or peddler, as the word (l)
signifies; who takes up his wares at one place, and exposes them to
sale, and vends them at another; so a talebearer, he goes from house to
house, and picks up tales at one place and carries them to another and
tells them; and as by his going about he gets into the secrets of
persons and families, or is intrusted with them, his character not being
known, he reveals them to others, and so breaks the trust committed to
him see [Ti1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013). The Targum and
Syriac version render it "an accuser"; and the same name is given to the
devil in the New Testament, and indeed such a man is no better;

but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter; that is
"faithful" to his friend, that trusts him with his secrets, of which
there are but few; he "conceals the matter" he is entrusted with: "the
things", as the Septuagint version; the secrets which are imparted to
him; or "the word" (m) that he has heard, and has been spoken to him in
privacy, and in strict friendship: or he "covers the matter" (n) or
thing; he hides the infirmities of his friend and neighbour, and does
not expose them as the talebearer does; see [Pe1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008).

\(l\) "obambulat ut mercator", Tigurine version; "qui incedit
nundinator", Schultens. (m) "verbum", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus,
Baynus. (n) "tegit rem", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "velat
negotium", Schultens.

[Proverbs 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 11:14</span></span>

Where no counsel is, the people fall,.... Where there is no wise and
prudent, sound and good counsel, as the word signifies; where that is
not, there had as good be none, or better; a people, a kingdom, a
commonwealth, nation, or city, fall into ruin and destruction, or into
schemes which bring them to it; they are like a ship without a pilot, or
without a helm, or one to steer it: the Targum, Syriac, and Vulgate
Latin versions, render it,

"where there is no governor;''

and the Arabic version,

"they that have no providence (or forecast) fall as a leaf falls;''

and so the Septuagint version,

"they that have no government fall as leaves,''

as leaves fall in autumn; and the word signifies the helm of government
(o), in allusion to a ship;

but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety; because what one
may miss another may hit upon; and, if they agree in their advice, it
may be the more depended upon; and, if not, yet their different
sentiments being compared together, and the reasons of them, a person
may the better judge which is best to follow, and what is fit to be
done: it may be rendered, "in the greatness" or "largeness of a
counsellor" (p), for the word is in the singular number; that is, in the
large capacity or endowments of a counsellor; in one that is abundantly
qualified for a counsellor; whose abilities are not to be questioned; in
the advice of such an one a man may safely confide; and who that answers
to this character as Jesus Christ, the wonderful Counsellor? in whose
counsel we may rest with the greatest safety; and which may be found in
his word, in the Scriptures, which David says should be the men of his
counsel, [Psa 119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024); see [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

\(o\) "gubernationes", Schultens. (p) "in amplitudine consiliarii",
Junius & Tremellius.

[Proverbs 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 11:15</span></span>

He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it,.... Or in "breaking
shall be broken" (q), ruined and undone; he engaging or becoming a
bondsman for one whose circumstances he knew not; and these being bad
bring a load upon him, such an heavy debt as crushes him to pieces. Mr.
Henry observes that our Lord Jesus Christ became a surety for us when we
were strangers, and he smarted for it, he was bruised and wounded for
our sins; but then he knew our circumstances, and what the consequence
would be, and became a surety on purpose to pay the whole debt and set
us free; which he was capable of doing: without being broken or becoming
a bankrupt himself; for he was not broken, nor did he fail, [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004). Jarchi's note is,

"the wicked shall be broken, to whose heart idolatry is sweet;''

and he that hateth suretyship is sure; or those "that strike" (r), that
is, with the hand, used in suretyship; see [Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001); such an one is safe from coming
into trouble by such means. The Targum is,

"and hates those that place their hope in God.''

\(q\) "frangendo frangetur", Michaelis; so Pagninus and others. (r)
"complodentes", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius; "defigentes",
Mercerus.

[Proverbs 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 11:16</span></span>

A gracious woman retaineth honour,.... Or "a woman of grace" (s) one
that has the grace of God in her heart, and is of a virtuous
conversation, and by both amiable and lovely to others; as she receives
honour or glory from them, which she deserves, so she retains the same.
The Targum is,

"a gracious woman divides glory;''

that is, between herself and her husband; to which the Arabic version
agrees, which renders it,

"a gracious woman raises up glory to her husband.''

Jarchi interprets it of the congregation of Israel; his note is,

"the congregation of Israel continually draws nigh to the glory of God
and his law;''

and it may be applied to the true church of Christ, which seeks the
glory of Christ, and retains the glory of Gospel doctrines, of Gospel
ordinances, of Gospel discipline, and of Gospel conversation, when the
harlot, the apostate church, has lost all honour of these things;

and strong men retain riches: some render it, "as strong men retain
riches" (t); as they, when they have got them into their possession,
keep them, it being in the power of their hands so to do, against all
that would take them from them; so a gracious woman is as tenacious of
her honour for chastity, modesty, wisdom, and conduct: or by those
"strong men", or "terrible and violent" ones, as the word (u) signifies,
may be meant the beast of Rome and his followers, cruel persecutors;
whose principal care it is to amass the riches and wealth of others,
which, when they have got, they hold fast.

\(s\) "mulier gratiae", Montanus, Baynus, Gejerus, Michaelis; "quae
gratia praedita est", Tigurine version; "uxor gratia pollens",
Schultens. (t) "ut", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Schultens. (u)
"violenti", Piscator, Schultens; "formidabiles", Gejerus.

[Proverbs 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 11:17</span></span>

The merciful man doeth good to his own soul,.... Or "to himself": a man
of mercy or grace, a liberal bountiful man, he comfortably enjoys what
God has given him, [Ecc 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018); and he
does good to others with it, and thereby does good to himself also; as
well as he is solicitous in a spiritual sense for the good and welfare
of his immortal soul;

but he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh; a sordid avaricious man
withholds from himself that which is meet, will not allow himself the
necessaries of life, nor will he provide that which is fit and
convenient for his family; he hides himself from his own flesh, and will
not communicate to the wants of his nearest friends and relations, and
shuts up his bowels of compassion against his own brother; all which may
be called a troubling his own flesh; see [Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007). R. Levi Ben Gersom interprets
this of such who place religion in afflicting and macerating the body by
fasting, which the law does not require; and it may fitly be applied to
the Papists, who do this by penances and fastings, and whippings and
scourgings; and which the apostle calls a neglecting of the body, not in
any honour to the satisfying of the flesh, [Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023).

[Proverbs 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 11:18</span></span>

The wicked worketh a deceitful work,.... Such a wicked man as before
described; that neither enjoys the good things of life he has, nor
suffers others to enjoy them; and all to accumulate riches, which are
deceitful and perishing; and who abstains from meats, which God has
created for use, under a pretence of religion, and so deceives his own
soul; and indeed every sin which a wicked man commits is a deceitful
work; it promises him that pleasure, or profit, or liberty, which it
does not give him, and in the issue is the ruin of him; and so all false
doctrines, propagated by deceitful workers, are deceitful works, by
which they deceive the simple, and at last themselves; they "obtain a
deceitful reward of their work", as Gussetius (w) renders it;

but to him that soweth righteousness; does acts of beneficence and
liberality; see [Co2 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#009); and all
other good works, or works of righteousness,

shall be a sure reward; according to what a man sows, and the manner in
which he sows, so shall he reap, [Co2
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006); or, "a reward of truth"; instead
of being given up to believe a lie, he shall receive the love of the
truth, and abide in it, which will bring him to eternal glory and
happiness; he being chosen to it through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth, [Th2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010);
and, instead of a deceitful reward, shall have a true, real, solid, and
substantial one.

\(w\) Ebr. Comment. p. 692.

[Proverbs 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 11:19</span></span>

As righteousness tendeth to life,.... Or, is unto life: not mere outward
acts of moral righteousness; these may be done where there is no
principle of spiritual life, and are no other than dead works, and will
never bring to everlasting life; indeed the best righteousness of man's
is no justification of life, nor can it entitle to it, nor is
meritorious of it. Godliness, or true holiness, has the promise of this
life and that to come, [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008); and
so here in the Hebrew text it is, "unto lives" (x), in the plural
number. Internal grace, or powerful godliness, which is the new man that
is created in righteousness, gives a meetness for everlasting life, and
issues in it; particularly the righteousness of Christ, as that is a
perfectly justifying one; it makes a man alive in a law sense, and gives
a title and claim to eternal life;

so he that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death; or, it is "to his
own death"; it issues in that: not he that is overtaken in a fault, or
falls into sin through the infirmity of the flesh and the force of
temptation, but such who eagerly follow after it and overtake it; who
give up themselves unto it, weary themselves in committing it, draw
iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope;
these often by their sins bring diseases upon them, which end in a
corporeal death; or by means of which they come into the hand of the
civil magistrate, and are capitally punished; and, however, die the
second death, or an eternal one, the just wages of sin, [Rom
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023).

\(x\) "ad vitas", Montanus.

[Proverbs 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 11:20</span></span>

They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the Lord,.... Such
as are men of perverse dispositions and principles; that are contrary to
the light of nature, the law of God, and Gospel of Christ; who, like the
Jews of old, please not God, and are contrary to all men, to all good
men; as antichrist and his followers, these work abomination, and make a
lie, and speak lies in hypocrisy; are double hearted men, hypocrites,
that say one thing and mean another; and, under the pretence of
religion, do the vilest things: such of all men are abominable in the
sight of God, and will have their portion in the lake of fire, in the
hottest place in hell, as hypocrites will, [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008);

but such as are upright in their way are his delight; or, "in the way";
there being no need of a supplement: such as are in the way, Christ, and
walk by faith in him, and in the paths of truth and holiness, in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless, who are the
"undefiled in the way", as in [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001), where the same words are used
as here: or, are "perfect" in Christ; though not in faith, nor in their
walk and conversation; yet are sincere, Israelites indeed, and walk
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. These the Lord takes
delight and pleasure in; he is well pleased with their persons in
Christ; and in their walk and works, as they flow from right principles,
and are directed to right ends, and being upright in all; see [Psa
84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011).

[Proverbs 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 11:21</span></span>

Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished,.... Though
they give the hand to one another, unite in their counsels, enter into
combinations, confederacies, and strict alliances, and join all their
force and strength together; or though with both hands, with all their
might and main, endeavour to secure themselves, yet they shall not go
unpunished. This may be exemplified in the kings of the earth, that will
join each other, and gather their armies together, to make war against
Christ; when they will be conquered, taken, and slain, [Rev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019). Jarchi interprets it, "from
hand to hand", and explains it thus; from the hand of God into their
hand shall come the reward of their work, and shall not go unpunished:
to which may be added, even though there may be a succession of parents
and children, and their substance may be handed down from the one to the
other, yet at last just punishments will take place. To which is
opposed,

but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered; these are the seed of
the church in all successive ages; the seed that are accounted of by the
Lord for a generation; particularly the remnant of the woman's seed,
that keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ; against whom the dragon, the old serpent the devil, was wroth,
and went forth to make war, in order utterly to destroy them; but they
escaped his hands, were delivered from him, and preserved by the power
and grace of God, as a seed to serve him, [Rev
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#017).

[Proverbs 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 11:22</span></span>

As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout,.... The allusion seems to be to
the ringing of swine, to prevent their rooting up the earth; which is
usually done by putting an iron ring into their snout; which is much
more proper and suitable than a gold ring, or a jewel set in gold, which
is very unbecoming such a creature; and is soon had to the dunghill, or
to some miry place, and there defiled;

so is a fair woman which is without discretion; or, "has departed from
taste" (y); from a taste of virtue and honour; lost all sense of modesty
and chastity; forsaken her husband, and given up herself to the embraces
of others. As her beauty is fitly expressed by a "jewel of gold", which
is valuable and desirable, and, rightly placed and used, is ornamental;
so she is properly represented by a swine, wallowing in the impurities
of lust; to which her beauty was the snare, and whereby it is quickly
sullied and lost. Jarchi applies this to a disciple of a wise man, or a
scholar that departs from the good way, or from the law; which he
explains by taste or sense: but it may be better applied to the scarlet
whore, or apostate church of Rome; which has departed from Christ, once
her professed husband; from the doctrines of the Gospel, and the
ordinances of it; from all taste and savour of true religion; and even
from common sense and right reason, as in the affair of
transubstantiation, and other things; and may be fitly compared to a
swine with a jewel of gold in its snout, being "decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls"; and yet "drunk with the blood of the
saints", and "martyrs of Jesus"; and wallowing in all the faith of
fornication, of idolatry, and superstition; as well as in all manner of
other sins and iniquities, [Rev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004).

\(y\) Heb. "recedens a gusta", Piscator; "cujus recessit sapor",
Schultens.

[Proverbs 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 11:23</span></span>

The desire of the righteous is only good,.... Or, "what is good" (z);
only good is the object of it. His desire is to do good, and that only;
though be does not always do what he would do: as he delights in the law
of God, after the inward man; as he is a righteous, holy, and good man,
and would be conformable thereunto, and serves it with his mind, will,
and affections; his desires are to the Lord, and to the remembrance of
his name; he desires his favour, the discoveries of his love, communion
with him, and communications of grace from him; he desires all spiritual
good things, and everything that is good, for himself and others, and
which he desires in submission to the will of God; and all things do
work for and issue in his good. Good is what he is continually desirous
of, wishing and praying for; and good is what he has eventually here and
hereafter: though there may be many irregular and unlawful desires in
him at times, and all things he has may not seem good; yet acting as a
good man, his desires are only good, and there is nothing attends him
but what is for his good;

but the expectation of the wicked is wrath; what he is desirous of,
wishing, and looking for, is wrath and vengeance upon all that displease
him, and he is angry with; he desires no good to them, but evil; he
desires and hopes for nothing but what is offensive to God, and will
bring upon him his fierce wrath and sore displeasure; so that eventually
nothing else will be the fruit and consequence of his expectation and
hope; and some are so shockingly profane, and so dreadfully hardened,
that they wait for hell, as Jarchi on the place observes; they look for
damnation and expect it, and are easy about it.

\(z\) "tantummodo bonum quid est", Michaelis; "tantum bonum", Cocceius;
"nihil cupiunt quod bonum non sit", Mercerus; "tamen bonum quid",
Gussetius, p. 39.

[Proverbs 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 11:24</span></span>

There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth,.... That scattereth "his
own", as the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions add:
that disperses his money here and there, among many poor objects,
plentifully and liberally; and his substance is so far from being
lessened by such a conduct, that, by the blessing of God, it is
increased more and more; or "become richer", as the Vulgate Latin; see
[Psa 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009). So he that disperses and
dispenses the word of God, and spreads the truths of the Gospel, and
freely and fully preaches them, increases himself in spiritual knowledge
and understanding;

and there is that withholdeth more than is meet; or, "right" or "just"
(a), by the, laws of God and men; from himself, from his family, from
his friends and relations, and from the poor of the church and of the
world; and from the cause and interest of Christ, and what is necessary
to support that, according to his ability;

but it tendeth to poverty, or "want" (b): such a man is often brought to
beggary; there is a moth and rottenness sent into his substance, which
secretly consume it: so he that withholds any truth or doctrine, that
keeps back anything that may be profitable to the saints; this tends to
the impoverishing: of his soul, and the souls of them that attend on his
ministry.

\(a\) "plus aequo", Vatablus, Mercerus, Gejerus; "plus quam aequum est",
Cocceius; "prae quam rectum est, seu plus aequo", Michaelis. (b) "ad
egestatem". Junius & Tremellius, Picator; "ad penuriam", Cocceius; "ad
rasam egestatem", Schultens.

[Proverbs 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 11:25</span></span>

The liberal soul shall be made fat,.... Or, "the soul of blessing" (c):
that is, as the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "the soul which
blesseth"; not that merely prays for a blessing upon others, and wishes
them well, and gives them good words; but bestows blessings on them,
gives good things unto them liberally, cheerfully, and plentifully; and
so is a blessing to the poor, and receives a blessing from them again;
as such also do from the Lord, by whom they are "made fat"; or are
blessed with temporal and spiritual blessings; and are in thriving and
flourishing circumstances, both in soul and body. So he that comes full
fraught with the blessing of the Gospel of Christ to others is enriched
with it himself, and becomes more and more flourishing in gifts and
grace;

and he that watereth shall be watered also himself; he that largely
shares with others, like a flowing fountain of water, shall have an
abundance communicated to him again from God, the inexhaustible fountain
of mercies. Watering the plants in Christ's vineyard is one part of the
work of a Gospel minister; "I have planted, Apollos watered", &c. [Co1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006); and such who do their work well
are watered, rewarded, refreshed, and comforted of God, being largely
taught and richly furnished for such service by him; so the Targum,

"and he that teacheth, also he himself shall learn.''

\(c\) "anima benedictionis", Montanus, Baynus, Cocceius, Michaelis;
"anima benedictioni dedita", Schultens.

[Proverbs 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 11:26</span></span>

He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him,.... That hoards it
up for a better price, in hopes of a better market; and does not bring
it out, and expose it to sale, when there is a scarcity of it; so the
Targum adds, "in famine"; or, "in straits", as the Syriac version; in a
time of distress through, famine: this will bring the curse of the poor
upon him, who will imprecate the most dreadful things on him and his
family. Jarchi interprets it of the law, and of withholding the teaching
of it; but it may be better applied to the Gospel, and the withholding
the ministration of that, and so causing a famine, not of bread and of
water, but of hearing the word of the Lord; which is done by the
Papists, by prohibiting Gospel ministers preaching the word; forbidding
the people to read it in their own language; locking it up from them in
a language they understand not; and so starve the souls of men, which
brings upon them a curse;

but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it; at a
moderate price, so that the poor may be able to come at it; such will
have their blessing; they will wish all happiness to them and their
families, here and hereafter. Or, "that breaks" (d) it; separates it
from the heap, breaks and grinds it into flour, and then sells it: or
imparts it freely; so the Septuagint version, "that communicates": and
the Arabic version, "that gives"; and may be fitly applied to a faithful
minister of the Gospel, who breaks the bread of life, and freely and
plentifully imparts it to the souls of men; and who has the hearty
prayers and good wishes of the people to whom he ministers. The master
of a family used to break the bread, as Christ often did.

\(d\) "frangentis", Montanus.

[Proverbs 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 11:27</span></span>

He that diligently seeketh good,.... Or "early"; who rises early in the
morning, as the word (e) signifies, and seeks both to do good, and to
enjoy it all the day; who, in the first place, seeks the kingdom of God
and his righteousness; who, in the morning of his youth, inquires after
the best things; and diligently pursues what is for his own good and
welfare, and that of others, and for the glory of God:

procureth favour, both of God and men: or, "seeketh favour" (f); or that
which is acceptable and well-pleasing unto God;

but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him; that seeks to do
hurt to others; that which he seeks to do to them shall come upon
himself; see [Psa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015); so antichrist,
that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity; and that kills with
the sword, shall be killed by it, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010).

\(e\) "qui mane quaerit", Vatablus; "quarens mane", Montanus; "qui mane
vestigat", Schultens; "bene consurgit diluculo", V. L. so the Targum and
Ben Melech. (f) "quaerit favorem, beneplacitum", Vatablus, Michaelis;
"benevolentiam", Junius & Tremellius, Mercerus, Gejerus.

[Proverbs 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 11:28</span></span>

He that trusteth in his riches shall fall,.... As leaves in autumn,
which are withered and dry. To trust in riches is to trust in uncertain
things; things not to be depended on, being here today and gone
tomorrow; it is like leaning upon a broken staff, which giving way, the
person falls: and so the fall of Babylon will be, while she is trusting
in and boasting of her riches and grandeur, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007);

but the righteous shall flourish as a branch; that abides in the tree,
is alive and green, full of leaves, and laden with fruit: so the
righteous are as branches in Christ, and receive life and nourishment
from him, and abide in him; and bring forth fruit and flourish, like
palm trees and cedars, in the house of the Lord, and grow in every
grace, and in the knowledge of Christ; see [Jer
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007).

[Proverbs 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 11:29</span></span>

He that troubleth his own house,.... His family, his wife, and children,
and servants; by being bitter to the one, and by provoking the others to
wrath, and continually giving out menacing words to the rest; or through
idleness, not providing for his family; or through an over worldly
spirit, pushing on business, and hurrying it on beyond measure; or
through a niggardly and avaricious temper, withholding meat and drink,
and clothes convenient for them; see [Pro
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#027); or through profuseness and
prodigality. Such an one

shall inherit the wind; nothing but vanity and emptiness; he shall come
to nothing, and get nothing; and what he does, be shall not keep, and on
which he cannot live;

and the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart; he who has both got
and lost his substance in a foolish way shall be so reduced as to become
a servant to him who has pursued wise measures, both in getting and
keeping what he has; and to whom perhaps the fool formerly stood in the
relation of a master. Such a change will be with respect to antichrist
and the saints, [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025).

[Proverbs 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 11:30</span></span>

The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life,.... Either the fruit which
grows upon Christ, the tree of life, and which they receive from him;
even all the blessings of grace, peace, pardon, righteousness, and life,
[Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007); or the fruits which the
righteous bring forth under the influence of divine grace; they are
trees of righteousness, and are filled with the fruits of righteousness
by Christ, and have their fruit unto holiness, and their end everlasting
life. Aben Ezra interprets it,

"the fruit of the righteous is as the fruit of the tree of life;''

that is, lovely, beautiful, desirable, salutary, and issues in life;

and he that winneth souls is wise; antichrist trades in the souls of
men, that is one part of his wares, [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013); but his negotiations about them
are to the loss, and not to the saving of them: whereas wise and
faithful ministers of the word, such as are here described, use all
prudent methods to gain and save the souls of men, [Co1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019); even their precious immortal
souls, which are of more worth than a world, are the immediate
production of God, made after his image, which by sin they come short
of; and having sinned, are liable to eternal death; the redemption of
which is precious; the charge of which Christ has taken, and therefore
is called the Shepherd and Bishop of souls; and which he commits to the
care of his under shepherds, who watch for them, as they that must give
an account. To "win" them is to teach them, for the word (g) has the
signification of teaching or doctrine; see [Pro
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#002); the ministers of Christ are
teachers, qualified and sent by him as such; and their business is to
teach men their state by nature, how sinful, miserable, and helpless
they are; and also Christ, and the way of life by him; that salvation is
in him, and in no other; that justification is only by his
righteousness, peace and pardon by his blood, and atonement by his
sacrifice: they also teach various other things; as the fear of God,
faith in Christ, love to him, and obedience to all his commands. To win
souls is to proselyte them and convert them to the true religion; to
bring them into a love and liking of it, and to embrace it: the souls
that Abraham got or made in Haran are supposed to be such; and the same
with those trained or instructed in his house, whom he armed for the
rescue of Lot, [Gen 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#005); the former
of which texts Jarchi compares with this, as explanative of it. The
phrases of "turning many to righteousness", done by the "wise": and of
"converting a sinner from the error of his way", whereby a "soul is
saved from death", [Dan 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003), are a
proper comment on these words: which, moreover, may be rendered, "he
that taketh souls" (h); as a fort or castle is taken, and which is
sometimes expressed by "winning"; see [Ch2
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#001). The soul of man is a hold, and a
strong hold, of foul spirits; it is Satan's palace or castle, which he
keeps and holds against Christ, but is won and taken by him; which is
usually done by means of the word, and the ministry of it, which are
made effectual to the pulling down of strong holds, [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004). Or the allusion is to the taking
or catching of birds in a snare, or fishes in a net. The souls of men
are got into the snare of the devil, and they are taken out from hence
by breaking this snare; by which means they escape the hands of the
fowler, Satan, and come into better hands: the old serpent laid a bait
for our first parents, by which he gained his point, and that was the
fruit of the forbidden tree; but the bait which wise men lay to catch
souls is the fruit of the tree of life, mentioned in the former clause,
the blessings of grace in Christ. Again, Christ's ministers are called
"fishers" of men, and are said to "catch" men, [Mat
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019); which they do by casting and
spreading the net of the Gospel; the Gospel is the net; the world is the
sea into which it is cast; where natural men are in their element, as
fishes in the sea: the casting of the net is the preaching of the
Gospel; and by means of this souls are caught and gathered in to Christ
and his churches, [Mat 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047). Once
more, the words are by some rendered, "he that allures souls" (i); which
is done, not by the terrors of the law, but by the charming voice of the
Gospel; by which souls are drawn to God and Christ, and brought among
his people: and one that is an instrument of all this had need be
"wise", and so he appears to be; he that teacheth men the knowledge of
divine and spiritual things had need to be as he is, as a scribe well
instructed in the kingdom of God; he who is to be the instrument of
converting sinners must have a mouth and wisdom to address them in a
proper manner; as he that wills a castle, or takes a fort, ought to have
military skill as well as courage; and to cast a net well requires art
as well as strength.

\(g\) "qui docet", Pagninus, Baynus, Mercerus, Gejerus. (h) "Capit",
Vatablus, Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "capit
salutari doctrina", Michaelis. (i) "Allicit", Drusius, Gejerus.

[Proverbs 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 11:31</span></span>

Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth,.... Which Aben
Ezra understands of the recompence of their good works. There is a
reward for the righteous, and which they have now in keeping, though not
"for" keeping, the commandments of God; they have the promise of this
life, as well as of that which is to come, and which is made good to
them; they have every good thing now which is proper and convenient for
them; and they shall be recompensed in the new earth, in which only
righteous persons will dwell. But it seems better, with Jarchi, to
interpret it of the recompence of their sins and transgressions; that
is, of their chastisements and afflictions, with which they are
chastised by their heavenly Father, when they sin against him; which are
all in love and for their good; and which they have only here on earth,
while they are in this world; they will be all over in another, when
there will be no more sin, and no more chastisement for it, much less
condemnation; see [Co1 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032);

much more the wicked and the sinner; who shall not only be punished on
earth as they often are, but in hell to all eternity. The Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic versions, render the whole thus; "if the righteous be
scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?" Which
words are used by the Apostle Peter, to show, that if judgment or
chastisement begin at the house of God, or with the righteous, that the
end of the wicked must be very bad; which entirely agrees with the sense
of this passage; see [Pe1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017); a
"behold" is prefixed to the whole, as a note, either of admiration, or
rather of attention to what is sure and certain, and worthy of regard
and consideration. The Targum is,

"behold, the righteous are strengthened in the earth; but the wicked and
the sinners shall be consumed out of the earth;''

which seems to agree with Aben Ezra's sense of the words; see [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 12](pro012)

</div>
