<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa067)  [Next](psa069) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 68](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 68:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 68

To the chief Musician, A Psalm or Song of David. The Targum makes the
argument of this psalm to be the coming of the children of Israel out of
Egypt, and the giving of the law on Mount Sinai; in which it is followed
by many of the Jewish interpreters: but Aben Ezra rejects such an
interpretation of it, and thinks that David composed it, concerning the
war he had with the uncircumcised nations, the Philistines and others,
[Sa2 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001), &c. And so the title of the
Syriac version begins,

"a psalm of David, when the kings prepared themselves to fight against
him:''

and Kimchi says it was composed on account of Sennacherib's army coming
against Jerusalem, in the times of Hezekiah, and so delivered by David,
under a spirit of prophecy concerning that affair; though he owns that
some of their writers interpret it of the war of Gog and Magog, in the
times of the Messiah they yet expect. But they are much nearer the
truth, who take it that it was written on occasion of the ark being
brought to the city of David; seeing it begins with much the same words
that Moses used when the ark set forward in his times, [Num
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035); and the bringing of which was
attended with great joy and gladness, [Sa2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014); such as the righteous are called
upon to express in this psalm, [Psa
68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003). And this being a type of Christ,
and of his ascending the holy hill of God, may be allowed of; for
certain it is that this psalm treats of the coming of Christ, and of
blessings by him, and of victory over his enemies; and particularly of
his ascension to heaven, as most evidently appears from [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008); and from prophecies in it,
concerning the calling of the Gentiles. Wherefore the latter part of the
Syriac inscription of it is very pertinent;

"also a prophecy concerning the dispensation of the Messiah, and
concerning the calling of the Gentiles to the faith.''

Jarchi interprets [Psa 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031) of the
Messiah.

[Psalms 68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 68:1</span></span>

Let God arise,.... Which, as Kimchi observes, is either by way of
prayer, or by way of prophecy; and in either way the sense is the same:
for, if it is considered as a prayer, it is a prayer of faith that so it
would be; or, if as a prophecy, it is certain that so it should be. And
this is to be understood of the same divine Person, whose chariots the
angels are; who is said to be the "Adonai", or "Lord" in the midst of
them; and of whom it is prophesied that he should ascend to heaven, [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017); even the Messiah, who is God
over all. And this "arising", attributed to him, may be interpreted
either of his incarnation, his exhibition and manifestation in the
flesh; which is sometimes called in Scripture a raising of him up, as in
[Act 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026); or of his resurrection from
the dead, as it is interpreted by many of the ancients; which, as it was
a certain thing, and previous to his ascension hereafter spoken of, so
it was a proof of his deity; for though it was only the man that rose,
who died and was buried, yet as in union with the divine Person of the
Son of God, and who rose by virtue of that union; and thereby he was
declared to be the Son of God with power. Or else rather this is to be
understood of his arising and exerting his power as a man of war, as a
mighty and victorious hero, on the behalf of his people, and against his
enemies; as he did when he arose and met Satan, the prince of the world,
and engaged with all the powers of darkness; see [Psa
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003); and this sense is confirmed by
what follows:

let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him flee before
him: the sense of these two clauses is the same; his enemies, and those
that hate him, are the same persons; and to be scattered and flee
express the same things; for enemies, being discomfited, flee and
scatter. Some interpret this of the watch set to guard our Lord's
sepulchre; who, upon his rising from the dead, were filled with great
fear and dread, and scattered, and fled to the priests, to acquaint them
with what was done: others, of the Jewish nation in general, who were
enemies to Christ; and hated him, and would not have him to reign over
them; against whom he rose up and exerted his great strength; came in
his kingdom and power against them; poured out his wrath upon them to
the uttermost; which issued in the utter destruction of them, as a body
politic; and in the entire dispersion of them in all countries, which
remains until quite recently. Or rather the whole is to be applied to
Satan, and to his principalities and powers; the professed enemies of
Christ, personal and mystical; who, when he arose and exerted his mighty
power in his conflict with them, in the garden and on the cross, were
spoiled and dissipated, and obliged to fly before him: and who at the
same time overcame the world, made an end of sin, abolished death, as
well as destroyed him which had the power of it; see [Num
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035).

[Psalms 68:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 68:2</span></span>

As smoke is driven away, so drive them away,.... This both describes the
character of wicked men, Christ's enemies; as their darkness and
ignorance, their will worship and superstition, and their detestableness
to God, [Rev 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#002); and the manner of
their destruction; which is as easily brought about as smoke is driven
by the wind, and is as irretrievable, like smoke that vanisheth into air
(o); see [Psa 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020);

as wax melteth before fire; whereby its consistency, form, and strength,
are lost. Respect may be had, both in this and the foregoing metaphor,
to the fire of, divine wrath, and the smoke of eternal torments; since
it follows:

so let the wicked perish at the presence of God; the appearance of
Christ, either in his awful dispensation against the Jews, or in the
last judgment; when the wicked shall not be able to stand before his
face, but shall call to the rocks and mountains to hide them from him;
and when they shall be bid to depart from him, and shall be punished
with everlasting destruction in soul and body, from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his power.

\(o\) "----et tenues fugit, ceu fumus in auras". Virgil. Aeneid. 5.
prope finem.

[Psalms 68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 68:3</span></span>

But let the righteous be glad,.... At the incarnation of Christ, which
is matter of joy to all people that believe in him; as did Zacharias and
Elisabeth, who were both righteous, and also Simeon; and at his
resurrection from the dead, since it is for their justification, by
which they are denominated righteous; as did the disciples of Christ,
and as do saints in all ages; who know the power of his resurrection,
and the influence it has on the regeneration of their souls, the
justification of their persons now, and the resurrection of their bodies
hereafter; and at the destruction of the enemies of Christ and theirs;

let them rejoice before God; in the presence of him; enjoying communion
with him; having views of interest in him; as they do when this is the
case, and as they will when they shall appear before him, and stand at
his right hand at the last day, clothed with his righteousness, and
having palms in their hands;

yea, let them exceedingly rejoice; as they have just reason to do, in
his person, grace, righteousness, and salvation. All these expressions
denote the greatness, frequency, fervency, fulness, and continuance of
their joy. They may be rendered in the future, "but the righteous shall
be glad" (p), &c. so the Targum.

\(p\) "laetabuntur, exultabunt, et gaudebunt", Pagninus, Montanus,
Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Psalms 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 68:4</span></span>

Sing unto God,.... Manifest in the flesh, risen from the dead, ascended
on high, set down at the right hand of his divine Father; having exerted
his great strength in their redemption; and therefore should sing the
song of redeeming love, with grace and melody in their hearts, unto him;

sing praises to his name: to the honour of his name Jesus, a Saviour,
because of the great work of salvation wrought out by him; give him all
the praise and glory of it, which due unto his name;

extol him that rideth upon heavens: having ascended above them, and
being higher than they, and so is exalted above all blessing and praise;
and uses his power and greatness for the help of his people: see [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026). Some choose to render the
words, "prepare the way" (q), as John the Baptist is said to do before
him, [Isa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003); "for him that rideth
through the deserts", or "fields" (r); as he did through the fields of
Judea on an ass; and through the nations of the world, in the ministry
of the word, carried thither by his apostles; whereby places, comparable
to deserts for their barrenness and unfruitfulness, became like the
garden of the Lord: or rather, "that rideth in the west"; it being at
the west end of the tabernacle and temple, where the cherubim were, on
which Jehovah rode, they being his chariot;

by his name JAH; or Jehovah; which being a name incommunicable to
creatures, and given to Christ, shows him to be the most High; a
self-existent Being, the immutable and everlasting "I AM"; which is, and
was, and is to come; from whom all creatures receive their being, and
are continued in it; and who is also Jehovah our righteousness; and by,
in, and because of this name, is he to be extolled and magnified;

and rejoice before him; See Gill on [Psa
68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003).

\(q\) "elevate viam lapidibus", Vatablus; "parata viam", Gejerus; "make
an highway", Ainsworth. (r) "per deserta", Hieron. Theodoret.
Bugenhagius, aliique in Michaelis; "in campestribus", Piscator,
Cocceius; "in campis, vel per campos", Gussetius, p. 641. "in the
deserts", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 68:5</span></span>

A father of the fatherless,.... In a literal sense, so as to show mercy
to them, take care of then), and protect them; and this is a character
which the great God often assumes, partly to express his power and
providence over such, and partly to signify his tenderness, mercy, and
goodness to them; and in which he should be imitated by civil
magistrates, and by all good men: for it was not only a law in Israel to
show regard to such, and take care not to afflict them, but it is also a
branch of pure undefiled Christian religion, [Jam
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027), in attending to which we
resemble the great Author of it, who is here intended. Moreover, this
may be understood in a spiritual sense of such who are deserted by their
friends, or are called to leave father and mother for the sake of Christ
and his Gospel; and who are like fatherless ones, in an helpless
condition in themselves, and are sensible of it; and will not trust in
the creature, nor in any works of their own, but apply to Christ, where
they have help and salvation, in whom the fatherless find mercy, [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003); and who afterwards, when they
are without the presence of Christ, and sensible communion with him, are
like orphans or fatherless children; but Christ, who is the father of
such, will not leave them so, will have pity on them, show favour to
them, provide everything needful for them, and will come and visit them,
as in [Joh 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018); where the word
"orphans" or "fatherless" is used of Christ's disciples;

and a Judge of the widows; of such who are widows indeed in a literal
sense, and especially that are believers, his elect that cry unto him;
see [Luk 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002); and of such who are so
in a spiritual sense; even of the whole church of Christ, who may, even
now, be said to be in a widowhood estate, as well as under the former
dispensation; since Christ, her bridegroom, is gone to heaven, and who
yet, in the mean time, is her Judge, protector, and defender; and when
she is made ready for him, as a bride adorned for her husband, will come
and take her to himself, and she shall remember the reproach of her
widowhood no more, [Isa 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004);

is God in his holy habitation: in heaven, the habitation of his
holiness, where is Christ the high and Holy One; and has respect to the
poor and lowly, the fatherless and the widow: or in his church, his holy
temple, where he dwells and walks, and grants his gracious presence, and
will do to the end of the world, according to his promise; or in his
holy human nature, the temple and the tabernacle, in which the Godhead
dwells.

[Psalms 68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 68:6</span></span>

God setteth the solitary in families,.... Which the Jewish writers
generally understand of an increase of families, with children in lawful
marriage; see [Psa 113:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009); an instance
of which we have in Abraham and Sarah; from which single or solitary
ones, when joined in marriage, sprung a numerous offspring, [Isa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002). And to this sense the Targum
paraphrases the words;

"God is he that joins, couples single ones into a couple, as one:''

some copies add,

"to build an house out of them;''

that is, a family; see [Rut 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011). But
it may be better interpreted of the fruitfulness and increase of the
church with converts, under the Gospel dispensation, even from among the
Gentiles; who were before solitary, or were alone, without God and
Christ, and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel; but being called and
converted by the ministry of the word, were brought into and placed in
Gospel churches, or families; see [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001); and may be applied to particular
persons, who, before conversion, may be said to be "solitary" or alone;
living without God, the knowledge and fear of him, and fellowship with
him, being alienated from the life of him through ignorance; and without
Christ, and communion with him, he not dwelling in them, nor they in
him; and also sensual, not having the Spirit, his graces and fruits;
being destitute of faith, hope, and love: and, moreover, aliens from the
people of God, having no society with them, being in a state of solitude
and darkness, and under the power of sin and Satan; helpless and
"desolate", as the word here used rendered, [Psa
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016). But, in effectual calling, such
are brought out of this dismal state, and being drawn with the cords of
love by the Spirit, to the Father and the Son, and brought to a
spiritual acquaintance with them, they are "set in families", or placed
in Gospel churches; which, as families, have a master over them, who is
Christ the Son and firstborn, of whom they are named; where are saints
of various ages, sizes, and standing; some fathers, some young men, and
some children; where are provisions suitable for them, and stewards to
give them their portion of meat in due season, who are the ministers of
the word; and laws and rules, by which they are directed and regulated,
and everything is kept in good decorum;

he bringeth out those which are bound with chains; as Peter and others
literally, [Act 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#005); or rather it is
to be understood spiritually of such as are bound with the chains of
their own sins, and are under the power of them, with the fetters of the
law, in which they are held, and who are led and kept captive by Satan;
those Christ the Son makes free, proclaims liberty to them, says to such
prisoners, Go forth; and, by the blood of his covenant, sends them
forth, and directs them to himself, the strong hold, as prisoners of
hope; see [Isa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). The Septuagint
and Vulgate Latin versions render it, "he bringeth forth the prisoners
with fortitude"; so Apollinarius, "with his great power and strength";
and the Syriac version, with prosperity; or in a pompous manner, as the
Targum. But the words may be better rendered, "he bringeth forth the
prisoners", either as Ainsworth, "into fit (and commodious) places", or
rather, "into the conveniencies" or "commodities": that is, of life,
such as prisoners are destitute of;

but the rebellious dwell in a dry land; meaning the Jews, to whom Christ
came, and whom they rejected, reviled, hated, and would not have him to
reign over them, and were a gainsaying and disobedient people; for which
their land was smitten with a curse, and in the time of their wars
became a dry land; when famine and pestilence were everywhere, and such
tribulation as was never known, [Isa
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021). Moreover, the nations of the
world, among whom they are dispersed, are a dry land to them; and even
such places as are become fruitful through the preaching of the Gospel
are no other to them, who neither do hear it, nor will they hear it; and
they are like persons in a dry and thirsty land, vainly expecting a
Messiah, who will never come. This may also be applied to all that obey
not the Gospel of Christ, who will be punished with everlasting
destruction from his presence, and shall not have a drop of cold water
allowed them to cool their tongue. The allusion may be thought to be to
the Jews, that murmured and rebelled against God, and vexed his Spirit
in the wilderness, where their carcasses fell; and so dwelt in a dry
land, and entered not into rest, or the land of Canaan. The Septuagint,
Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions, render it, "in graves";
Apollinarius paraphrases it,

"he bringeth the dead out of the graves to light.''

[Psalms 68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 68:7</span></span>

O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people,.... In the pillar of
cloud, and in the pillar of fire, as the Targum adds; and this divine
Person was the Son of God, the Angel of his presence, in whom his name
was, even his name JAH or Jehovah before mentioned;

when thou didst march through the wilderness; at the head of the
Israelites, leading, guiding, and directing them; providing for them all
things necessary, and protecting them against their enemies. And so
Christ goes before his people, as they pass through the wilderness of
this world; and does the like good offices for them, until he, as the
great Captain of their salvation, brings them safe to glory: for what is
here said is taken notice of as a resemblance of what he now does, or
has done, under the Gospel dispensation, to which this psalm belongs;
particularly of his marching through the wilderness of the Gentile
world, in the ministry of the word by his apostles, wherein he went
forth conquering and to conquer.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 68:8</span></span>

The earth shook,.... Not only about Sinai, but in other places; see [Psa
114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001). It may also design the dread
and trembling of the inhabitants of the earth, when they heard of the
wonderful things God did for his people, [Exo
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014);

the heavens also dropped at the presence of God; the Targum supplies,
dew; to which may be added, quails and manna: though it rather seems to
design a large shower of rain, which followed the lightning and thunder,
when the law was given;

even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel:
it is said to quake greatly, [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018). The words of this verse and
[Psa 68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007) seem to be borrowed out of
the song of Deborah, [Jdg 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004). Like
effects followed the promulgation of the Gospel, even a shaking of the
heavens and of the earth as an emblem of the removing of the ceremonial
rites and Mosaic ordinances. Let it be observed, that Christ, who went
before the Israelites in the wilderness, and whom they tempted and
rebelled against, is called the God of Israel.

[Psalms 68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 68:9</span></span>

Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain,.... Not of water literally
taken, as when the Israelites passed through the sea, [Psa
77:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017); or when the thunderings and
lightnings were on Mount Sinai, at the giving of the law, which are
commonly attended with rain, [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016); or in the land of Canaan, which
was the land that drank in the water of the rain of heaven, [Deu
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011); nor the rain of manna and of
quails, as Arama, [Exo 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004); but
either the effusion of the Holy Spirit, ordinary or extraordinary; that,
on the day of Pentecost, in consequence of Christ's ascension,
prophesied of in this psalm, was a "plentiful" one indeed; when the
disciples were filled with the Holy Ghost, and baptized with it: yea,
the ordinary measure of the Spirit's grace in conversion is abundant,
and exceeding abundant; it is shed abundantly through Christ, and
superabounds sin, and may be called, as the words here signify, "a rain
of liberalities" (s), or a free and liberal rain; for it comes from the
free grace of God, and makes those on whom it descends a willing people
in their obedience. The Spirit of God is a free Spirit; and, where he
is, there is liberty, in the exercise of grace, and in the discharge of
duty. Or else the ministration of the Gospel (t) is meant; which is
compared to rain, [Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002). This,
especially in the first times of the Gospel, was a very large and
plentiful one; it being sent all over the world, and brought forth fruit
in every place: this was also a "liberal" one, flowed from the free
grace of God; the subject of it is free grace; and the tendency and
effect of it are, to make men free from the bondage of the law, and the
spirit of bondage which that induces. The Targum is,

"thou hast let down the dews of quickening, and the rains of good
pleasure;''

grace, or free favour;

whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance when it was weary; that is,
the church, as the Targum explains it; the inheritance of Christ, which
he has chosen, the Father has given him, and he possesses: the people of
God, "weary" with the burdensome rites and ceremonies of the law; with
their own sins and corruptions, a burden too heavy for them to bear;
with the sins of others, among whom they dwell; with the temptations of
Satan, with which they are annoyed; with the persecutions of the men of
the world, which make them weary sometimes, and faint in their minds;
and with the common afflictions of life, which often make them weary of
life itself. Now, by the plentiful ministration of the doctrines of the
Gospel, accompanied with the Spirit and grace of God, the hearts of the
Lord's people are refreshed, as the weary, dry, and thirsty land, is
with a comfortable shower of rain; and by it weary souls have rest, or
at least are directed by it to Christ, where they find it: and as the
earth is "prepared" (u), as the word used signifies, by rain, for the
nourishment of plants; so is the church by the Gospel, whose plants are
an orchard of pomegranates, for the reviving and fructifying of those
who are planted in it; whereby they appear to be trees of righteousness,
and the planting of the Lord; and so are confirmed, settled, and
established in the house of God, and in the truths of the Gospel.

\(s\) "pluviam munificentiarum", Montanus; "vel liberalitatum",
Vatablus, Gejerus, Michaelis; so Ainsworth; to the same purpose the
Tigurine version, Cocceius, Junius & Tremellius. (t) "Dicitur de
pluvia", Psal. lxviii. 10. "quae effusionem Spiritus sancti, et
praeconium evangelii designat". Stockius, p. 660. (u) "parasti eam",
Michaelis; "praeparas", Gejerus.

[Psalms 68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 68:10</span></span>

Thy congregation hath dwelt therein,.... That is, in the Lord's
inheritance, in the midst of his church and people. The word for
"congregation" signifies "beasts" or "living creatures" (w): some
understand them of the Gentiles, who, before the Gospel came among them,
were comparable to such; but, under the Gospel dispensation, being
called and taken out by it, were put among the people of God, and dwelt
in his inheritance. Though, without any limitation, it may be applied to
all that are quickened and made alive by the grace of God; to all that
are written among the living in Jerusalem; and particularly to the
ministers of the Gospel, who are signified by the four living creatures,
in Ezekiel's vision and in John's Revelation; though not to the
exclusion of any living believer, who has a name and a place here, and
who are fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God:

thou, O God, hast prepared of thy goodness for the poor; blessings of
goodness, spiritual blessings, blessings of grace and of glory; which
flow from divine goodness, are in themselves good, and in their effects;
and these were prepared in the covenant of grace and in Christ from all
eternity; and that for persons poor and mean, indigent and helpless; and
so the goodness of God in preparing them appears to he free and
unmerited. The Targum is,

"thou hast prepared an host of angels to do good to the poor of God.''

Arama interprets it of the manna.

\(w\) , Sept. "animalia tua", V. L. so Eth. Syr. Arab. & Cocceius;
"pecus tuum", Musculus, and some in Vatablus.

[Psalms 68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 68:11</span></span>

The Lord gave the word,.... The word of the Gospel to his apostles. He
committed the word of reconciliation to them; he intrusted them with it,
as a sacred depositum; he gave gifts unto them, qualifying them for the
ministration of it; he gave them a commission to preach it; and he gave
them a door of utterance to speak it as it should be, and an opportunity
to publish it. The Targum wrongly interprets it of the word of the law;

great was the company of those that published it; there were in our
Lord's time twelve apostles and seventy disciples, who were sent out to
preach the Gospel; and many more in the times of the apostles, and
since. The word for "company" signifies an "army" (x): Christ's
ministers are soldiers, and war a good warfare; they have weapons which
are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through God, and they are made
to triumph in Christ in every place. And the word rendered "those that
published" is in the feminine gender; not as suggesting that women would
be preachers of the Gospel under the New Testament dispensation, for
that is forbidden, [Co1 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034); but in
allusion to the custom of women in Israel publishing the victories
obtained by their armies and generals; see [Sa1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007); and it may be it is used to
denote the weakness of Gospel ministers in themselves, who have the
treasure of the word put into their earthen vessels, that the power may
appear to be of God, and not of man; so ministers are called maidens,
[Pro 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#003); and this same word is used
of them in [Isa 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009). And it may be
observed, that notwithstanding it is of the said gender, yet it is by
the Targum interpreted of men, thus;

"but Moses and Aaron evangelized the word of God to the great army of
Israel.''

And it may also be observed, that this word which signifies a
"publishing of good news", is derived from a root which signifies
"flesh" denoting, that the good tidings of the Gospel, or of peace and
pardon, righteousness, life, and salvation, published in it, are by an
incarnate Saviour, or through his assumption of our flesh, and suffering
in it.

\(x\) "exercitus", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 68:12</span></span>

Kings of armies did flee apace,.... Or "they fled, they fled" (y); or
"they flee, they flee". This is either the subject matter of the word
"published", the words of the publishers so saying; or the effect of the
publication of the Gospel: for though some, by these kings of armies,
understand the apostles either fleeing from place to place because of
persecution, or running to and fro, as they interpret the words, to
spread the Gospel; yet they rather intend the enemies of the Gospel, and
the chief of them that opposed themselves to it; namely, Roman emperors
and kings, and who fled before it; particularly at the time of the
downfall of Paganism, when they fled to the mountains and hills, and
called upon them to hide them from Christ, [Rev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015);

and she that tarried at home divided the spoil; the church, compared to
a woman that keeps at home, [Tit 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#005),
who shared in the spoils token out of the hands of Satan, and from among
the Gentiles, even converted souls, brought unto her. What is promised
to Christ, [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012); is said of the
church; she being made more than a conqueror through him, and sharing in
all his victories and spoils. It denotes the certain and easy success of
the Gospel ministry, attended with a divine power, and the advantages
thereof to the church of Christ; this was particularly true of the
church in the times of Constantine.

\(y\) "fugiebant, fugiebant", Pagninus, Montanus; "fugerunt, fugerunt",
Tigurine version, Musculus.

[Psalms 68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 68:13</span></span>

Though ye have lain among the pots,.... Kimchi takes these words to be
the words of the women, or of the psalmist addressing the Israelites
going out to war; that though they should lie in a low, dark, and
disagreeable place, in the camp, in the open field, exposed to wind and
weather; yet they should be fair and beautiful, and be loaded with gold
and silver, the spoil of the enemy. But Fortunatus Scacchus (z) refers
them, much better, to the encampment of the Israelites in their tents,
and to the disposition and order of their army going to battle: the body
of the army in the middle, and the two wings, right and left, on each
side; whose glittering armour of gold and brass, the rays of the sun
striking on them, are fitly resembled by the colours on the wings and
back of a dove. Another learned writer (a) thinks they are an address to
the wings of the dove; that is, to the dove itself, meaning the Holy
Spirit, expostulating with him how long he would dwell within the limits
and borders of the land of Canaan; which was not long after the
ascension of Christ, for soon was the gift of the Holy Ghost poured down
upon the Gentiles, But rather they are an address to the people of
Israel; intimating, that though they had been in adversity, and their
lives had been made bitter with hard bondage, in mortar and in brick,
and in all manner of service in the field; and had lain among the brick
kilns and furnaces when in Egypt; and in the times of the Judges had
suffered much from their neighbours, by whom they were frequently
carried captive; and had been in affliction in the times of Saul; yet
now in prosperous circumstances in the times of David, who had conquered
their enemies, and enlarged their dominions, and restored peace; and
especially would be more so in the days of Solomon, when they enjoyed
great plenty and prosperity, and silver was made to be as the stones of
the street. Though it is best of all to apply the words to the church
and people of God in Gospel times; and they may describe their state and
condition by nature and by grace, in adversity and in prosperity: the
former in this clause, in which there is an allusion to scullions, or
such as lie among coppers and furnaces, and are black and sooty; and so
it describes the Lord's people before conversion, who are black with
original sin and actual transgressions; who being transgressors from the
womb, and as long as they live and walk in sin, and have their
conversation with the men of the world, may be said to lie among the
pots: and this may also be expressive of the church of Christ being in
adversity, and black with the sun of persecution smiting her; and she
might be said to lie among the pots while the ten Heathen persecutions
lasted, and also in the reign of antichrist; during which time the
church is in the wilderness, and the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth;

yet shall they be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her
feathers with yellow gold: alluding to the white silver colour of some
doves. Such were the white doves Charon of Lampsacum speaks of (b), seen
about Athos, which were like the white crow Ovid calls (c) the silver
fowl with snowy wings: and also it may be to the time when they become
of a golden colour, at which time they are fit for sacrifice, as the
Jews (d) observe; or to the different appearances of them, according as
the rays of light and of the sun differently fall upon them. So the
philosopher (e) observes, that the necks of doves appear of a golden
colour by the refraction of light. And this describes the saints and
people of God as they are by grace. They are comparable to the dove on
many accounts: like doves of the valleys, everyone of them mourn for
their iniquities; like the trembling and fearful dove, tremble at the
apprehensions of divine wrath, and judgment to come under first
convictions; and are fearful of their enemies, and of their own state;
are humble, modest, and meek; think the worst of themselves, and the
best of others; flee to Christ for refuge, and to ordinances for
refreshment; are chaste and affectionate to Christ, and harmless and
inoffensive in their lives and conversations, [Eze
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016). Being "as the wings of a dove
covered with silver" may denote the purity of doctrine held by them; the
words of the Lord being as silver purified seven times, [Psa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006); and the preciousness and
sincerity of their faith, by which they mount up with wings as eagles;
and the holiness of their conversation, being as becomes the Gospel of
Christ: and being as the "feathers" of a dove covered "with yellow gold"
may denote their being adorned with the graces of the Spirit, as faith,
hope, and love; which are more precious than gold that perisheth, and
are called chains of gold, [Sol 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010);
see [Pe1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007); or their being clothed
with the righteousness of Christ, signified by gold of Ophir, and
clothing of wrought gold, [Psa 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009);
or their being enriched with the unsearchable, solid, substantial, and
durable riches of Christ, [Rev 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018).
And both may describe also the prosperous estates of the church, either
in the first ages of Christianity, when she was clothed with the sun,
and had a crown of twelve stars on her head, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001); or in the latter day, when her
light will be come, and the glory of the Lord will rise upon her; when
her stones will be laid with fair colours, and her foundations with
sapphires; when she shall, have the glory of God upon her, and be as a
bride adorned for her husband, [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001).

\(z\) Elaeochrism. Sacr. l. 3. c. 24. (a) Gusset. Comment. Heb. p. 884.
(b) Apud Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 1. c. 15. (c) Metamorph. l. 2. Fab. 7.
(d) Maimon. Issure Mizbeach, c. 3. s. 2. (e) Aristotel. de Color. c. 3.
Vid. Lucret. l. 2. v. 800.

[Psalms 68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 68:14</span></span>

When the Almighty scattered kings in it,.... His inheritance, his
congregation, the church, [Psa 68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009).
Which some understand of his diffusing, and spreading and giving, in
large numbers, ministers and preachers of the Gospel, pastors and
teachers; who are kings and spiritual governors, are over churches, and
have the rule over them in the Lord: and so Jarchi interprets them of
the disciples of the wise men. Or they may be understood of the Lord's
bringing into his churches such as are made kings and priests unto God,
and in whose hearts grace reigns; and even of kings, in a literal sense,
who will be brought into the church in the latter day, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023). Though they may be interpreted
of wicked kings, and the destruction of them "by it" (f), the dove, the
church of Christ; which will be done at the battle of Armageddon, at
which time we read of the church being clothed in white, as follows; see
[Rev 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014). The name of "Almighty"
well agrees with Christ, [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008); or
"Shaddai", who is sufficient, all sufficient; and whose grace is
sufficient for his people, [Co2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009);

it was white as snow in Salmon; a mountain near to Shechem, [Jdg
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#048); which seems to have had its name
from the shady trees upon it; and which also, as it seems from hence,
was sometimes covered with snow; as was Lebanon, so called from the
whiteness of the snow on it; and Olympus is called snowy by Homer, from
the snow continually on it (g). Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it, "in
darkness", or "in the shadow of death"; denoting, as Ainsworth observes,
light in darkness; joy in tribulation: but rather it may design the
purity of the church and people of God, through the imputation of
Christ's righteousness to them, which is as fine linen, clean and white;
and through his pardoning blood, whereby their scarlet and crimson sins
are as white as wool, as white as snow; and through the sanctifying
grace of the Spirit, by which they are washed and cleansed, and made all
glorious within; and through the holiness of their lives and
conversations, they hating the garment spotted with the flesh; and
washing their garments, and making them white in the blood of the Lamb:
or they may be said to be so, as having got the victory over all their
enemies; and especially this will be the case when the kings of the
earth will be scattered and destroyed by the Almighty Saviour, [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009).

\(f\) "per eam, vel propter eam", Gejerus. (g) Iliad. c. v. 420. & 18.
v. 615.

[Psalms 68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 68:15</span></span>

The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan,.... The church is the hill of
God, an excellent and supereminent one, and in which he dwells, as is
said in [Psa 68:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016); called an hill for
its visibility, and especially as it will be in the latter day, when it
will be established and exalted above the mountains and hills, the
kingdoms of this world, [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); this
is compared to the hill of Bashan for fertility and fruitfulness; hence
we read of the kine and bulls, the rams and lambs, and fatlings of
Bashan, and of the oaks thereof, [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014), [Isa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013); the ordinances of the church are
green pastures, where his people become fat and flourishing, [Psa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002);

an high hill, as the hill of Bashan; or "an hill of eminences" (h); it
had several tops, or little hills that rose up from it; so the church of
Christ, though but one hill or church in general, yet there are several
little hills belong unto it, or particular congregational churches, of
which it consists: for "a mountain abounding with cheese" (i); which fed
much cattle, and these produced much milk, of which large quantities of
cheese were made, and so is expressive of the fruitfulness of it.

\(h\) "mons gibborum", Montanus; "vel eminentiarum", Gejerus; "monte
frequente gibbis", Junius & Tremellius; "mons fastigiorum", Cocceius.
(i) "Mons qui caseis abundat", Tigurine version.

[Psalms 68:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 68:16</span></span>

Why leap ye, ye high hills?.... Meaning the kingdoms of this world that
lift up themselves above, and look with contempt upon the interest,
kingdom, and church of Christ; lie in wait for it, leap upon it, insult
over it, and endeavour to crush and extirpate it; but all in vain; these
high hills and mountains are nothing before Zerubbabel King of saints;
his church is built on a rock, and the gates of hell cannot prevail
against it; the little stone cut out of the mountain without hands will
become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth, and break in pieces
and consume the kingdoms of it: the word in, the Arabic language,
signifies "to lie in wait", as Jarchi from R. Moses Hadarsan observes;
and to look out, and leap upon the prey; so R. Hai in Ben Melech says,
it has the signification of looking, observing, hoping, or waiting, in
the Arable language (k);

this is the hill which God desireth to dwell in; as in [Psa
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013); the Word of the Lord, as the
Targum; the essential Word, the Messiah: his desire was towards his
church and people, in eternity, in time, and now is; he has chosen and
desired them for his habitation, and in the midst of them he delights to
be, [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013);

yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever: he dwells in his church now by
his gracious presence; he will dwell in the New Jerusalem church state
personally for the space of a thousand years; and after that he will
dwell with and among his people to all eternity; see [Psa
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014).

\(k\) "Ratzad, insidiatus fuit, uti praedae leo", Golius, col. 991.
Castel. col. 3633.

[Psalms 68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 68:17</span></span>

The chariots of God are twenty thousand,.... By which are meant the
angels, as the following clause shows; called "chariots", because they
have appeared in such a form, [Kg2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011); and because, like chariots of
war, they are the strength and protection of the Lord's people; and
because of their swiftness in doing his work; and because they are for
his honour and glory: they are the chariots of God, in which he rides
about the world doing his will; they are the chariots in which Christ
ascended up to heaven, and in which he will descend at the last day; and
in which he now fetches the souls of his people to him at death, and
will make use of them at the resurrection to gather them to him, when
their bodies are raised by him: their number is very great, and in other
places is mentioned as greater, [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010); Christ speaks of twelve legions
of them, [Mat 26:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053); there is a
multitude of them, and they are said to be even innumerable, [Luk
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013); which is observed, both for the
glory of God, and for the safety of his people: even "thousands of
angels"; the word for "angels" is only used in this place; Kimchi and
Ben Melech take it to be one of the names of angels by which they were
called: some derive it from a word which signifies "peaceable and
quiet"; as expressive of the tranquil state in which they are in heaven,
always beholding the face of God there: others from a word which
signifies "sharp", as Jarchi; and so refers to their being the
executioners of God's wrath and vengeance on men, and alluding to a sort
of chariots with sharp hooks used in war: others from a word which
signifies to "second"; these being the second, or next to God, the chief
princes; or, as Aben Ezra, it denotes the number of angels, even "two
thousand"; so the Targum,

"the chariots of God are two myriads (or twenty thousand) of burning
fires, two thousand of angels lead them;''

the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place; that is, at the
head of them, being their Governor and Commander, at whose beck they
are, and ready to do his will; and he was among them when he ascended to
heaven, as it follows, being carried up by them; as he was among them at
Sinai, when the law was given; for Christ was there then, [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038); and attended with ten thousands
of his holy angels, by whom the law was ordained, spoken, and given,
[Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002), [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002); which Sinai is called the holy
place, from the presence of God there, and the law given from it: or
else the sense is, that Christ is among the angels as in Sinai of old;
so in the holy place, in Sion his holy hill, the church under the Gospel
dispensation, where there are an innumerable company of angels, [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022); according to the construction
of the word in the Hebrew text, it seems as if Sinai was in the holy
place, the inside of it being of cedar, like the Shittim wood that grew
about Sinai (l); or rather the worship commanded and directed to on
mount Sinai was performed in it.

\(l\) Vid. Texelii Phoenix, l. 3. c. 7. p. 281.

[Psalms 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 68:18</span></span>

Thou hast ascended on high,.... Which is to be understood, not of Moses
ascending up to the firmament, as the Targum and Jarchi interpret it, of
which we nowhere read; nor of David's going up to the high fortresses,
as Aben Ezra; nor of God's ascent from Mount Sinai; but of Christ's
ascension to heaven, as the apostle cites and explains it in [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008); which ascension respects him as
man, was not figurative, as in [Gen
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#022); but real and local, from earth
to heaven, and was certain and visible; he was seen to go up by angels
and men; and, because of the certainty of it, it is here expressed in
the past tense, though it was then future;

thou hast led captivity captive; meaning either such who had been
captives, in which sense the word is used, [Psa
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001); and so may design either those
who had been prisoners in the grave, but were set free at Christ's
resurrection, and went with him in triumph to heaven; or all his people,
whom he redeemed by his blood from that captivity and bondage they were
in by nature; or rather those who led them captive are here meant by
"captivity"; such as sin, Satan, the world, death, and every spiritual
enemy, whom Christ conquered and triumphed over; the allusion may be to
public triumphs, when captives were led in chains, even kings and great
men, that had captivated others: the words seem to be borrowed out of
[Jdg 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012);

thou hast received gifts for men; the gifts of the Holy Spirit,
qualifying men for the ministry of the Gospel, as they are interpreted
by the Apostle, [Eph 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011); these
Christ received from his divine Father in human nature, when he ascended
up to heaven, in order to give them to men; and which he did in a very
extraordinary manner on the day of Pentecost. The Targum and Syriac
version render it, "thou hast given gifts to men"; and the Arabic
version, "and he gave gifts to men", as the apostle, [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008);

yea, for the rebellious also; disobedient and unbelieving (m), as all
men are by nature, even God's elect, before conversion, [Tit
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003); who are not only called by grace,
and have the blessings of grace bestowed upon them; but some of them
have gifts given them, whereby they are fitted to preach the Gospel to
others, as Saul, the blasphemer, persecutor, and injurious; and some of
those among the Jews, that were concerned in the crucifixion of Christ:
though some think the Gentiles are intended, on whom the Holy Spirit was
poured forth after our Lord's ascension; and so the Targum interprets it
of the rebellious, who become proselytes, and return by repentance;

that the Lord God might dwell among them; that is, that they, by the
gifts and graces of the Spirit bestowed on them, might become a fit
habitation for God; or that "they", the rebellious, being now partakers
of the grace of God and his gifts, "might dwell with the Lord God" (n)
in his churches; enjoy his divine presence, and have communion with him
in his word and ordinances.

\(m\) Sept. "non credentes", V. L. (n) "ut habitent cum Jah, Jehovah",
Piscator; "cum Deo", Gejerus; "ut habitent pulchritudinem Dei",
Cocceius.

[Psalms 68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 68:19</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits,.... With all
spiritual blessings, with an abundance of grace, as well as with
temporal mercies, for which he is, and ought to be, praised day by day:
so Aben Ezra and Kimchi supply the text, and suppose the word
"blessings" or "goodness" to be wanting; though the words may be
rendered, "blessed be the Lord day by day, he will hear us", or "carry
us" (o); as a father his child, or a shepherd his lambs; and so he does
from the womb, even to hoary hairs; and therefore blessing and praise
should be ascribed to him; see [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003); or "he will put a burden upon
us" (p); meaning the burden of afflictions: these are of the Lord's
laying upon his people; and he will lay no more upon them than he will
enable them to bear; and will, in his own time and way, deliver them
from them, and be the author of salvation to them, as follows; and
therefore his name is to be praised, [Co1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013); the Targum interprets it of the
burdensomeness of the law;

"blessed be the Lord every day, he burdens us, adding precepts unto
precepts;''

even the God of our salvation; the author of temporal, spiritual, and
eternal salvation, as Christ is.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(o\) "portal nos", Vatablus, Musculus; "bajulat nos", Cocceius. (p)
"Onus imponit nobis", Lutherus, Gejerus.

[Psalms 68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 68:20</span></span>

He that is our God,.... Or "God for us" (q); is on our side; and is the
mighty God, able to save to the uttermost;

is the God of salvation; or "God for salvations" (r); for the obtaining
of them for his people, and giving them to them, even of every kind;

and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death; deliverance from it;
Christ has abolished it, and him that had the power of it; has delivered
himself from it, and will deliver all his people from it, though they
become subject to it, as well as from eternal death; for he has the keys
of hell and death in his hands. Some render the words, "to God the Lord
belong the issues", or "ways unto death" (s); he has various ways of
bringing persons to death, of destroying his and his people's enemies;
and so Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi interpret it; though the following
words seem to be opposed to these: the Heathens had a notion that the
power of death belonged to God; hence they had a deity called the god of
death, "Dites" (t).

\(q\) "Deus nobis, vel est nobis", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Piscator. (r) "Deus ad salutes", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (s) "ad mortem
exitus", Pagninus, Montanus; "mille viae laethi", Lucan. (t) Macrob. in
Somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 11.

[Psalms 68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 68:21</span></span>

But God shall wound the head of his enemies,.... Him who is the chief of
his enemies, even Satan the prince of devils, the god of the world, the
father of the wicked Jews, all enemies of Christ; to "wound" is the same
as to bruise him, as in [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); and
so the Targum here,

"but God shall break the head of his enemies;''

disappoint his schemes, blast his designs, crush his power and
authority, demolish his empire, and eternally destroy him with the fire
prepared for him and his angels; and the same may be applied to the man
of sin, and all other enemies of Christ, who is the divine Person here,
and all along, spoken of; see [Psa
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006);

and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses;
by whom may be meant antichrist: Jarchi interprets it of Esau, who was
an hairy man, and a figure of antichrist: and his hairy scalp may denote
his fierceness and cruelty, appearing like a savage beast, drinking the
blood of the saints; and like a thief and a robber, who used to let
their hair grow long, shagged, and entangled, to strike terror into men
they met with, [Job 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#005); and also his
pride and haughtiness; he exalting himself above all that is called God,
and opening his mouth in blasphemy against him: and likewise it
signifies his great power and authority, he having people, kingdoms, and
nations, depending upon him, as hair on the head, and subject to him:
and of him it may be truly said, that he "goes on still in his
trespasses"; in tyranny, idolatry, superstition, and will worship;
taking no notice of what God says by his witnesses, nor any warning by
what the eastern empire suffered by the Turks and Saracens; so as to
repent of the works of his hands, of worshipping idols of gold, silver,
brass, and wood; nor of his murders, sorceries, fornications, and
thefts; but still persisting in them, until his, and the sins of his
followers, reach to heaven, [Rev 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020);
but the God-man, Christ Jesus, will give him a deadly wound, of which he
shall never be healed: this also holds true of all that persist in a
sinful course of life without repentance; who are workers of iniquity,
whose lives are one continued series of sinning; these will be punished
by Christ with everlasting destruction.

[Psalms 68:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 68:22</span></span>

The Lord said,.... Within himself, in his own heart; he resolved upon it
in his mind; or he said it in council and in covenant; he undertook and
engaged to do what follows; or he spoke of it in promise and in
prophecy, as what would be done;

I will bring again from Bashan; as he delivered his people from Og king
of Bashan formerly, [Num 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033); so he
purposed and promised to ransom them out of the hands of him that was
stronger than they; to recover them from the strong man armed, and
deliver them from the power of darkness, and translate them into his own
kingdom, and save them from all the bulls of Bashan; see [Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012); to which text Jarchi refers in
the exposition of this; though some understand it of the fat and great
ones of the earth, of the conversion of kings and princes, [Psa
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029);

I will bring my people again from the depths of the sea; out of the most
wretched and desperate condition, out of the depths of sin and misery;
out of an helpless and hopeless state, in which they were through the
fall, and their actual transgressions: the allusion is to the bringing
of the children of Israel through the Red sea, and out of the depths of
it, unto dry land: the Targum interprets the whole of the resurrection
of the righteous, whether devoured by wild beasts, or drowned in the
sea; see [Rev 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013); some interpret
the passage of the Lord's gathering of his people, in the effectual
calling, from the east and from the west; from the east, signified by
Bashan; and from the west, by the depths of the sea; see [Isa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005).

[Psalms 68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 68:23</span></span>

That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies,.... This
verse is in connection with [Psa
68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021), with [Psa
68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023) being to be read in a
parenthesis: the sense is, that the Messiah would so wound the head and
hairy scalp of his people's enemies, and there should be such a large
effusion of blood, that their feet should be dipped therein, [Rev
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020); See Gill on [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010);

and the tongue of thy dogs in the same; who should lick it up, as the
dogs licked the blood of Jezebel, [Kg1
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019); and so such a carnage will be
made of antichrist and his followers, that the fowls of the heavens will
be called upon to eat the flesh of kings, captains, and mighty ones,
[Rev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017).

[Psalms 68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 68:24</span></span>

They have seen thy goings, O God,.... In saving his people, and
destroying his enemies;

even the goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary; the walk and
conversation of Christ, when he was made flesh, and dwelt among men; his
manner of life and deportment; his works and miracles, his sufferings,
death, and resurrection from the dead; all which his apostles were
eyewitnesses of; as also his going up to heaven, which was visible to
angels and men; likewise his progress and victorious expeditions in
Judea, and in the Gentile world, by the ministry of the word, in which
he went forth conquering, and to conquer; which sense is confirmed by
the following words: for Christ, who is God over all, the Lord and God
of his people, and King of saints, is here, as throughout the psalm,
intended. The Targum interprets it of the path or goings of the divine
Majesty upon the sea, which the house of Israel saw.

[Psalms 68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 68:25</span></span>

The singers went before,.... The apostles and ministers of the word, the
sweet singers of Israel, the charmers that charm so very wisely: the
Gospel is a joyful sound; it is like vocal music, harmonious and
delightful; it is as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant
voice, as Ezekiel's ministry was, [Eze
33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032); it is a voice of love, grace,
and mercy, of peace, pardon, and righteousness, and of eternal life and
salvation by Christ; it is as music in the ears of sensible souls, when
sounded forth, and sung out clearly and distinctly by the faithful
ministers of it. The allusion seems to be to singers going before
armies, when marching to battle, or returning with victory; see [Ch2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021);

the players on instruments followed after; so the sweet strains of the
Gospel, the melodious notes and distinguishing sounds of it, as well as
the praises of God's people, are, in the New Testament, signified by
harps, and men's playing upon them, [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008);

amongst them were the damsels playing with timbrels; or "in the midst of
the virgins playing with timbrels" (u); or "beating on tabrets"; as
women used to do when they met their kings returning from the conquest
of their enemies; see [Sa1 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006); these
may be the pure and primitive churches of Christ, and the members
thereof, rejoicing at the preaching of the Gospel, and praising God for
the blessings of grace in it; in the midst of which the ministers of the
word sung the new song of Gospel truths: and who may be compared to
damsels or virgins for their beauty and comeliness through Christ; for
their relation to him, being betrothed unto him; and for their strong
and chaste affection for him; for their uncorruptness in doctrine and
worship, and their uprightness in their lives and conversation, [Rev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004); the allusion may be to Miriam
and the women with her at the Red sea, [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020); and the Targum interprets the
whole verse of Moses and Aaron singing at the Red sea, and of Miriam and
the women playing with timbrels.

\(u\) "in medio puellarum", Pagninus, Montanus; "inter puellas", Junius
& Tremellius, Piscator; so Cocceius, Gejerus.

[Psalms 68:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 68:26</span></span>

Bless ye God in the congregations,.... This was what they said as they
sung and played; they called upon the churches, and the members of them,
and upon one another, to bless the Lord Jesus Christ, God manifest in
the flesh; not by invoking or bestowing a blessing on him, which cannot
be, and of which he has no need; but by proclaiming him to be God over
all, blessed for evermore, as he is in himself; and the perfections of
his nature, by attributing all the blessings of nature, grace, and glory
to him, in whom they are, and from whom they come; and by exercising
faith upon him for them particularly, and for pardon, righteousness,
supplies of grace, and everlasting salvation; and by giving him the
glory of all, and ascribing blessing and honour to him on account of
them; which should be done openly and publicly, in the several
particular congregated churches of Christ; and this shows the psalm
still refers to Gospel times, in which only such churches are;

even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel; or, "the Lord, who is of the
fountain of Israel" (w); that is, whose natural descent is from Israel,
or Jacob, as Christ's was, according to the flesh, [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005); though some take this to be a
description of the posterity of Jacob, those that go out from the
fountain of Israel, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi; see [Isa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001); so the Tigurine version, and
others; who are called upon to bless the Lord: but then it must be
understood not of the carnal Israelites, they rejected the Messiah,
Jesus, and called him accursed; but the spiritual seed of Jacob, whether
Jews or Gentiles; Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile. The Targum,
and so Jarchi, interpret it of the seed of Israel; compare with this
[Luk 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041); the words may be read,
"for", or "because of the fountain of Israel" (x): God, who is the
fountain of living wafers; Christ, whose blood is the fountain opened
for sin and uncleanness; the Spirit, who, in the operations of his
grace, is a well or fountain of living water, springing up unto eternal
life; and all spiritual blessings, and the abundance of them, which the
spiritual Israel of God enjoy, may be designed by this phrase; and so be
considered as the reason why God the Lord is to be blessed. Some
understand it of the Scriptures, from whence all divine knowledge,
blessing, and praise are derived; and others of the heart, and the
abundance of it, from whence, and not with the lips only, men should
bless and praise the Lord.

\(w\) "qui est ex fonte Israelis", i.e. "natus ex semine Israelis",
Tillius & Vitringa apud Michael (x) "Ob vel propter fontem lsrael",
Gejerus.

[Psalms 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 68:27</span></span>

There is little Benjamin, with their ruler,.... Or who is "their ruler"
(y); that is, in the congregations or churches, where he was a ruler; or
in the procession, the triumphal progress of Christ in Judea, and in the
Gentile world, by the ministry of the word; where the singers and
players of instruments, and damsels with timbrels, went in order: for
not the tribe of Benjamin is meant, called "little", because Benjamin
was Jacob's younger son; or because it was greatly weakened and reduced
at Gibeah, [Jdg 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048); and was one of
the smallest tribes in Israel; and Saul's family, who was the first king
of Israel, the least in that tribe, [Sa1
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#021); though the Targum interprets it
of the tribe; and so Jarchi; but the Apostle Paul is here meant, who was
of the tribe of Benjamin, [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001);
was a young man when he was converted, [Act
7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058); as the Septuagint and Vulgate
Latin versions have it here; was "little" in stature, as is generally
reported of him, and as his name "Paul" may be thought to signify, and
might be given him on that account; see [Co2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010); and was little in his own eyes,
less than the least of all saints, and the chief of sinners; one born
out of due time, and unworthy to be called an apostle; as well as he was
little and contemptible in the eyes of others; yet he was greatly
honoured by Christ, had an authority from him, was a "ruler" in his
churches; set in the first place there, made an apostle, and was an
apostle of the Gentiles, and not a whit behind the very chief of the
apostles; and he was a principal in this progress, and therefore is
named first: he was a chosen vessel to bear the name of Christ, and
carry it into the Gentile world; he travelled and laboured more
abundantly than the rest, and preached the Gospel fully from Jerusalem
round about to Illyricum. The Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions,
render it, "there was Benjamin the younger in an ecstasy", or trance, as
the Apostle Paul was, [Act 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#009); but
our version is best;

the princes of Judah, and their council; or "company", as Kimchi; their
churches, or congregations over which they presided, or were the means
of gathering; these were the apostles, some of which were of the tribe
of Judah, of which tribe Christ was, and so must be those that are
called his brethren, [Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055); these
were "princes", not only in common with other Christians, by adoption
and regeneration, but by their office, being apostles, and over others
in the Lord; and besides the church at Jerusalem, where James presided,
there were other churches in Judea, which had spiritual guides and
governors over them; see [Heb 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007);
and so the Septuagint version, and those that follow it, render the
words, "the princes of Judah, their governors"; and so Aben Ezra
interprets them, and observes that "regem", in [Zac
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#002) so signifies; to which the sense
of R. Menachem in Jarchi agrees, who renders it "their purpled ones"; so
Cocceius; but Gussetius (z) renders it "their stoning"; who stoned those
that preached the Gospel to them; see [Mat
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#035); or stoned their enemies,
conquered them; or "their stone" (a), the Messiah, that sprung from
Judah, [Gen 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024);

the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali; the rest of the
apostles, who were of Galilee, in which country lay the tribes of
Zebulun and Naphtali: such as Peter, Andrew, James and John, Philip and
Nathaniel, see [Mat 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013).

\(y\) "dominans eos", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus; "dominator eorum",
Musculus: so Tigurine version, Cocceius. (z) Ebr. Comment. p. 777. (a)
Vid. Teelman. Explic. Parabol. p. 312.

[Psalms 68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 68:28</span></span>

Thy God hath commanded thy strength,.... Which is either an apostrophe
or an address to the Messiah, as in [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007); declaring, that as his God and
Father had purposed and promised to send forth, so he had sent forth,
the rod of his strength out of Zion, [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001); that is, his Gospel, both into
the several cities of Judea, and into the Gentile world, where it was
the power of God unto salvation, both to Jew and Gentile: or else these
words are spoken to the churches and congregations, in whom the Lord's
name was to be blessed; or to the princes, rulers, and governors of them
before mentioned, showing that the Lord has made good his promise to
them, that as their day was their strength should be; and it was owing
to their being strengthened by him that they walked up and down in his
name, doing his work, and preaching his Gospel, both to Jews and
Gentiles: to which they reply by petition,

strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us; which, if
understood of the apostles, princes, and rulers, refers to the work of
preaching the Gospel, and the success of it, desiring it might be more
and more confirmed; and to the settlement of Christianity in the Pagan
world, and also to the work of the reformation from Popery in later
times; compare with this [Rev 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002); if
of the churches, and the members thereof, it may respect the carrying on
and finishing the work of grace in them. It is rendered "in us" by the
Septuagint and others; see [Isa 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012);
for this work sometimes seems to be very low and weak, and needs
strengthening, and it is God only that can do it, and he will do it,
[Pe1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010); and this shows that the
grace of God is not only necessary at first conversion, but to be
continued for the performing of the work of grace until the day of
Christ.

[Psalms 68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 68:29</span></span>

Because of thy temple at Jerusalem,.... Not the material temple there,
which was not in being in David's time, but was built by his son, and
destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar; and though it was rebuilt by Zerubbabel,
repaired by Herod, and was the Messiah's temple, into which he entered
as the Lord and proprietor of it, [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); yet was quickly after his time
demolished, and will never be rebuilt more; but the Messiah's spiritual
temple, of which he is the builder, foundation, and cornerstone; the
materials of which are believers in him, and it is for his service,
worship, and glory: and "because of Jerusalem" (b), as it may be
translated: by which also the church of Christ is meant, which is the
heavenly Jerusalem, the Jerusalem which is above, and free, the mother
of us all, the city of the great King, the place of divine worship, and
well fortified by the power and grace of God. The words may be rendered
"above Jerusalem" (c), and connected either with [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028), and so point at the place,
heaven, the temple and palace of the Messiah; from whence spiritual
health and strength are desired, and may be expected; or with the
following words, and the sense be, "from", or "out of thy temple in
Jerusalem": even out of the material temple, the Gospel should be
preached, as it was by the apostles on the day of Pentecost; and so the
word of the Lord went out from thence, and from Jerusalem into Judea,
and so into the Gentile world, where it is continued, and will be until
the kings of the earth shall be converted, as follows;

shall kings bring presents unto thee: that is, such as should become
Christians, as Constantine, and others, in the earlier ages of
Christianity; who brought their riches and wealth to Christ, and into
his church, with a design for the good and welfare of it, though it
proved otherwise; and as many will in the latter day, who, being
converted, will bring presents to the King Messiah, join his churches,
and be their nursing fathers; see [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010); and who will bring their glory
and honour, and that of the nations, into the New Jerusalem church
state, [Rev 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024); and it will be
because of his church and people, and for their good and welfare, as
well as for the glory and honour of Christ, that those presents will be
brought; and which will not only be theirs, their good things, but
themselves, whom they will present to the Lord, as living and acceptable
sacrifices, [Rom 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001); the Targum is,

"out of thy temple thou shalt receive offerings; upon Jerusalem thy
Shechinah dwells; out of their palaces kings shall bring unto thee
sacrifices.''

\(b\) "propter Jeruschalaima", Junius & Tremellius. (c) "Super
Jerusalaim", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus.

[Psalms 68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 68:30</span></span>

Rebuke the company of spearmen,.... Or, "of the reed" (d); that is, men
that use and fight with spears, like to reeds, as Kimchi and Ben Melech
interpret it. Aben Ezra says, that spears are so called in the Kedarene
or Arabian language; and the Arabians use a sort of reed for a spear, as
Mr. Castel out of Avicenna observes (e), and Pliny (f) says they are
used spears: or rather the words should be rendered, "rebuke", restrain,
destroy "the wild beast", or "beasts of the reed" (g); as the Syriac,
Septuagint, and Vulgate Latin versions, and others, render it: the
allusion is to such kind of creatures as lions in the thickets of
Jordan; See Gill on [Jer 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019); and
the behemoth, that lies under the covert of reeds, [Job
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021); or as the crocodile in the
river Nile, and other rivers of Egypt, which abounded with flags and
reeds, in which such creatures lay; see [Isa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006); perhaps the hippopotamus, or
river horse, is referred to; so may design an insidious, cruel, and
tyrannical prince; such an one as Pharaoh king of Egypt, [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001); a type of antichrist, and who
seems to be here meant; for as Rome, for its wickedness, cruelty, and
idolatry, is spiritually called Egypt, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008); so the Romish antichrist is the
beast ascending out of the bottomless pit; and is an insidious creature,
lies in wait to deceive, puts on the mask and visor of Christianity; has
two horns, like a lamb in his ecclesiastic capacity; lies covered with
the reeds of the traditions, inventions, and the doctrines of men; and
teaches men to trust in the staff of a broken reed, in their own merits,
and the merits of others. Jarchi interprets it of Esau, who is like to a
wild boar that dwells among the reeds; and the Talmud (h) interprets it
of a beast that dwells among reeds, and the gloss explains it of the
nation of Amalek; the Turks, according to some, are meant;

the multitude of bulls; the secular powers of the beast of Rome; the
antichristian states, their kings and princes, comparable to these
creatures for their great strength, power, and authority, and for their
fierceness and furiousness in persecuting the people of God: these are
horned creatures, the ten horns of the beast, in his civil and secular
capacity, with which he pushes at the saints, casts them down, and
tramples upon them; see [Psa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013);
compared with [Rev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018);

with the calves of the people; or the people, comparable to calves for
their weakness, folly, and stupidity; these are the common people under
the government and influence of the kings and princes of the earth; the
people, multitudes, nations, and tongues, over whom the antichristian
harlot sits, rules, and reigns: this phrase shows that the whole is to
be taken, not in a literal, but figurative, sense;

till everyone submit himself with pieces of silver; that is, rebuke them
by thy word, or by thy providences, until they become sensible of their
sins, repent of them, and submit themselves to Christ; and bring with
them their wealth and substance, and lay it at his feet for the use of
his interest, as a testification of their subjection to him: but as this
is not to be expected from the persons before described, at least not
from everyone of them, the words require another sense, and are to be
considered as a continued description of the persons to be rebuked, and
may be rendered, even everyone "that treads with pieces of silver" (k);
that walks proudly and haughtily, being decorated with gold and silver
on their garments; so the Romish antichrist is said to be decked, his
popes, cardinals, and bishops, with gold and precious stones, [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004); or "everyone that humbles
himself for pieces of silver" (l), as the word is rendered in [Pro
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003); that lies down to be trampled
upon for the sake of temporal advantage; and so it describes the
parasites and flatterers of the man of sin, who crouch unto him, take
his mark in their hands or foreheads, that they may be allowed to buy
and sell; all these, it is desired, God would rebuke, not in love, but
with flames of fire, as he will sooner or later; for when the kings of
the earth are become Christians, as in [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029), God will put it into their
hearts to hate the whore, and burn her flesh with fire;

scatter thou the people that delight in war; as antichrist, and the
antichristian states, do: they take delight in making war with the
saints, and in slaying of them, to whom power has been given so to do;
with whose blood they have been made drunk, and have took as much
pleasure in the shedding of it as a drunken man does in indulging
himself to excess in liquor; but these in God's own time shall be
scattered, when Christ the Lamb shall fight against them with the sword
of his mouth, and shall utterly destroy them; see [Rev
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#007).

\(d\) "congregationem calami", Pagninus. (e) Lexic. Polyglott. col.
3376. (f) Nat. Hist. l. 16. c. 36. (g) "Feram cannae", Montanus;
"bestiam arundineti", Cocceius; "feram vel bestiam arundinis", Gejerus,
Michaelis. (h) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 118. 2. (k) "gloriantem se",
Montanus, Vatablus; "calcantem", Rivet. (l) "Ob fragmina argenti",
Gejerus.

[Psalms 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 68:31</span></span>

Princes shall come out of Egypt,.... The Vulgate Latin and all the
Oriental versions render it "ambassadors". This verse is a prophecy of
the conversion of the Gentiles, under the names of Egypt and Ethiopia;
which will be at the same time that the kings of the earth will become
Christians, and antichrist will be destroyed. The Gospel is said to be
preached in Egypt by Mark the Evangelist; and no doubt but there were
conversions there in the first times of the Gospel; but there will be
more in the latter day; see [Psa 87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003).
Unless we understand this of kings and princes, that shall leave the
communion of the church of Rome, which is spiritually and mystically
Egypt, and join themselves with the true churches of see [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008). The conversion of every sinner
is a coming out of Egypt; it is a call of them out of darkness and
bondage, worse than that of Egypt, into light and liberty, when they are
set among princes, even the princes of Christ's people;

Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God; the Gospel is said
to be preached in Ethiopia by the Evangelist Matthew, and also by
Matthias, who succeeded Judas in the apostleship; by means of whose
ministry there is reason to conclude some were converted: and we have an
instance of a famous Ethiopian, that was converted and baptized by
Philip, [Act 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027); and who very likely
carried the Gospel into this country, and spread it: so that this
prophecy began to have its fulfilment then, but will have a greater
hereafter; see, [Psa 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004). All men are
like Ethiopians, even God's elect, in a state of nature and
unregeneracy: they are black with original sin and actual
transgressions; and can no more remove this blackness than the Ethiopian
can change his skin, [Jer 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023). They
are, like them, idolaters, serving divers lusts and pleasures, the idols
of their own hearts; are in a state of distance, afar off from God and
Christ, and from his people, word, and ordinances; and are enemies in
their minds by wicked works, yea, enmity itself, and stretch out their
hands against God; but when they are called and converted, and made
sensible of their state, then they stretch out their hands unto God, as
a gesture of sorrow, [Jer 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031);
expressing their sorrow for sin, as committed against God, and because
of the evil that is in it; and look to Christ, and stretch out their
hands to him, whom they have pierced, and mourn; and as a prayer
gesture, [Job 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013). For, as soon as a
man is converted, he prays and cries to God for pardoning grace and
mercy, and to be cleansed from his sin, and to be openly received into
his favour, and to enjoy communion with him; and as the gesture of a man
in the utmost danger, who stretches out, his hand to lay hold on
anything to save him; and so a sinner, sensible of its danger, and
seeing Christ and salvation in him, it stretches out its hand, lays hold
on him, and will have him and no other to be its Saviour, and receives
his righteousness, and grace out of his fulness; and as the gesture of
one that is conquered, resigning up himself into the victor's hands, as
a token of submission, peace, and reconciliation (m); so sinners, in the
day of Christ's power upon them, are made willing to submit and give up
themselves to him. In the Hebrew text it is, "shall make her hands to
run unto God" (n); that is, with an offering, gold or some treasure, to
bring it unto God, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, interpret it,
which may very well be understood of the offering of themselves, as well
as of the spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praise. The Targum is,

"the sons of Ham shall come, the great men out of Egypt, to be made
proselytes; the children of Cush (or Ethiopia) shall run to stretch out
their hands in prayer to God.''

Jarchi's note is,

"and then when thou shalt destroy Esau (his posterity), and the King
Messiah shall arise, they shall bring to thee gifts out of Ethiopia.''

And so he owns this to be a prophecy of the Messiah; and so it is
applied to the times of the Messiahs and to the nations bringing gifts
to him, in the Talmud (o), and other Jewish writings (p).

\(m\) Vid. Caesar. Comment. de Bello Gallic. l. 7. c. 48. "Oremus pacem
et dextras tendamus inermes". Virgil. Aeneid. 11. (n) "faciet currere",
Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus, Michaelis. (o) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 118.
2. (p) Shemot Rabba, s. 35. fol. 136. 4.

[Psalms 68:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 68:32</span></span>

Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth,.... Not only the Egyptian and
Ethiopian kingdoms, but all the kingdoms of the world; which will now be
converted to Christ, and become his, even all the Papal, Pagan, and
Mahometan kingdoms; see [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015).
These are called upon to sing songs and hymns of praise to Christ, who
is God, for redemption by him, and salvation in him; and for their
deliverance from all the darkness and delusions under which they
formerly were;

O sing praises unto the Lord; the Lord of all, the Lord of lords, the
Head of the church, and Saviour of the body; and whom those converted
nations will acknowledge to be their Lord and King; and make their
homage, and bring their tribute of praise to him, for breaking the
antichristian yokes that were upon them, and freeing them from the
tyranny and bondage with which they were oppressed: this will be
fulfilled in the latter day; see [Rev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 68:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 68:33</span></span>

To him that rideth upon the heaven of heavens, which were of old,.... Or
"eastward" (q); the first, second, and third heavens, which were created
from the beginning of time by Christ himself, [Psa
102:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025) compared with [Heb
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010). These he rode upon when he
ascended on high, even far above all heavens, as the apostle says, [Eph
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010); and so above the heaven of
heavens, when he was made higher than they, and both Lord and Christ;
and placed his throne in them, and from thence exercises his government
over the whole world: and it may be observed, that it was from Mount
Olivet, which was to the east of Jerusalem, that Christ ascended, and so
to the eastern part of the heavens, [Act
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012); see [Rev
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002);

lo, he doth send out his voice; which is his Gospel, for that is the
voice of Christ; which he utters by his ministers, and which his sheep,
his people, hearken unto, and can distinguish from the voice of a
stranger. This is a voice of love, grace, and mercy; it speaks of
righteousness, peace, pardon, and salvation by him, and is very joyful
and comfortable to hear. This he sent out by his apostles into all the
earth, after his ascension to heaven; and which he has been, more or
less, sending out in one place or another, by his ministers, ever since;
and in the latter day will send it out more clearly, fully, and largely,
by a set of ministers he will raise up for that purpose;

and that a mighty voice; or, "a voice of strength" (r); a strong and
powerful voice, such as the Gospel is, when accompanied with the power
and Spirit of God. It is a soul shaking and awakening voice; it is an
heartmelting and an heartbreaking one; it is a quickening and an
enlightening voice; it quickens dead sinners, gives life unto them, and
the entrance of it gives light to dark minds: it is a soul charming and
alluring one; it draws to Christ, engages the affections to him, and
fills with unspeakable delight and pleasure. The Targum interprets this
of the voice of the spirit of prophecy; Aben Ezra understands this voice
as saying what follows.

\(q\) "ab oriente", Pagninus; "ad orientem", V. L. so Sept. Eth. Syr.
Arab. (r) "vocem fortitudinis", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Psalms 68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 68:34</span></span>

Ascribe ye strength unto God,.... The Messiah; by asserting him to be
the mighty God, even the Almighty; by attributing works of strength and
power to him: such as the creation of all things; upholding all things
in their being; the redemption and preservation of his people; the
resurrection of the dead, &c. by applying to him, and exercising faith
on him for spiritual strength, and giving him the glory of it: so the
Targum,

"give the glory of strength to God.''

Moreover, this may be understood of ascribing dominion and power to him
by the kingdoms of the earth, who are here addressed, when they shall be
converted to him; and who, upon this enlargement of his kingdom, will be
congratulated by his people, for taking to himself his great power and
reigning, [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015);

his excellency is over Israel; the spiritual Israel, such who are
Israelites indeed. Over these his glorious Majesty in his kingdom rules;
they are subject to him, and acknowledge him for their King; and among
them is his Shechinah, or divine Presence. Or over Israel, literally
understood; when they shall, as at this time the prophecy refers to, be
all called, converted, and saved: they shall seek the Lord their God,
and David their King, and he shall be Prince over them;

and his strength is in the clouds; which are round about him, the
chariots in which he rides, and in which he shows his strength; by
sending forth from thence the rain of his strength, the terrible
lightning and thunder. In these he went up to heaven, and in these he
will come again to judgment. They may be mystically understood of the
ministers of the Gospel, especially in the latter day, who may be
compared to clouds for their numbers, they will then be many; for their
swiftness in moving to and fro, and spreading the Gospel; and for their
being full of the doctrines of grace, comparable to rain; see [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006). And the Lord's strength will be
seen in them, who will greatly strengthen them to do their work; his
strength will be made perfect in their weakness; the excellency of the
power attending their ministrations, to the large conversion of sinners,
will appear to be of God, and not of man.

[Psalms 68:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 68:35</span></span>

O God, thou art terrible,.... In his judgments and acts of vengeance, on
antichrist and the antichristian states; being the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, that will break them to pieces as a potter's vessel: or
"reverend" (s); to be feared and worshipped by his saints;

out of thy holy places; both out of heaven, the habitation of his
holiness, by angels and glorified saints there; and out of all his
churches, the several assemblies of them, among whom he is greatly to be
feared and adored: the Targum interprets it of the house of the
sanctuary;

the God of Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people;
his peculiar covenant people, his Israel he is the God of. These are
weak, and encompassed about with infirmities; he has strength in himself
for them; he has promised it to them, and he gives it to them as a pure
gift and unmerited favour of his. It may be understood of the great
degree of strength that will be given them in the latter day; when a
small one shall be a strong nation, and the feeble shall be as David,
and David as God, as the Angel of the Lord, [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021); and of the dominion and
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven; which will be given to
the saints of the most High, [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027);

blessed be God: the psalm is concluded with an ascription of blessing to
the Messiah, who is God blessed for evermore; and who, as Mediator, is
the promised seed, in whom all nations were to be blessed, and now will
be; see [Rev 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012).

\(s\) "venerandus", Michaelis.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 69](psa069)

</div>
