<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa078)  [Next](psa080) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 79](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 79:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 79

A Psalm of Asaph. This psalm was not written by one Asaph, who is
supposed to live after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans,
or, according to some, even after the times of Antiochus, of whom there
is no account, nor any certainty that there ever was such a man in those
times; but by Asaph, the seer and prophet, that lived in the time of
David, who, under a prophetic spirit, foresaw and foretold things that
should come to pass, spoken of in this psalm: nor is it any objection
that what is here said is delivered as an history of facts, since many
prophecies are delivered in this way, especially those of the prophet
Isaiah. The Targum is,

"a song by the hands of Asaph, concerning the destruction of the house
of the sanctuary (or temple), which he said by a spirit of prophecy.''

The title of the Syriac versions,

"said by Asaph concerning the destruction of Jerusalem.''

The argument of the psalm is of the same kind with the Seventy Fourth.
Some refer it to the times of Antiochus Epiphanes; so Theodoret; but
though the temple was then defiled, Jerusalem was not utterly destroyed;
and others to the destruction of the city and temple by Nebuchadnezzar;
and why may it not refer to both, and even to the after destruction of
both by Titus Vespasian? and may include the affliction and troubles of
the Christians under Rome Pagan and Papal, and especially the latter;
for Jerusalem and the temple may be understood in a mystical and
spiritual sense; at least the troubles of the Jews, in the times
referred to, were typical of what should befall the people of God under
the New Testament, and in antichristian times.

[Psalms 79:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 79:1</span></span>

O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance,.... The land of
Canaan, divided among the children of Israel by lot and line for an
inheritance, out of which the Heathen were cast, to make room for them;
but now would come into it again; see [Psa
89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035), and this is called the Lord's
inheritance, because he gave it as such to the people of Israel, and
dwelt in it himself; and the rather this is observed as something
marvellous, that he should suffer Heathens to possess his own
inheritance; or the city of Jerusalem, which was the place the Lord
chose to put his name in; or the temple, where he had his residence,
called the mountain of his inheritance, [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017), and into which it was always
accounted a profanation for Heathens to enter; see [Act
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#028), into each of these places the
Heathen came; the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar; the Syrians under
Antiochus, as in the Apocrypha:

"Insomuch that the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled because of them:
whereupon the city was made an habitation of strangers, and became
strange to those that were born in her; and her own children left her.''
(1 Maccabees 1:38)

"Now Jerusalem lay void as a wilderness, there was none of her children
that went in or out: the sanctuary also was trodden down, and aliens
kept the strong hold; the heathen had their habitation in that place;
and joy was taken from Jacob, and the pipe with the harp ceased.'' (1
Maccabees 3:45)

the Romans under Pompey, Vespasian, and Titus; and the Papists have
since entered among the people of God, who are his heritage or
inheritance, and have lorded it over them, and made havoc of them, and
who are called Heathens and Gentiles, [Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016),

thy holy temple have they defiled: this was done in the times of
Antiochus, by entering into it, taking away the holy vessels out of it,
shedding innocent blood in it, and setting up the abomination of
desolation on the altar, and sacrificing to it, as in the Apocrypha:

"Every bridegroom took up lamentation, and she that sat in the marriage
chamber was in heaviness,'' (1 Maccabees 1:27)

"Thus they shed innocent blood on every side of the sanctuary, and
defiled it:'' (1 Maccabees 1:37)

"And pollute the sanctuary and holy people:'' (1 Maccabees 1:46)

"And whosoever was found with any the book of the testament, or if any
committed to the law, the king's commandment was, that they should put
him to death.'' (1 Maccabees 1:57)

"For thy sanctuary is trodden down and profaned, and thy priests are in
heaviness, and brought low.'' (1 Maccabees 3:51)

"And they called upon the Lord, that he would look upon the people that
was trodden down of all; and also pity the temple profaned of ungodly
men;'' (2 Maccabees 8:2)

and by burning it in the times of Nebuchadnezzar and Titus; see [Psa
74:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#007), and the church, which is the
holy temple of God, has been defiled by antichrist sitting in it, and
showing himself there as if he was God, by his dreadful blasphemies,
idolatrous worship, and false doctrines, [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004),

they have laid Jerusalem on heaps; the walls and buildings being pulled
down, and made a heap of stones and rubbish: in the times of Antiochus
and of the Maccabees, it was set on fire, and the houses and the walls
pulled down on every side, and was greatly defaced, and threatened to be
laid level with the ground, as in the Apocrypha:

"And when he had taken the spoils of the city, he set it on fire, and
pulled down the houses and walls thereof on every side.'' (1 Maccabees
1:31)

"And that he would have compassion upon the city, sore defaced, and
ready to be made even with the ground; and hear the blood that cried
unto him,'' (2 Maccabees 8:3)

"That the holy city (to the which he was going in haste to lay it even
with the ground, and to make it a common buryingplace,) he would set at
liberty:'' (2 Maccabees 9:14)

and this was thoroughly done in the times of Nebuchadnezzar and Titus,
when the city was broke up and burnt with fire, and laid utterly
desolate; so the Targum renders the word for "desolation"; it sometimes
signifies a grave; see [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024), and
the sense may be here, that the city of Jerusalem was made graves to
many; and multitudes were buried under the ruins of it. Aben Ezra
interprets it, low places which were dug to find hidden things; the
Septuagint translate it "a watch", or cottage "for apple orchards", and
so the versions that follow it; signifying to what a low condition the
city was reduced. Jarchi and Kimchi interpret the word as we do,
"heaps": this, as it is true of Jerusalem, which has been trodden under
foot by the Gentiles, and remains so to this day, [Luk
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024), so likewise of mystical
Jerusalem, the holy city, given to the Gentiles or Papists, to be
trodden down for the space of forty and two months, the exact time of
the reign of antichrist, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002).

[Psalms 79:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 79:2</span></span>

The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the
fowls of the heaven,.... For such there were, both at the time of the
Babylonish captivity, and in the times of Antiochus, who were good men,
and served the Lord, and yet suffered in the common calamity. Nicanor, a
general of Demetrius, in the time of the Maccabees, seems to have been
guilty of such a fact as this, since, when he was slain, his tongue was
given in pieces to the fowls, and the reward of his madness was hung up
before the temple, as in the Apocrypha:

"And when he had cut out the tongue of that ungodly Nicanor, he
commanded that they should give it by pieces unto the fowls, and hang up
the reward of his madness before the temple.'' (2 Maccabees 15:33)

the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth; this clause and
the following verse are applied to a case in the times of the Maccabees,
when sixty men of the Assideans were slain, religious, devout, and holy
men, so called from the very word here translated "saints";

"Now the Assideans were the first among the children of Israel that
sought peace of them:'' (1 Maccabees 7:13)

"The flesh of thy saints have they cast out, and their blood have they
shed round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them.'' (1
Maccabees 7:17)

[Psalms 79:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 79:3</span></span>

Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem,.... Without
any concern of mind, or remorse of conscience; without any fear of God
or man; as if it had been so much water only; and this they shed in
great abundance: from the Apocrypha:

"And when he had taken all away, he went into his own land, having made
a great massacre, and spoken very proudly.'' (1 Maccabees 1:24)

"And spake peaceable words unto them, but all was deceit: for when they
had given him credence, he fell suddenly upon the city, and smote it
very sore, and destroyed much people of Israel.'' (1 Maccabees 1:30)

"Thus they shed innocent blood on every side of the sanctuary, and
defiled it:'' (1 Maccabees 1:37)

"So they rose up against them in battle on the sabbath, and they slew
them, with their wives and children and their cattle, to the number of a
thousand people.'' (1 Maccabees 2:38)

in like manner the blood of the saints has been shed by the
antichristian beast of Rome, for which he and his followers will be
righteously retaliated, [Rev 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006).

and there was none to bury them: either the number of the slain was so
great, that there were not left enough to bury the dead, or they that
did remain were not suffered to do it; this will be the case of the two
witnesses, when slain, [Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007).

[Psalms 79:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 79:4</span></span>

We are become a reproach to our neighbours,.... That is, those that
remained; so the Jews were to the Edomites, especially at the time of
the Babylonish captivity, [Psa 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007),

a scorn and derision to them that are round about us; as the Christians
in all ages have been to the men of the world, and especially will be
insulted and triumphed over when the witnesses are slain, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010).

[Psalms 79:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 79:5</span></span>

How long, Lord, wilt thou be angry? for ever?.... That is, how long wilt
thou be angry? shall it be for ever? see [Psa
85:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#004), for though what was done, or to
be done, as before related, was or will be done by the enemies of the
Lord's people, yet by his permission, and as a token of his anger and
displeasure against them: at least it might be so understood, both by
them and by their enemies; and hence this expostulation,

shall thy jealousy burn like fire? so jealousy does; its coals are coals
of fire, [Sol 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006), there were, at the
times referred to, such among the people, who did evil things, and
provoked the Lord to jealousy and wrath: see the Apocrypha:

"And there was very great wrath upon Israel.'' (1 Maccabees 1:64)

"When this was done, and they had made a common supplication, they
besought the merciful Lord to be reconciled with his servants for
ever.'' (2 Maccabees 8:29)

[Psalms 79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 79:6</span></span>

Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not known thee,.... Who
had poured out the blood of the saints like water, and therefore it was
a righteous thing with God to pour out the cup of wrath in his hands,
and cause them to drink the dregs of it: these words, though they are in
the form of an imprecation, yet regard not private revenge, but public
justice, and the honour of God; and, besides, may be considered as a
prophecy of what would be, and particularly of God's pouring out the
vials of his wrath on the antichristian states; who, though they profess
Christianity, are no other than Heathens, and have no spiritual and
serious knowledge of Christ:

and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name; but upon their
idols of gold, silver, brass, and stone, on the Virgin Mary, angels, and
saints departed; for these, besides the kingdoms of Babylon, Syria, and
Rome Pagan, are the kingdoms of the ten kings, that gave their kingdoms
to the beast, and committed fornication, i.e. idolatry, with the whore
of Rome; see [Rev 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002), these words
are referred to in [Jer 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025) and also
the following.

[Psalms 79:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 79:7</span></span>

For they have devoured Jacob,.... The posterity of Jacob, the people of
the Jews, typical of the church of God, made havoc of by the Romish
antichrist: and laid waste his dwelling place; both Jerusalem and the
temple, which was done both by the Chaldeans and the Romans, and also in
the times of Antiochus; see the Apocrypha:

"38 Insomuch that the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled because of them:
whereupon the city was made an habitation of strangers, and became
strange to those that were born in her; and her own children left her.
39 Her sanctuary was laid waste like a wilderness, her feasts were
turned into mourning, her sabbaths into reproach her honour into
contempt.'' (1 Maccabees 1)

"4 In his acts he was like a lion, and like a lion's whelp roaring for
his prey. 5 For He pursued the wicked, and sought them out, and burnt up
those that vexed his people.'' (1 Maccabees 3)

which were types of the Gospel church made desolate by the Papists: the
word (d) used signifies a sheepcote, the dwelling place of those sheep
that are troubled by the beast of Rome.

\(d\) "caulam ejus", Michaelis.

[Psalms 79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 79:8</span></span>

O remember not against us former iniquities,.... Or, "our ancient
iniquities", as the Septuagint; the most ancient sin of all is that of
our first parents, in which we are involved, and by which we are made
sinners; and for which judgment comes upon all men; and from thence
flows the corruption of nature, or that original sin of our nature in
which we are all conceived and born, and so are transgressors from the
womb; or iniquities of former times, of our youth, as Kimchi, sins done
of old, committed long ago, in the youthful age, see [Psa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007), or the sins of former persons,
of our fathers, as Aben Ezra, which the Lord visits sometimes upon the
children: some think reference is had to the sin of their forefathers in
making and worshipping the golden calf; the Jews (e) have a saying, that
there is no punishment happens to Israel, but there is an ounce in it
for the sin of the calf; their meaning is, that this is always
remembered and visited, according to [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034), the phrase may take in all the
sins of former persons, their ancestors, and of former times, from age
to age, they had continued in, which had brought ruin upon them; and all
their own sins, of nature and of youth, all past ones, to the present
time: and it is desired that God would not "remember these against
them"; that is, that he would not chastise or punish them for them, but
that he would pardon them; for forgiveness of sin is sometimes expressed
by a non-remembrance of it, [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025), or that he would not "remember
unto" (f) them; that is, put them in mind of them, lay them home and
heavy upon their consciences, charge them with the guilt of them, and
demand satisfaction for them; which is causing them to possess the sins
of their youth, or former ones, [Job
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#026),

let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us; the mercy of God is rich,
plenteous, and abundant; many are the acts, and manifold the instances
of it; and there is a heart of compassion, and a tenderness expressed in
it; and which is free, and comes before the merits of men, goes before
them, and is not caused by them; and the phrase denotes the early and
timely application of it, the case being desperate, and requiring haste,
and the danger such that nothing but mercy could prevent; and indeed it
is mercy that prevents both our temporal and eternal ruin. The reason
given for this request is,

for we are brought very low; sin brings men into a low estate, and only
the grace and mercy of God can raise them up, and that exalts to an high
estate; or are become very "weak" (g) and helpless; sin strips men of
their strength, leaves them without any, and incapable of helping
themselves out of that estate into which it has brought them: or are
quite "exhausted" (h) and dried up, no good thing in them, no comfort
left them; but are poor, and wretched, and miserable.

\(e\) T Hieros. Taanioth, fol. 68. 3. (f) "ne memineris nobis",
Montanus, Michaelis; so Cocceius. (g) "attenuati", Pagninus, Montanus,
Tigurine version, Vatablus, Musculus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (h)
"Exhausti", Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 79:9</span></span>

Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name,.... Help us
out of the troubles in which we are; enable us to bear them with
patience, and without murmuring, while it is thy pleasure to continue
them; assist us against our powerful enemies, and strengthen us to do
our duty; afford us more grace, and fresh supplies of it in our time of
need: the arguments enforcing these petitions are, because God is "the
God of salvation", to whom it belongs, of whom it is, and of him only to
be expected; he is the sole author and giver of it; and because to help
and save is for the glory of his name, which is great in the salvation
of his people:

and deliver us; out of the hands of all our enemies, and out of all our
afflictions, and out of this low estate in which we are:

and purge away our sins for thy name's sake; which were the cause of all
calamities and distress, and which can only be purged away by the blood
and sacrifice of Christ, [Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003), the
word signifies to "expiate" (i) sin, or atone for it; which was the work
and business of Christ our High Priest, who has made reconciliation for
sin, finished, made an end of it, and put it away by the oblation of
himself, for the sake of which God is propitious; and so the words may
be rendered, "be propitious to our sins" (k): or merciful to our
unrighteousnesses, for the sake of Christ the great propitiation; or
through the propitiatory sacrifice to be offered up by him; or, in other
words, "cover our sins" (l); which is also the sense of the phrase, that
they may be seen no more; pardon and forgive them for Christ's sake; see
[Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001).

\(i\) "expiationem fac", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Michaelis. (k)
"Propitiare", Pagninus, Montanus; "propitius esto", V. L. Musculus; so
Tigurine version. (l) metaph. "texit", Amama.

[Psalms 79:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 79:10</span></span>

Wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their God?.... They boast of,
and put their confidence in, and expect salvation from? he does not
appear for them, he is not with them; he has forsaken them, and will not
help them; than which nothing can be more afflicting and distressing to
the Lord's people; see [Psa 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003),

let him be known among the Heathen in our sight; in his holiness and
justice, as a God of power, and to whom vengeance belongs; let him be
known by his judgments executed upon the Heathen, openly and publicly in
our sight, and in the view of the whole world; see [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016), so it follows,

by the revenging of the blood of thy servants, which is shed; as in [Psa
79:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#003), which blood God will revenge
according to the request of his people, and give them blood to drink by
way of retaliation; by which means his vindictive justice will be known,
and it will be seen where the God of his people is, that he is with
them, and maintains their cause; see [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009). The words may be rendered in
connection with the preceding clause thus; "let it be known among the
Heathen in our sight, even the revenging of the blood of thy servants
which is shed"; though Kimchi supplies the words as we do, "by a
revenging", &c.

[Psalms 79:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 79:11</span></span>

Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee,.... Such as were so in
a literal or spiritual sense; and the sighs and groans of such are not
hid from the Lord; they come up into his ears as did the sighing and
groaning of the children of Israel when in Egypt, [Exo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023),

according to the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are
appointed to die; not by the Lord, as all men are, but by men; who are
under a sentence of condemnation, who are ready to die, being appointed
to destruction, [Pro 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006), or are in
danger of death, as Jarchi observes; the phrase is used in Talmudic
writings; whose lives are exposed to danger, who are killed all the day
long, and are accounted as sheep for the slaughter, [Psa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022), these it is desired the Lord
would keep from dying, or cause them to remain in life; or not suffer
their lives to be taken away from them, which he was able to do through
"the greatness of his power"; though these words according to the
accents belong to the preceding clause. The Targum, and so Jarchi, and
other Jewish writers, render the words, "loose thou those", &c. mention
being made before of prisoners, or of persons bound.

[Psalms 79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 79:12</span></span>

And render unto our neighbours seven fold into their bosom, Not seven
fold for one, as the Targum paraphrases it, or a seven fold punishment
for one sin; but that he would recompense their sins, or punish for
them, and take vengeance on them, largely, abundantly, though not beyond
measure, or exceeding the rules of justice; see [Gen
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015),

the reproach with which they have reproached thee, O Lord; by denying
his being, or calling in question his perfections of power, truth, and
goodness, to help his people; speaking ill of his providence, despising
his word and ordinances, and even reproaching his people in reproaching
him, [Psa 89:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#050), and this is what a
righteous recompence is desired for; see [Lam
3:64](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#064).

[Psalms 79:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 79:13</span></span>

So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture,.... Who were the people of
God, not by creation and providence only, as all men are, being his
creatures, and provided for by him; but by special choice, and by
covenant grace: and "the sheep of his pasture"; whom he feeds as a
shepherd does his flock, provides good pasture for them, and leads them
into it:

will give thee thanks for ever, we will show forth thy praise to all
generations: the above petitions being answered and fulfilled; the work
of praise is acceptable unto God, what he is well pleased with, being
glorified thereby; and is what becomes his people to do, and which they
are formed for, and that for evermore, as long as they live in this
world, and to all eternity in another; and who will and do take care
that the wonders of divine grace and providence be transmitted and told
to their posterity in succeeding ages, that so thanks may be given him,
and his praise shown forth in one generation after another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 80](psa080)

</div>
