<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa053)  [Next](psa055) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 54](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 54:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 54

To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when the
Ziphims came and said to Saul, Doth not David hide himself with us? Of
the word "neginoth", See Gill on [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001), title; and of "maschil", See Gill
on [Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), title. The occasion of
writing this psalm were the discoveries the Ziphims or Ziphites made to
Saul of David being in their neighbourhood; which they did twice, as
appears from [Sa1 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014). Which of
these gave occasion to the psalm is not certain; it is very likely that
it was composed after both had been made. These Ziphims were the
inhabitants of a city called Ziph, which was in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055), near to which was a wilderness,
which had its name from the city in which David was when they came to
Saul with this news of him.

[Psalms 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 54:1</span></span>

Save me, O God, by thy name,.... That is, by himself, by his power, and
of his grace and goodness; the Lord's name is often used for himself.
David in his distress applies to his God for salvation and deliverance,
who only could give it; which was right; and his prayer was remarkably
heard and answered: for when Saul came down upon the first discovery,
and beset David and his men all around, just as he was about to seize
the prey, tidings came to him of the invasion of the Philistines; which
obliged him directly to quit his pursuit of David, and return in haste
for the defence of his country, [Sa1
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026); and upon the second discovery,
when Saul came again to take him, Saul was delivered into the hands of
David, who could have took away his life if he would; but he only took
his spear and cruse of water by his bolster, as a proof of his being in
his power, [Sa1 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#012). Of such avail
is the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man. This prayer is
suitable enough to David's antitype and son, the Messiah; see [Psa
69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001); and especially to sensible
sinners; who, being made acquainted with, their lost and perishing
condition, inquire the way of salvation; and finding it is not by works,
but by Christ alone, apply in that way for it, and desire that God would
save them by his Son; who is his name, in whom his name is, and whose
name Jesus, a Saviour, is of God's giving; and this name is a strong
tower, whither such souls, sensible of danger, flee and are safe; nor is
there any other name in which salvation is, and which is therefore
exceeding precious, and like ointment poured forth; see [Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021). Or, "for thy name's sake" (h);
for the sake of the glory of his divine perfections; which was displayed
in the deliverance of David, and more abundantly in the salvation of
lost sinners; such as the wisdom, power, faithfulness, justice, grace
and mercy of God. Such a petition shows that man cannot save himself;
that no creature, none but God can save him; and that a sensible sinner
desires to be saved in such a way that God may be glorified;

and judge me by thy strength; David, though innocent, had many charges
laid against him; his enemies were lively and strong; he puts his cause
into the hands of the Lord, his strong Redeemer, who was able to plead
it thoroughly against those that strove with him; so Christ, his
antitype, committed his cause to him that judgeth righteously, [Pe1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023); and so should every believer.

\(h\) "propter nomen tuum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus,
Amama, Michaelis.

[Psalms 54:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 54:2</span></span>

Hear my prayer, O God,.... The psalmist first puts up his petitions, and
then desires to be heard; his distress, and the fervency of his spirit,
not suffering him to observe order;

give ear to the words of my mouth; for the prayer which was conceived in
his mind, and inwrought there by the Spirit of God, was expressed
vocally.

[Psalms 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 54:3</span></span>

For strangers are risen up against me,.... Meaning such as Doeg the
Edomite, or Heathen soldiers, that Saul had hired and took into his
army, who were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel; and such as these
rose up against David's antitype, the Messiah, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), [Act
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027). Or rather the Ziphims, who were
of his own nation, yea, of his own tribe, yet used him as barbarously as
the very Heathens would have done, or worse; and who, though
notwithstanding they were of Israel, might not be Israelites indeed, but
strangers to an inward experience of divine and spiritual things: for
men may be professors of religion, and yet be strangers to God in
Christ, to Christ himself, and the way of salvation by him, and
communion with him; to the Spirit of God, and the operations of his
grace on the heart; to themselves, their own hearts, and their state and
condition by nature; to the Gospel of Christ, and to the people of God;
and these are sometimes the most violent persecutors of good and
spiritual men;

and oppressors seek after my soul; or "life" (i), to take it away; as
did Saul and his army; who are "the mighty" or "strong ones" (k), as the
word here used signifies; see [Sa1
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011); and as the Jewish sanhedrim,
Scribes and Pharisees, sought after the soul or life of Christ, to take
that away, as they did;

they have not set God before them. They did not consider themselves as
under the omniscient eye of God; they did not set his word before them,
as the rule of their conduct, but cast it behind their backs; nor did
they regard his providential mercies and layouts as a motive to engage
them to obedience to him, but despised them; they had not the fear of
God before their eyes, nor in their hearts, nor any concern for his
glory; and therefore did the wicked things they did against his servant.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(i\) "vitam meam", Junius & Tremellius, Michaelis. (k) "fortes", V. L.
Pagninus, Musculus, Gejerus; "praepotentes", Vatablus.

[Psalms 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 54:4</span></span>

Behold, God is mine helper,.... This being a matter of wonder to be
helped in so extraordinary a manner, and a sure and certain case, and
what was deserving the attention of others; for the encouragement of
their faith and hope in like cases, a "behold" is prefixed unto it: and
what is here said is true of David's son, the Messiah, and is expressed
by him in much the same language, [Isa
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009); and of all the saints whom the
Lord helps, as at first conversion, out of the pit wherein is no water,
out of the horrible pit, the mire and clay of nature's darkness,
ignorance, and unbelief; so out of all their afflictions and
temptations, and out of the hands of all their enemies; he helps in the
exercise of grace, and in the discharge of duty; and he helps to all
mercies, temporal and spiritual, needful for them; which help is quick
and present, seasonable and suitable, always sufficient; and is what
they have reason to expect both from what he has said to them in
promise, and from what he has done for them;

the Lord is with them that uphold my soul; that ministered to his
sustenance, as Abigail did, and that gathered to him and joined him, and
exposed their lives in the defence of him; these the Lord was with,
blessed, protected, and afforded them his gracious presence. Such there
were with Christ; who followed him in the regeneration; who ministered
to him of their substance, whom God rewarded in a way of grace; and he
blesses them that bless his, and do good to them; they being the
excellent in the earth, in whom is his delight, the apple of his eye,
and his jewels. Or the sense is, that the Lord is he that upheld his
soul; not only the chief of his upholders, but the only one: so R. Moses
(l) interprets it, that he is the alone upholder, and is instead of all
upholders, and answers to them all; who upheld his soul in life, and
followed him with his goodness: as when God is said to be the first, and
"with the last", the meaning is, that he is the first and the last, [Isa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004); see [Psa
118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007); so he upheld the soul of Christ
in the wilderness, and in the garden, and on the cross; see [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001). And he upholds all his people in
a providential way in their beings, and supplies them with all the
necessaries of life; and, in a spiritual way, maintaining their
spiritual life, supplying them with all grace, bearing them up under all
trials, holding up their goings in his ways, and preserving them to the
end.

\(l\) Apud Aben Ezram in loc.

[Psalms 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 54:5</span></span>

He shall reward evil unto mine enemies,.... That eyed him as Saul did;
that observed his haunts, where he resorted, and who were with him, as
the Ziphites did under Saul's direction; as the Word (m) here used for
"enemies" signifies: the mischief they had devised for him, he believed,
would be returned upon their own heads; the pit they digged they would
fall into themselves; and the net they had spread for others their own
feet would be taken in. This was true as of David's enemies, so of
Christ's, the wicked Jews, who narrowly watched him to take every
advantage against him;

cut them off in thy truth; root and branch, as Saul, and his family, and
his courtiers, quickly were, according to the truth of promises made to
David, and of threatenings unto them.

\(m\) "observatoribus meis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Psalms 54:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 54:6</span></span>

I will freely sacrifice unto thee,.... Not legal sacrifices; no, nor
freewill offerings the law gives directions about, though the allusion
is to them; but the freewill offerings of his mouth, [Psa
119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108); the sacrifices of praise and
thanksgiving, on account of help, salvation, and deliverance, as appears
from the following clause; which he determines to offer, not by
constraint, but willingly; not by force, but of a ready mind; freely,
and with all his heart. The sacrifice of his antitype is himself, his
soul and body, as in union with his divine Person; and this was offered
up to God, against whom man has sinned, and whose justice must be
satisfied; and this was done freely and voluntarily; he gave himself an
offering; he laid down his life of himself, and that for sinners. The
sacrifices of his people are their prayers and praises, their acts of
beneficence, and the presentation of their souls and bodies in divine
service; all which they do freely, under the influence of divine grace;

I will praise thy name, O Lord; which explains what is meant by
sacrificing: this is what is due to the Lord, and comely in his people;

for it is good; either the name of God; and therefore to be praised. He
himself is good, as, he is, both in a way of providence and of grace;
and it is good, both pleasantly and profitably good, to sing praises to
him, [Psa 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001).

[Psalms 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 54:7</span></span>

For he hath delivered me out of all trouble,.... As he desired, [Sa1
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#024); that is, out of all his present
trouble; not that he had no more afterwards; for as soon as one trouble
is gone, generally speaking, another comes; but as God delivered him out
of his present distress, so he believed he would deliver him out of all
his afflictions in future times;

and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies: or revenge, as the
Targum supplies it; not that he delighted in the destruction of his
enemies, but in the justice of God glorified thereby, and in the
goodness of God to him, in delivering him from them; see [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 55](psa055)

</div>
