<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa086)  [Next](psa088) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 87](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 87:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 87

A Psalm or Song for the sons of Korah. Whether this psalm was composed
by David, in a view of the temple to be built by his son Solomon; or
whether by one that returned from the Babylonish captivity, who wrote it
for the comfort of those that wept at the laying of the foundation of
the second temple; it seems evident that the subject matter of it is the
church of God in Gospel times, and especially in the latter day glory:
the title in the Syriac version is,

"concerning the redemption of Jerusalem.''.

[Psalms 87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 87:1</span></span>

His foundation is in the holy mountains. The Jewish writers connect
these words with the title of the psalm, and make the sense to be this;
"the foundation" or argument "of it", the psalm, "is concerning the holy
mountains" of Zion and Jerusalem; so Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and Kimchi; and
the Targum joins them together thus,

"by the hands of the sons of Korah is said a song, which is founded by
the mouth of the fathers that were of old:''

but the words are a part of the song or psalm, which begins in an abrupt
manner, just as [Sol 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002) and may be
rendered either "its foundation", or "his foundation", and refer either
to the church, or to the Lord, and the sense is the same either way; for
the church's foundation is also the Lord's foundation, a foundation of
his laying; see [Isa 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032) and is laid
"in the holy mountains"; alluding to the mountains of Zion and Moriah,
where the temple stood, a type of the church; or to the mountains about
Jerusalem, by which also the church is frequently signified; and by
those, in a mystical and spiritual sense, may be meant the purposes and
decrees of God, which are as mountains of brass, [Zac
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001), they are like the ancient
mountains for the antiquity of them, and are high, and not to be reached
and searched into, and are firm, solid, and immoveable; and are also
holy, particularly the decree of election, that source of all true
holiness, which has sanctification for its end and means; and is the
foundation of the church, which supports and secures it, and stands
sure, [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019), also the covenant of
grace, which is sure and immoveable, and in which are provisions for
holiness, internal and external; and is the foundation and security of
the church, and all believers; but especially Jesus Christ, the Rock of
ages, is meant, the Holy One of Israel, the sure foundation laid in
Zion: some interpret these holy mountains of the holy apostles, who were
in an high and eminent station in the church, and were doctrinally
foundations, as they ministerially laid Christ, as the only foundation;
see [Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020), it may be rendered,
"among the holy mountains" (w); and so may regard, as Cocceius explains
it, the several kingdoms and provinces of the world in which the Gospel
shall be preached; and the church shall be established and settled in
the latter day even upon the tops of mountains, which shall become holy
to the Lord, [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).

\(w\) "inter montes sanctitatis", Junius & Tremellius; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 87:2</span></span>

The Lord loveth the gates of Zion,.... Which the Targum interprets of
the schools, as preferable to the synagogues: the Lord loves Zion
herself; that is, the church, and therefore has chosen it for his
habitation, took up his rest and residence in it, has founded it, and
set Christ as King over it, and by whom he has redeemed it; and he loves
her gates, the public ordinances; he loves them that come to Zion's
gates, and wait and worship there, and who enter in and become members
thereof; and he loves what is done there, he being there publicly prayed
unto, and publicly praised by a large number of his people; where his
word is faithfully preached, and reverently attended to, and his
ordinances truly administered, and the graces of his saints exercised on
him: wherefore, because all this is done socially, and in a public
manner, and so much for his own manifestative glory, he esteems these

more than all the dwellings of Jacob; the private habitations of his
people; yet he has a regard to these, the bounds of which he fixed from
eternity, and where he was delighting himself before they were in being;
and he loves the persons that dwell in them, and what is done there in a
right manner, as closet and family worship; but when these are put in
competition with public worship, the latter is preferred unto them,
because done by more, and more publicly; Zion and its gates, the church
and its ordinances, are preferable to all the dwellings of Jacob put
together.

[Psalms 87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 87:3</span></span>

Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Which is to be
understood not of the city of Jerusalem literally, which was a
magnificent city, compact together, full of inhabitants, and spacious
houses, the metropolis of Judea, and seat of the kings of Judah; and
what was most glorious of all that could be said of it, it was the city
of God; and so Jarchi interprets it, the glory spoken of it is, that it
is the city of God; here the temple was built, and many glorious things
were in it; here God granted his presence, and his worship was kept up:
and besides, there were other and more glorious things spoken of it, by
way of prophecy; as, that the Messiah should come in person into it, as
the owner of it, and give it a greater glory than the first temple had;
here he was to preach his doctrines, and do his miracles, which he
accordingly did; near this city he suffered, died, and was buried; rose
again, ascended to heaven; and here he poured forth the gifts of the
Holy Spirit in an extraordinary manner: but rather this is to be
interpreted of the church of God, comparable to a city, and which is of
God's building, and where he dwells; See Gill on [Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001) of which glorious things are
spoken for the present; as, that it is the city of the King of kings,
the name of which is "Jehovah Shammah", the Lord is there; its
foundation is Christ; its walls and bulwarks are salvation; its gates
are praise; glorious ordinances are administered in it, and glorious
truths are preached here; and so the words may be rendered, "glorious
things are spoken in thee" (x): and of it also glorious things are
spoken, by way of prophecy, as, what shall be in the latter day; a great
effusion of the Spirit upon it; the gracious presence of Christ in it in
a more visible manner; a great increase of converts both among Jews and
Gentiles, which shall flock into it; and the great spread of the Gospel,
which shall be the means of it; the unity, harmony, and concord of
professors of religion; the holiness of their lives and conversation;
and the very great peace and prosperity which will everywhere abound;
and especially glorious things are spoken of the New Jerusalem, the city
of our God; of which see [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001).

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(x\) "in te", Montanus, Tigurine version, Cocceius, Schmidt, Syr. vers.

[Psalms 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 87:4</span></span>

I will make mention of Rahab,.... Not of Rahab the harlot, as Jerom and
others of the ancients (y) interpret it; for the letters of both words
are not the same in Hebrew; though mention is made of her in the Gospel,
and Gospel times, in the genealogy of Christ, and by two of the
apostles, [Mat 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005), but of Egypt; and
so the Targum interprets it, which is so called, as it is in [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010) either from the pride of its
inhabitants, the word having in it the sense of pride and haughtiness,
and these being naturally proud and haughty, as Philo (z) the Jew
observes; or from some city of this name in it; or rather this respects
that part of Egypt called Delta, which was in the form of a pear; which
"raab", or "rib", in the Egyptian language, signifies; in the midst of
which was the city of Athribis of Ptolemy (a), which has its name from
hence, and signifies the heart of a pear; and still this part of the
country is called Errifia, as Leo Africanus (b) relates, and is here put
for the whole country: the passage respects the conversion of it, and
are the words of God foretelling it, and of which mention is made in
[Isa 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018) and had its accomplishment,
at least in part, on the day of Pentecost, [Act
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010) and will be further accomplished
in the latter day, when the people that now inhabit that country shall
be converted, which will be when the kingdoms of this world become
Christ's: and Babylon; the country of the Assyrians and Chaldeans, of
which Babylon was the metropolis: mention is made of the conversion of
these in [Isa 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#024) and which also was
fulfilled, in part, on the day of Pentecost, [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009) and in Babylon there was a church,
in the times of the Apostle Peter, [Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013) these the Lord promises that he
would make mention of:

to them that know me; says he, that so they might expect their
conversion, and take notice of them, and receive them, when converted;

or among them that know me (c); that is, I will make mention of them, as
such that know me, and belong to that number; even such that love the
Lord, believe in him, own and confess him, and yield obedience to him,
and whom he takes into communion and fellowship with himself, and makes
his friends, familiars, and acquaintance:

behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; where also will be many
converts, regenerate persons, and such as know the Lord; of which there
has been a partial accomplishment already; of Philistia, see [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040), for Azotus, or Ashdod, was a
city of the Philistines; and of Tyre, see [Psa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012) and of Ethiopia, and its
conversion, mention is made in [Psa
68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031), and the Ethiopian eunuch is one
instance of it, [Act 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#027) of all which
there will be abundance of instances in the latter day; and thus, as the
church is commended from her foundation, from the superlative love the
Lord bears to her, and the glorious things spoken of her; so from the
number of her converts in different nations, in which her glory in
Gospel times would greatly lie; see [Isa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018),

this man was born there; not any particular man; any single individual,
famous for piety, wisdom, wealth, or power; as if it suggested that now
and then such a person might be born in the above countries; whereas in
Zion there were frequently many such persons born: nor is it to be
understood of the Messiah, that should come out of Zion, as if that was
the reason why multitudes from the above places should flock thither,
because of the birth of this illustrious Person: the Targum understands
it of a great personage, a king; and paraphrases it,

"a king is educated there;''

but it designs many persons in each of those countries that should be
born again, of water, and of the Spirit, of the incorruptible seed of
grace, by the ministry of the word; who, because they should be
regenerated by means of the Gospel preached in Zion, therefore are said
to be born there; and besides, being born again, they are admitted
members of Zion, and to all the privileges of Zion, as true born
Israelites; and are brought up there, are nourished with the sincere
milk of the word, and nursed with the breasts of Gospel ordinances there
administered; and so Zion, or Jerusalem, the Gospel church, is truly the
mother of them all, [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026).

\(y\) Aug. Euthymius, Theodoret, & alii, in Amama, Antibarbar. Bibl. I.
3. p. 820. (z) De Agricultura, p. 196. (a) Geograph. l. 4. c. 5. (b)
Descriptio Africae, l. 8. c. 2. (c) "inter scientes me", Vatablus,
Gejerus, Schmidt; "apud noscentes me", Junius & Tremellius; "apud
familiares meos", Piscator; "apud notos meos", Amama.

[Psalms 87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 87:5</span></span>

And of Zion it shall be said,.... The same with the city of God, the
church before commended:

this and that man was born in her; this and that great man, in
opposition to a mean person, in the preceding verse: "or a man and man"
(d); men of all sorts, and of different nations, Jews and Gentiles, and
great numbers of them:

and the Highest himself shall establish her; the church of God, though
founded by him, and laid on a sure foundation, on the Rock of ages,
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail, yet is sometimes
fluctuating and unsettled;

it is tossed with tempests, the persecutions of men, the errors and
heresies of false teachers, and the contentions and divisions of its own
members; and is not always in one place, but is removed from one place
to another, and is obliged to flee into the wilderness; but in the
latter day it will be established and settled; it will be a tabernacle
that shall not be taken down nor removed; but shall be established for
ever, [Psa 89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037), and this is the work
of God, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth, whatever
instruments he may make use of, as ministers of the word, and kings of
the earth; as it is his work, and his only, to establish particular
believers, [Co2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021), so it is his to
establish the church in general: or it may be rendered, "he shall
establish her on high" (e), which will be the case when she is
established upon the top of the mountains, and exalted above the hills,
[Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).

\(d\) "vir et vir", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Vatablus,
Gejerus, Michaelis. (e) So the Targum, and Ainsworth.

[Psalms 87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 87:6</span></span>

The Lord shall count when he writeth up the people, Not in the Lamb's
book of life; for that was written from eternity, [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008) but in the writing of the house
of Israel, among the living in Jerusalem, and with his righteous ones;
which is done at effectual calling, and when admitted members of Gospel
churches, whereby they openly appear to be the children of God, and are
taken into the list and catalogue of saints; see [Eze
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009) or in the last day, when the Lord
will take the number of his people,

and cause them again to pass under the rod of him that telleth them; and
will make up his jewels, complete the number of them in conversion, and
collect them all together; and his counting and writing them may denote
his exact knowledge of them, and his care that he lose none; but this
will only concern regenerate persons; the Lord will not count nor make
any account of any others, as follows:

that this man was born there; and the man that is born in Zion, even
every regenerate man, will be counted and numbered by him, and declared
to be his, when he makes a general survey and muster of his saints
another day.

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 87:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 87:7</span></span>

As well the singers as the players on the instruments shall be
there,.... In Zion, in the church; signifying that there should be great
spiritual joy there when the above things should be accomplished; great
joy in the churches, because of the conversion of Jews and Gentiles; and
great joy in the persons themselves, born again, and brought to Zion; in
allusion to the vocal and instrumental music used in the temple service;
see [Isa 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010).

all my springs are in thee; which are either the words of the psalmist,
or rather of the souls born in Zion; who, in their spiritual songs, will
thus express themselves concerning the church, in which are the word and
ordinances, compared to fountains of living water, and are springs of
spiritual peace and refreshment to converted persons; see [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018), where also the Spirit and his
graces are communicated by the ministry of the word and ordinances in
the church, which are signified by wells and rivers of living water,
[Joh 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014) and particularly here stands
Christ, the fountain of gardens, and well of living waters, for the
supply and comfort of saints, and his blood a fountain opened for
cleansing and purification, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015),
yea, here flows the river of God's love, the streams whereof make glad
the city of God; and which, like the waters in Ezekiel's vision, come
from under the threshold of the sanctuary, [Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004) or the words may be considered as
an address of the psalmist, or of the church, or of regenerate persons,
unto Christ:

all my springs or fountains are in thee; the fulness of grace dwells in
him, the springs of all joy, and peace, and comfort, are with him; the
wells of salvation are in him, and both grace and glory are from him; he
is the spring of all grace now, and the fountain of all happiness
hereafter. Gussetius (z) has a very peculiar version of the whole text,
which he renders thus

"all my fountains will be singing in thee, or of thee, as those that
dance at the sound of the pipe:''

taking the allusion to be to the playing of fountains in gardens, and to
the delightful sound the waters make; but the accents will not admit of
such a sense.

\(z\) Comment. Ebr. p. 845.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 88](psa088)

</div>
