<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa020)  [Next](psa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 21

To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David. This psalm was either written
by David; and therefore called a "psalm of David"; or it was written, as
it may be rendered, "for David", by some other person, on account of his
victories and triumphs; or rather "concerning David" (s); that is,
concerning the Messiah, the son of David, as Kimchi says some expound
it; or concerning the Messiah, who is called David, [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024); and Jarchi observes, that their
Rabbins interpret it of the Messiah; but, says he, it is right to
explain it, moreover, of David himself, for an answer to the heretics
(Christians) who err in it; and various passages in this psalm are by
the Jewish writers understood of the Messiah; as "the King", in [Psa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001) is in the Targum called the King
Messiah; [Psa 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004) is in the Talmud
applied (t) to him; [Psa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003) are in
Zohar (u), and in the Midrashes (w), interpreted of him; and many
Christian writers understand the whole of him; which is right: though
Theodoret thinks it was penned on the account of the health of King
Hezekiah, and his restoration from his disease; which is not likely.

\(s\) "pro Davide, vel de Davide", Vatablus. (t) T. Bab. Succah, fol.
52. 1. Vid. Nachman. disput. "cum fratre Paulo", p. 36. Ed. Wagenseil.
(u) In Numb. fol. 68. 3. 4. (w) Midrash Tillim apud Viccars. in loc. &
in Galatin. l. 3. c. 9. Bemidbar Rabba, fol. 212. 4. & 218. 1.

[Psalms 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 21:7</span></span>

For the King trusteth in the Lord,.... That is, the King Messiah, as the
Targum paraphrases it; he trusted in the Lord for his support and
sustenance as man, for assistance and help in his time of trouble, and
for deliverance out of it; he trusted in the Lord that he would hear him
for himself, and for his people; and that he would glorify him with all
glory, honour, majesty, and blessedness, before spoken of; see [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008);

and through the mercy of the most High he shall not be moved; God the
Father is the most High; Christ is called the Son of the Highest, and
the Spirit the power of the Highest, [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032); there is mercy with him, which
is a ground of hope and trust, in his people, and also in the Messiah;
see [Psa 89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028); and some versions make
the mercy of the most High to be what the King Messiah trusts in,
reading the words (b), "for the King trusteth in the Lord, and in the
mercy of the most High"; but the accent "athnach", which distinguishes
the propositions, will not admit of it; but the sense is, that because
of the mercy, grace, goodness, and faithfulness of God in making and
keeping his promises, Christ would not be and was not moved from his
trust and confidence in the Lord; nor shall he even be removed from his
throne of glory on which he sits; nor from the glorious and happy state
in which he is: nor will it ever be in the power of his enemies to
displace him; for these in time will be destroyed by him, as the
following words show.

\(b\) So Genebrard, Muis,

[Psalms 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 21:8</span></span>

Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies,.... The Jews, that would
not have him to reign over them, who crucified him and persecuted his
apostles; the Gentiles, who were also concerned in his death; the Roman
emperors, who persecuted the Christians, and are signified by the red
dragon that waited to devour the man child when brought forth by the
woman, the church, [Rev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003); and also
the Papists, the followers of the man of sin, who oppose Christ in his
offices and grace, and are the enemies of his witnesses, and of his
interest; and besides these there are many professors of religion who
are enemies of Christ, either doctrinally or practically; to whom may be
added, the devil and his angels, and all those who are the children of
him and are influenced by him: these the hand of Christ will find out
sooner or later; for the words are an address to the King Messiah, who
being omniscient knows where all his enemies are, and where to find
them; and being omnipotent he will lay hold upon them, and hold them,
and none shall escape from him; his hand of vengeance shall fall upon
them, and he shall inflict righteous and deserved punishment on them;
and this shall be the case of "all" of them, none will be able to hide
themselves in secret places from him. This has been in part verified in
the Jewish nation at the destruction of Jerusalem, when wrath came upon
that people to the uttermost for their treatment of the Messiah; and in
the Pagan empire, when it was demolished, and kings and great men in
vain called to the rocks and mountains to hide them from the wrath of
the Lamb, [Rev 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015); and will have a
further accomplishment in the antichristian states and kingdoms, when
the vials of God's wrath shall be poured out upon them; and especially
at the battle of Armageddon, when Christ will avenge himself, and get
rid of all his enemies at once; and will have its final accomplishment
in all wicked men and devils at the day of judgment, when all Christ's
enemies will be found out by him, whether open or secret, and receive
their just punishment;

thy right hand shall find out those that hate thee; this is the same
with the former clause, and is repeated for the further certainty and
greater confirmation of the thing; and "the right hand" is mentioned as
expressive of the mighty power of the Lord. The Chaldee paraphrase
renders it, "the vengeance of thy right hand".

[Psalms 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 21:9</span></span>

Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven,.... Some think the allusion is to
David's causing the Ammonites to pass through the brick kiln, [Sa2
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031); others to the burning of Sodom
and Gomorrah: it represents what a severe punishment shall be inflicted
on the enemies of Christ; they shall be cast into a fiery oven, or
furnace of fire, as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, were by the order
of Nebuchadnezzar; so some render the words, "thou shalt put them into a
fiery oven", "as", being put for "into" (c): wicked men are as dry
trees, as stubble, as thorns or briers, and are fit fuel for a fiery
oven or furnace; by which is meant the wrath and fury of God, which is
poured forth as fire; and this has had its fulfilment in part in the
Jews at Jerusalem's destruction; when that day of the Lord burned like
an oven, and the proud and haughty Jews, and who dealt wickedly by
Christ, were burned up in it, [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001); and will have an additional
accomplishment when the whore of Babylon shall be burnt with fire, and
when the beast and false prophet shall be cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone; and still more fully at the general
conflagration, when will be the perdition of ungodly men, and the earth
and all that is therein shall be burnt up; and especially when all
wicked men and devils shall be cast into the lake and furnace of fire,
where will be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth; see [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016). This will be

in the time of thine anger, or "of thy countenance" (d); not his
gracious, but his angry countenance; when he shall put on a fierce look,
and appear as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, and stir up all his wrath;

the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath; not that they shall be
annihilated; their souls remain after death, and their bodies after the
resurrection; and will be tormented with the fire of God's wrath for
ever and ever; the phrase is expressive of utter ruin, of the
destruction of soul and body in hell; see [Psa
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#025); Jarchi takes it to be a prayer,
"may the Lord swallow them up", &c.

and the fire shall devour them; that is, as the Targum paraphrases it,
the fire of hell; or, however, it designs the wrath of God, who is a
consuming fire; or that fiery indignation of his, which shall devour the
adversaries; which comes down upon them either in temporal judgments
here, or in their everlasting destruction hereafter.

\(c\) Vide Aben Ezram in loc. (d) "vultus tui", V. L. so Sept. Aethiop.
Gejerus, Muis, Ainsworth; "faciei iratae tuae", Junius & Tremellius; so
Michaelis.

[Psalms 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 21:10</span></span>

Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth,.... Meaning the offspring
of wicked men; the fruit of the womb, [Psa
127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003); the same with their seed in the
next clause:

and their seed from among the children of men; see [Psa
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028); which must be understood of
such of their seed, and offspring as are as they were when born; are
never renewed and sanctified, but are like their parents; as the Jews
were, their parents were vipers, and they were serpents, the generation
of them; and were the children of the devil, and did his works: now
these passages had their accomplishment in the Jews, when the day of
God's wrath burnt them up, and left them neither root nor branch, [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001); and in the Pagan empire, when
every mountain and island were moved out of their places, and the
Heathen perished out of the land, [Rev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014); and will be further accomplished
when the Lord shall punish the wicked woman Jezebel, the antichristian
harlot, and kill her children with death, [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023); see [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035).

[Psalms 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 21:11</span></span>

For they intended evil against thee,.... All evil, whether in thought or
deed, if not immediately and directly, yet is ultimately against the
Lord, whose law is transgressed, and who is despised and reflected upon
as a lawgiver; all sin is an hostility committed against God, or against
Christ, against the Lord and his Anointed, or against his people, who
are all one as himself: the intention of evil is evil, and is cognizable
by the Lord, and punishable by him:

they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform;
not the death of Christ; that was indeed in itself a mischievous device
of theirs, but that they performed, though they had not their end in it;
they expected his name would then perish, and they should hear no more
of him: but rather it respects his resurrection from the dead, they
could not prevent, though they took all imaginable care that them might
be no show of it; and when they found he was really raised from the
dead, they contrived a wicked scheme to stop the credit of it, but in
vain, [Mat 27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063); and Jews and
Gentiles, and Papists, have formed schemes and done all they can to root
the Gospel, cause, and interest of Christ, out of the world, but have
not been able to perform it.

[Psalms 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 21:12</span></span>

Therefore shall thou make them turn their back,.... Or flee and run away
to private places, to hide themselves from the wrath of God and of the
Lamb, though to no purpose; or "make them turn behind thy back": God
will turn his back upon them, and be negligent and careless of them, and
not regard them when they cry in their misery and destruction. Some
Jewish interpreters (e) understand it of their being put together on one
side, in one corner, and be separate from the people of God; to which
sense the Targum inclines, rendering the word for "back" the "shoulder",
which sometimes signifies unanimity and union, [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009); and thus, being all together by
themselves, the wrath of God shall be poured forth upon them, and they
shall be destroyed at once: so the Christians were, by the providence of
God, brought out of Jerusalem before its destruction; and the saints
will be called out of Babylon before its fall; and the goats, the
wicked, will be separated from the righteous, and set together at
Christ's left hand; for they shall not stand in the congregation of the
righteous: but the best sense of the words is, "thou shalt set them for
a butt" or (f) "heap"; or, as it is in the Hebrew text, a shoulder; a
butt to shoot at being so called, because it is earth heaped up like a
shoulder; see [Job 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#012); and to this
agrees what follows:

when thou shalt make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the
face of them; that is, direct the arrows of his wrath and vengeance
right against them; see [Psa 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011).

\(e\) Kimchi & Ben Melech in loc. (f) "ponis eos metam", Cocceius;
"humerum", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus; "velut tumulum", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 21:13</span></span>

Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength,.... Exert thy strength,
display thy power in such manner, that thou mayest be exalted and
magnified on account of it. This was fulfilled at the destruction of
Jerusalem, when the kingdom of God came with power, [Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001); and will be again when Babylon
shall be utterly destroyed, because the Lord is strong who judgeth her,
[Rev 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008); and finally at the day of
judgment, when the wicked will be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power, [Th2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009);

so will we sing and praise thy power; forms of such songs of praise may
be seen, as Cocceius observes, in [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015); at the sounding of the seventh
trumpet, at the victory over the beast, and his image, and at the
destruction of Babylon.

[Psalms 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 21:1</span></span>

The king shall joy in thy strength, O Lord,.... Either in that strength
which is in Jehovah himself, in whom is everlasting strength; and which
is seen in the works of creation and providence, and is the same in
Christ himself, as he is the mighty God; or else in the strength which
Jehovah communicated to Christ as man, whereby he was strengthened in
his human nature to go through and complete the work of man's
redemption; or in the strength which the Lord puts forth, and the power
which he exerts towards and upon his people, in conversion; which is the
produce of the exceeding greatness of his power; and in strengthening
them, from time to time, to exercise grace, discharge duty, and
withstand temptations and sin; and in keeping them safe to the end; in
supporting them under all their trials, and in carrying on and finishing
the work of faith upon their souls; all which is matter of joy to
Christ;

and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice? meaning either his
own salvation by the Lord, from all his sorrows and troubles, and out of
the hands of all enemies, being in the presence of God, where is fulness
of joy, [Psa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009); or else the
salvation of his people by him, which Jehovah appointed them to, secured
for them in the covenant of grace, sent Christ to work out for them,
applies by his Spirit, and at last puts into the full possession of:
Christ rejoices at the effectual calling and conversion of his people,
when salvation is brought near unto them; and especially at their
glorification, when they shall be in the full enjoyment of it; then will
they be his joy, and crown of rejoicing: this is the joy that was set
before him, which made him go so cheerfully through his sufferings and
death for them, [Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002); the reasons
of this joy are, because of the great love he bears to them; the
interest and property he has in them; his undertakings for them, as
their surety, to bring them safe to glory; his purchase of them by his
blood; his intercession for them, that they might be with him to behold
his glory; and, last of all, because of his Father's glory, his own
glory, and the glory of the blessed Spirit, which are concerned in the
salvation of these persons.

[Psalms 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 21:2</span></span>

Thou hast given him his heart's desire,.... Which the church had prayed
for in [Psa 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004); whatever Christ's
heart desired, or his lips requested, has been given him;

and hast not withholden the request of his lips. Whatever he asked in
the council and covenant of peace was granted; he asked for all the
elect, as his spouse and bride; these were the desire of his heart and
eyes, and they were given him; he asked for all the blessings of grace
for them, and all grace was given to them in him; he asked for glory,
for eternal life, and it was promised him; and not only the promise of
it was put into his hand, but the thing itself; see [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008), [Jo1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011); and [Psa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004); whatever he requested of his
Father, when here on earth, was granted; he always heard him; that
memorable prayer of his in [Joh 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)
is heard and answered, both in what respects himself, his own
glorification, and the conversion, sanctification, union, preservation,
and glorification of his people; whatever he now desires and requests in
heaven, as the advocate and intercessor for his saints, is ever
fulfilled; which is an instance of the great regard Jehovah has unto
him, and may be considered as a reason of his joy in him.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 21:3</span></span>

For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness,.... Not
temporal, but spiritual blessings, which spring from the grace and
goodness of God, and consist of it; and relate to the spiritual and
eternal welfare of those for whose sake he receives them, and who are
blessed with them in him: his being "prevented" with them denotes the
freeness of the donation of them; that before he could well ask for
them, or before he had done requesting them, they were given him; and
also the earliness of the gift of them, they were put into his hands
before his incarnation, before he was manifest in the flesh, even from
the foundation of the world, and before the world began, [Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003), [Ti2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009), and likewise the order in which
they were given; first to Christ, and then to his people in him, as the
passages referred to show;

thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head; which is expressive of
his victory over all enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, death and hell;
and of his being possessed of his throne and kingdom; and has respect to
his exaltation at the right hand of God, where he is crowned with glory
and honour: and this crown being of "pure gold" denotes the purity,
glory, solidity, and perpetuity of his kingdom; this is a crown, not
which believers put upon him by believing in him, and ascribing the
glory of their salvation to him, or what the church, called his mother,
has crowned him with, [Sol 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011), but
which his father put upon him, who has set him King over his holy hill
of Zion, [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); compare with this
[Rev 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014). The Septuagint and Vulgate
Latin versions read "a crown of a precious stone"; and so Apollinarius;
and seem to refer to the crown set on David's head, which had precious
stones in it, [Sa2 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030); Josephus (x)
says it had a sardonyx. Fortunatus Scacchus (y) fancies the topaz is
meant, and that the Hebrew text should be read "a crown of topaz";
mistaking the sense of the word "phaz", which never signifies a topaz,
but the best gold, pure solid gold.

\(x\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 7. s. 5. (y) Elaeochrism. Sacr. l. 3. c. 40. p.
1003.

[Psalms 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 21:4</span></span>

He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him,.... Both for himself, as
man, when he was about to die, that he might be raised to life again,
which was granted him; and for his people, that they might live
spiritually and eternally, and accordingly life is given to him for
them; and he has power to give it to as many as the Father has given
him, [Joh 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002);

even length of days for ever and ever; the life he has for himself as
man is what will ever continue; he will die no more, death will have no
more dominion over him; he will live for evermore, and that to make
intercession for his members, [Rom
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009); and the life which is granted
them at his request is an everlasting one, both as to body and soul; for
though they die as other men, they shall live again in the resurrection
of the just, and never die more, but shall be like the angels in heaven;
and as for the second death, that shall not harm them, nor have any
power over them; they will live and reign with Christ for ever.

[Psalms 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 21:5</span></span>

His glory is great in thy salvation,.... That is, the glory of the King
Messiah is great in the Lord's salvation of him; delivering him from all
his troubles and sorrows, and out of the hands of all his enemies, when
he was raised from the dead, and was set at the right hand of God, and
crowned with glory and honour: or the sense is, that his glory is great
in the salvation of his people by him; it was his glory as Mediator to
be appointed to be the Lord's salvation to them; and it being effected
by him declares the glory and greatness of his person; and the nature of
it is such as cannot fast of bringing glory to him; and such is the
sense his people have of it, that it obliges them to ascribe the glory
of it alone to him;

honour and majesty hast thou laid upon him; which is to be understood
not of the honour and majesty of his divine nature, which are essential
to him, and not laid upon him by any; nor of the glory which the saints
attribute to him on account of their salvation by him; but of that which
his Father has put upon him, and lies in the introduction of him into
his glory after his sufferings and death, and resurrection from the
dead; in exalting him at his right hand above all creatures and things;
in giving him all power in heaven and in earth; in putting all the gifts
of the Spirit into his hands, which he receiving gave to men, and in
ordaining him Judge of quick and dead.

[Psalms 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 21:6</span></span>

For thou hast made him most blessed for ever,.... Not as God, for as
such he is over all blessed for ever, and not made so; but as man and
Mediator; the words may be rendered, "thou hast set him to be blessings
for ever" (z); which design the blessings which are laid up in Christ
for his people, and which he imparts unto, them, and they are blessed
with in him; so that he is made a blessing, or rather blessings to them;
such as redemption to free them from, bondage, righteousness to justify
them, sanctification to make them holy, wisdom to direct and guide them,
and strength to assist and support them; through whom they have the
forgiveness of sins, by whom they have peace with God, and from whom
they receive all their joy and comfort, and at last eternal life and
happiness; and all these are for ever, they are irreversible blessings,
are never repented of, nor taken away: or this blessedness may be
understood of that which Christ himself enjoys as man; which lies in his
human nature being exalted to union with the Son of God; in being heard
and helped in the day of salvation; in being raised from the dead, and
glory given him; in being set at God's right hand, angels, authorities,
and powers, being subject to him; and in seeing the travail of his soul
with satisfaction: the particular instance of his blessedness follows;

thou hast made him exceeding glad with thy countenance; the glorious
presence of God in heaven; Christ having done his work on earth ascended
to heaven, where he was received by his Father with a cheerful
countenance, was made to sit down on the same throne with him, being
well pleased with his obedience, righteousness, and sacrifice; and being
now in the presence of God, in which is fulness of joy, and at his right
hand, where are pleasures for evermore, the human nature of Christ is
filled with an excess of joy; the words may be rendered, "thou hast
made" or "wilt make him glad with joy (a), with thy countenance"; see
[Psa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011).

\(z\) "posuisti vel pones eum benedictiones", Pagninus, Montanus,
Vatablus; so Ainsworth, Cocceius, Gejerus. (a) "laetificabis eum in
laetitia", Pagninus, Montanus, Michaelis; so Junius & Tremellius,
Gejerus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 22](psa022)

</div>
