<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa042)  [Next](psa044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 43:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 43

This psalm is without a title; but may well enough be thought to be one
of David's: and the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic, and Syriac
versions, call it a psalm of David, and the latter adds, when Jonathan
told him that Saul intended to kill him; and certain it is, that it was
wrote by the same person, at the same time, and upon the same occasion
as the preceding, seeing some of the same expressions are used in it,
see [Psa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001), title; and some take
this and the preceding to be but one psalm, and this might be written
with that on account of the rebellion of his son Absalom.

[Psalms 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 43:1</span></span>

Judge me, O God,.... The Targum adds, with the judgment of truth; see
[Rom 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002);

and plead my cause; which was a righteous one; and therefore he could
commit it to God to be tried and judged by him, and could put it into
his hands to plead it for him; See Gill on [Psa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001);

against an ungodly nation; meaning either the Philistines, among whom he
was; or his own nation, when they joined his son Absalom in rebellion
against him: some understand it of the great numbers that were with
Saul, when he was persecuted by him;

O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man; either Absalom, who,
under pretence of a vow he had vowed in Hebron, got leave of David to go
thither, and then engaged in a conspiracy against him; or Ahithophel,
who had been his friend and acquaintance, but now joined with Absalom.
It is true of Saul, who, under pretence of friendship, sought his ruin,
and to whom he expressed himself almost in the same words here used; see
[Sa1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017).

[Psalms 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 43:2</span></span>

For thou art the God of my strength,.... Who being the strong and mighty
God was able to deliver and save him, as well as to plead his cause; and
was the author and giver of strength, natural and spiritual, to him; and
was the strength of his heart, life and salvation; and is a good reason
why he committed his cause unto him;

why doest thou cast me off? this is the language of unbelief: it being
what was not in reality, only in appearance: the psalmist was ready to
conclude he was cast off and rejected of God, because he was afflicted
and left in a desolate condition by him, and he did not immediately
arise to his help and deliverance, and had withdrawn the light of his
countenance from him; but God does not cast off or reject any of his
people; they always continue in his love, and in his covenant, and in
the hands of his Son; they are always in his sight and family, and shall
never perish eternally; and whoever casts them off, or casts them out,
he will not;

why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? See Gill on
[Psa 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009).

[Psalms 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 43:3</span></span>

O send out thy light and thy truth,.... By light is meant, not the law,
as Arama; but rather, as some Jewish (p) interpreters understand it, the
Messiah, the sun of righteousness, and light of the world; who is the
author of all light, natural, spiritual, and eternal; and whose coming
into the world is often signified by being sent into it. The Spirit of
God also is the enlightener of men, both at first conversion and
afterwards, and is sent down into their hearts as a comforter of them,
by being the Spirit of adoption. The Gospel of Christ is a great and
glorious light, which, with the Holy Ghost, is sent down from heaven;
though perhaps here rather may be meant the light of God's countenance,
the discoveries of his favour and lovingkindness, which produce light,
life, joy, peace, and comfort: and by "truth" may be meant, either
Christ himself, who is the truth; or the Gospel the word of truth; or
rather the faithfulness of God in the fulfilment of his promises; and so
the words are a petition that God would show forth his lovingkindness,
and make good his word, which would be of the following use:

let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy
tabernacles; that is, to the place of public worship, where the
tabernacle was, the "hill" where it was, which seems to be Mount Zion;
and is called "holy"; not that there was any real holiness in it; only
relative, because of the worship of God in it; and the "tabernacle" is
called "tabernacles", because of the holy place and the most holy place
in it; the one being the first, the other the second tabernacle, as in
[Heb 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#002); and this hill and
tabernacles represented the church and ordinances of God, to which such
who are possessed of light and truth are led.

\(p\) Midrash Tillim, & Jarchi, in loc.

[Psalms 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 43:4</span></span>

Then will I go unto the altar of God,.... Which was in the tabernacle,
either of burnt offerings, or of incense, there to offer up the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for mercies received. The altar
under the Gospel dispensation is Christ, on which such sacrifices being
offered, are acceptable to God, [Heb
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010);

unto God my exceeding joy; as over the mercy seat, upon a throne of
grace, and as his covenant God; or this is exegetical of the altar,
which is Christ, God over all, blessed for ever; and who is the object
of the unspeakable joy of his people, in his person, righteousness, and
salvation;

yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, O God, my God: the harp is a
musical instrument, used in that part of public worship which concerned
the praise of God under the former dispensation, and was typical of that
spiritual melody made in the hearts of God's people when they sing his
praise, see [Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008).

[Psalms 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 43:5</span></span>

Why art thou cast down, O my soul?.... See Gill on [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005) and See Gill on [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 44](psa044)

</div>
