<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa065)  [Next](psa067) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 66:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 66

To the chief Musician, A Song or Psalm. This psalm does not bear the
name of David in the title of it, yet is generally thought to be one of
his; but because the plural number is used in it, which is not so common
in David's psalms, Aben Ezra is of opinion it is not his, but written by
the singers. This is not a sufficient objection: and besides, in [Psa
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013), the singular number is used.
The Arabic version ascribes it to David, and that version makes the
subject matter of it to be "concerning the resurrection"; as do the
Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Vulgate Latin versions. The title of the
Syriac version is,

"concerning sacrifices and burnt offerings, and the incense of rams; the
spiritual sense intimates to us the calling of the Gentiles, and the
preaching, that is, of the Gospel;''

which comes nearest the truth: for the psalm respects Gospel times, and
the church of Christ under the New Testament, spread throughout the
world, and especially as it will be in the latter day; see [Psa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001); and so in Yalkut Simeoni on the
psalm, it is said to be a psalm for time to come, and agrees with [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009); "I will turn to the people a pure
language", &c. Kimchi says it is a psalm concerning the gathering of the
captives of Israel; and so Jarchi and Obadiah expound it; and Theodoret
says David wrote this psalm for the captives in Babylon.

[Psalms 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 66:1</span></span>

Make a joyful noise unto God,.... The Creator of the ends of the earth;
the Provider for all his creatures; and the Dispenser of the blessings
of grace, under the Gospel dispensation, to men in all countries. The
Messiah may well be thought to be intended, since the psalm refers to
Gospel times; who is God over all, blessed for ever; to whom a joyful
noise, shouts, and acclamations, are to be made by all his subjects,
true believers in him, in all lands, as to their King; see [Num
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021); who is ascended on high, has
led captivity captive; received gifts for then, and gives them to them;
is enthroned on his Father's right hand, is crowned with glory and
honour, where he reigns, and must reign, till all enemies are put under
his feet; when his kingdom will be from sea to sea, and from the river
to the ends of the earth: and upon the destruction of his enemies, and
the enlargement of his kingdom in the latter day, voices will be heard
in heaven, the church; and such joyful noises as are here exhorted and
directed to, [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001). Moreover, such
acclamations are suitable to him, as a victorious conqueror; who, at his
death, overcame sin, Satan, the world, and death itself; and, by the
ministry of the Gospel, went forth conquering, and to conquer; and has
subdued many people in all nations, and caused his ministers to triumph
in him in every place; and who, by his Spirit and grace, still continues
to bring souls to a subjection to him, to dispossess Satan from them, to
set up his throne in their hearts, and reign there, and to make them
more than conquerors through himself that has loved them: of which there
will be more numerous instances in the latter day; and all such are
under great obligations to make a joyful noise unto him, or to express
their joy and thankfulness in loud singing of his praises;

all ye lands; that is, all the inhabitants of the earth, as the Targum;
not Judea, to which some restrain it, but the whole earth: for Christ is
the Saviour of some, in all countries, of the children of God, that are
scattered abroad throughout the whole world, for whom he is a
propitiation. The Gospel has been sent to all nations, and preached to
every creature; some in all lands have been converted, and made
partakers of the blessings and privileges of the Gospel, and therefore
have reason to be glad and make a joyful noise; and the more so,
inasmuch as they were in a state of great darkness and ignorance before,
without Christ, without hope, and without God in the world.

[Psalms 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 66:2</span></span>

Sing forth the honour of his name,.... Meaning not any particular names
of the Messiah, such as in [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006);
or his name "Jesus", a Saviour; though they are all honourable and
glorious, and furnish out sufficient matter for a song: but rather that
by which he was made known to the sons of men, his Gospel; see [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015). Which is a glorious Gospel; the
truths of which may be expressed in a song of praise, to the honour and
glory of Christ, and to the instruction and profit of men, [Col
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016). Or rather Christ himself is
meant; his name often designs himself, [Mat
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021). There that is due unto him, and
ought to be given which is done when all divine perfections and works
are ascribed to him, divine worship is paid him, and the glory of
salvation given him; which may be done in psalms, hymns, and spiritual
songs;

make his praise glorious: let the high praises of him be in your mouths;
give him, the most excellent praise; praise him in the best manner. This
is done when we sing his praise with grace in our hears in exercise;
when we with one mind and mouth glorify him; and when we honour him, the
Son, as we honour the Father.

[Psalms 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 66:3</span></span>

Say unto God,.... Or, "concerning God" (t), as some; or, "before God",
as the Targum; say to him as follows, in psalms and hymns of praise:

how terrible art thou in thy works! or "reverend" (u); to be feared and
reverenced with a godly fear on account of them; such as the works of
nature and providence, which are stupendous and marvellous, fearfully
and wonderfully wrought; and especially those of grace and redemption,
in which the goodness of Christ is manifest, and for which he is to be
feared: unless rather his judgments upon his enemies are here meant;
who, though he is a Lamb to his own people, is the Lion of the tribe of
Judah to them, whom he will break in pieces as a potter's vessel it may
be read, "how terrible", or "tremendous", is everyone of "thy works"; so
Aben Ezra, and also Jarchi, who interprets the next clause,

through the greatness of thy power, thus,

"when thou showest to the world thy power, by the pestilence, or sword,
or famine, or lightnings:''

shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee? in a lying, flattering,
and deceitful manner, as the word (w) here used signifies; See Gill on
[Psa 18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044); or, as the above
interpreters,

"they shall, through the greatness of fear, confess the lies and
transgressions they have committed.''

It will be a forced, and not a free, confession and submission; Christ's
enemies, whether they will or not, will be obliged to own that he is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father, [Phi
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010).

\(t\) "dicite de Deo", Campensis apud Gejerum; and some in Michaelis.
(u) "reverendus", Junius & Tremellius. (w) "mentientur", V. L. Musculus,
Montanus; "mendaciter se dedunt", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Amama.

[Psalms 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 66:4</span></span>

All the earth shall worship thee,.... The Messiah, who is equal with
God; the Creator of men; the Redeemer of his people; the Head of the
church, and King of saints; their Lord, and therefore to be worshipped;
with internal worship, in the exercise of faith, hope, and love; and
with external worship, in the word and ordinances, by prayer and praise,
public and private. This universal worship, that will be yielded him,
will be in the latter day; which shows that this psalm respects those
times, when Christ shall be King over all the earth, and his name,
worship, and religion, one, [Zac 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009);

and shall sing unto thee; the song of Moses and the Lamb, the Lamb's new
song, the song of redeeming grace; which none but the redeemed ever can
sing aright, [Rev 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003);

they shall sing to thy name; or, "they shall", or "let them sing thy
name" (x); thou shall be the subject of their song; thy person, offices,
kingdom, grace, and glory: or they shall sing to the honour of thy name,
as in [Psa 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(x\) "cantent nomen tuum", Gejerus; "cantabunt nomen tuum", Michaelis.

[Psalms 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 66:5</span></span>

Come and see the works of God,.... Of the Messiah, God manifest in the
flesh; those divine works which he did when here on earth; his
miraculous works, which were proofs of his deity and Messiahship; his
preaching the Gospel, in so divine a manner as never man did; his works
of obedience to the law, which were pure and perfect; the everlasting
righteousness he wrought out for the justification of his people; and
the great work of redemption and salvation finished by him, which none
but God could ever have effected. This is an invitation to the
inhabitants of all lands, where the Gospel should come with power, to
take notice of and consider these works of Christ, and the glory of his
might, wisdom, and grace in them, in order to engage them to sing his
praise;

he is terrible in his doing toward the children of men; in his vengeance
on the Jews, for disbelieving and rejecting him; in destroying
antichrist, and pouring out the vials of his wrath on the antichristian
states; and in the everlasting damnation of the wicked. So that as his
other works in the former clause design these of grace, this doing of
his respects his work, his strange work of judgment on his enemies; on
account of which he is terrible to them, and reverenced by his people.

[Psalms 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 66:6</span></span>

He turned the sea into dry land,.... The Red sea, or sea of Zuph, as the
Targum; by causing a strong east wind to blow, which made it dry, so
that the children of Israel passed through it on dry ground, [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). Or, "he turneth" (y); for
though the allusion is to the making the Red sea dry land, when the
Israelites passed through it; yet it refers to something to be done in
the times of Christ and the Gospel dispensation. So Christ might be said
to do this literally, when he walked upon the sea of Galilee as on dry
land, and enabled Peter to do so likewise, [Mat
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025); and figuratively, when he makes
his people walk through the sea of this world, and the waters of
afflictions in it, without overflowing them. He with them, bears them
up, and upholds them with his right hand; so that they pass on, as on
dry land, till they come safe to the shores of bliss and happiness;

they went through the flood on foot; or "river" (z); the river Jordan,
as the Targum: for this alludes not to the passage of the Israelites
through the sea, but through Jordan, when they entered into the land, of
Canaan, [Jos 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017). The words may be
rendered, according to Kimchi,

"they shall pass through the river on foot;''

the Targum adds,

"the children of Israel;''

so the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions. Such
things are said in prophecy concerning the people of God in future
times; see [Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015). So the river
Euphrates shall be dried up, to make way for the kings of the east, [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012);

there did we rejoice in him; still alluding to the above cases, when
Israel passed through the Red sea, and sung praise to God; and went
through Jordan, and set up stones of memorial, [Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001). Or "there shall we rejoice in
him": so the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic, Syriac, and Arabic
versions; only the latter reads in the singular, "he shall rejoice." The
Targum is,

"I will lead them to the mountain of his holiness, there shall we
rejoice in his word:''

in the essential Word, the Messiah, as the saints do rejoice in him in
his house, under his word and ordinances; when they see the salvation
wrought out by him, and their interest in it; the righteousness he has
brought in, and themselves clothed with it; pardon procured by him, and
that applied to them; and when they are favoured with a sight of him,
and communion with him; so will they rejoice in him when the marriage of
the Lamb is come, and the bride is ready; when antichrist shall be
destroyed, and they shall have got the victory over him; then they shall
stand on the sea of glass, and there shall they sing the song of Moses
and of the Lamb, [Rev 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007); and when
they shall have come through all their difficulties safely to heaven;
there shall they rejoice in Christ, and with him to all eternity.

\(y\) "convertit", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (z) "per fluvium",
Gejerus.

[Psalms 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 66:7</span></span>

He ruleth by his power forever,.... Christ is the Ruler in Israel, King
over his holy hill of Zion; who must reign till all enemies are put
under his feet. He rules in the kingdom of nature and providence by his
power, and does whatsoever he pleases; nor can any stay his hand. He
rules in the kingdom of grace, in the hearts of his people, by his
efficacious grace; which makes them willing, in the day of his power, to
be subject to him; and in the latter day he will take to himself his
great power and reign, when he will be King for ever. His kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, it shall never be subverted nor usurped; nor will
he in it be succeeded by another; he will reign to the end of the world,
throughout the thousand years, with his saints on earth, and then with
them in heaven for evermore. The Targum renders it,

"over the world;''

over the whole world; for Christ will be King over all the earth in the
latter day, [Zac 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009);

his eyes behold the nations; the antichristian states. He sees all the
idolatry and wickedness committed in them; and his eyes will be as
flames of fire to destroy them, when the time is come. The allusion is
to God's looking through the pillar of fire and cloud upon the Egyptians
in the Red sea, and troubling them, [Exo
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024);

let not the rebellious exalt themselves. That are rebels against Christ,
would not have him to reign over them; antichrist, who exalts himself
above all that is called God, and all his followers. Or, "they shall not
exalt themselves" (a): or, as the Targum,

"they shall not be exalted in themselves for ever;''

see [Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(a\) "haudquaquam sese exultabunt", Tigurine version, Musculus, &
Gejerus.

[Psalms 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 66:8</span></span>

O bless our God, ye people,.... In all countries, that know the Lord and
fear him; ascribe blessing, and honour and glory, to Christ our God, on
account of his works, actions, perfections, kingdom and power; and
because of the destruction of those who are rebels to his government;

and make the voice of his praise to be heard; far and near, in psalms,
and hymns, and spiritual songs; by shoutings, and loud acclamations of
joy; see [Rev 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005); where Christ is
called our God, and a like exhortation is made as here.

[Psalms 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 66:9</span></span>

Which holdeth our soul in life,.... Or, "putteth our soul in life" (b),
or "among the living", which is not to be understood of infusing a
living soul in man, nor of the preservation of natural life, which is
common to all men; but of appointing and ordaining them unto eternal
life, as the Targum; and of procuring it for them by Christ; and of
implanting a principle of spiritual life in them, by his Spirit and
grace; and of the preservation of the principle of life, that it be not
lost; and of giving them a right and title to eternal life, and that
itself: all which are a sufficient reason, and powerful argument, to
bless our God, and praise his name. It follows:

and suffereth not our feet to be moved; that is, not to be greatly
moved; or if moved so as to slip and fall, yet not so as to fall finally
and totally; see [Psa 55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022).

\(b\) "qui posuit", V. L. Pagninus, Musculus, Vatablus; "ponene",
Montanus; "qui ponit", Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 66:10</span></span>

For thou, O God, hast proved us,.... And by the experiment found them to
be true and faithful; to have the truth of grace, and the root of the
matter in them; not reprobate silver, or their grace counterfeit grace;
but of the right kind, solid and substantial;

thou hast tried us as silver is tried; in a furnace, where it is put and
melted by the refiner, and purified from the dross that attends it. So
the Targum,

"thou hast purified us as the silversmith purifieth the silver;''

or tries it by melting and purifying it. Thus the Lord puts his people
into the furnace of afflictions, and sits as a refiner and purifier of
them; hereby he tries their graces, faith, patience, hope, and love,
their principles and their professions; refines their graces, and makes
them more bright and illustrious; removes their dross and tin, and
reforms their manners; and proves them to be good silver, and approves
of them, and esteems them as such, even as his peculiar treasure. From
whence it appears, as well as from the following verses, that
afflictions are of God; that they are for the good of his people, and
not their hurt; like silver they are put into the fire of affliction,
not to be destroyed and lost, but to be purged and refined; and that
they are not in wrath, but in love: and this, with what follows, may
respect the sufferings of the saints under Rome, Pagan and Papal; when
Christ's feet, the members of his mystical body, were like unto fine
brass, as if they burned in a furnace; when their graces were tried,
their works were known, and their persons proved and approved, [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015); see [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009).

[Psalms 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 66:11</span></span>

Thou broughtest us into the net,.... That is, suffered them to be taken
in the net of wicked men, which they laid and spread for them; whereby
they were drawn either into bad principles or bad practices, or into
ruinous circumstances; though the Lord does not leave his own people
there, but breaks the net or snare, sooner or later, and they escape;
see [Psa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015). Jarchi interprets it of
a strait place, as in a prison; and which has often been literally true
of the people of God, into which, though they have been cast by Satan,
or by men instigated by him, yet, because permitted by the Lord, it is
ascribed to him, [Rev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010);

thou laidst affliction upon our loins: the Targum renders it "a chain":
the word signifies anything that is binding and pressing; it seems to be
a metaphor taken from the binding of burdens upon the backs of any
creatures. Afflictions often lie heavy upon the saints, are very close
upon them, and press them sore, even, as they sometimes think, beyond
measure; though the Lord supports them, and will not suffer them to sink
under them.

[Psalms 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 66:12</span></span>

Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads,.... Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret it of the kings and nations of the world ruling over Israel;
and may very well design the Heathen powers and antichristian states
tyrannizing over Christian people. The word in the original text is
singular, "a man" (c), a frail mortal man; and may be understood of the
man of sin and son of perdition; who rides upon the heads of men, exalts
himself above all that is called God, and has exercised dominion over
the saints in a most lawless and tyrannical manner. Vitringa, on [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002) interprets it of Antiochus
Epiphanes, who was a type of antichrist, and supposes the following
clause to refer to the persecution of the church in his time. The Targum
renders it, "a lord of rebuke"; that is, either one worthy of rebuke, as
antichrist is; or one that gives rebukes, delivers out anathemas and
excommunications, as he does: though some translate the words of the
Targum, "lords of usury", or "usurers"; a title not unfit for the
creatures of antichrist;

we went through fire and through water; through afflictions, compared to
fire and water; through fiery trials and overwhelming providences,
though not destroyed by them, because the Lord was with them; see [Isa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002); therefore they are said to go
through them, not to abide in them; nor to sink under them, and perish
by them: they went cheerfully through them for Christ's sake, even the
greatest hardships and difficulties, which this phrase may be expressive
of. It may have a particular reference to the sufferings of the saints
in Gospel times; to the burning of the martyrs with fire and faggot,
who, like Elijah, went up to heaven in a fiery chariot; and to the flood
of waters cast out after the woman, the church, by the dragon; see [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015);

but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place; the Targum is, into
largeness; or into a large place; see [Psa
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019). This may intend either the
state of the church upon the Reformation, or rather as it will be in the
latter day glory; when there will be a large spread of the Gospel, and
of the interest of Christ, everywhere; when the church will be enlarged
with converts, and the members of it with the gifts and graces of the
Spirit; and which will be a state of great liberty and freedom in the
worship of God, both inward and outward. The Septuagint version renders
it, "into refreshment": so the Tigurine version, and Piscator; as those
times will be times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, which
will be everywhere among his people, in his word and ordinances, and to
a great degree; see [Act 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019). The
Arabic version, "unto rest"; from adversity, from persecution; for,
after this state takes place, there will be no more persecution; no more
fines, imprisonment, racks, and torturing deaths, for the sake of Christ
and his Gospel. The word used signifies a well watered place (d) or
land; such as was the land of Canaan, [Deu
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007); and such will be the state of the
church in the latter day: the Spirit will be poured down like floods of
water upon the dry ground; the doctrines of the Gospel will drop as the
rain, and as showers upon the grass: the ordinances of it will be as
green pastures beside the still waters; and every believer will be as a
watered garden, whose springs fail not; it will be a time of great
plenty and prosperity in spiritual things. Ainsworth renders it, "to an
abundant place"; so Gejerus: a place abounding with all good things: a
"wealthy" one, as we translate it. And even in a literal sense this will
be the wealthy time of the church; when kings shall come into it, and
bring their riches and honour there, and use them for the good of it,
[Isa 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023); and then also will the
saints be enriched with every gift, and be rich in grace and in all good
works.

\(c\) "hominem", Pagninus, Montanus. (d) "ad irrignam", Pagninus,
Montanus.

[Psalms 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 66:13</span></span>

I will go into thy house with burnt offerings,.... The psalmist here
represents the saints and faithful in those times, who being delivered
out of all their troubles, and brought into a large, free, plentiful,
and comfortable condition, will come together into the place of public
worship, and there unite in their sacrifices of praise to God; will come
and present themselves as a whole burnt offering to the Lord; will come
with hearts inflamed with love to God and one another, which is more
than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices, [Mar
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033);

I will pay thee my vows; thanksgivings promised in time of distress, as
follows; see [Psa 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014).

[Psalms 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 66:14</span></span>

Which my lips have uttered,.... Or "opened" (e); publicly and distinctly
declared, and from which there is no going back; see [Jdg
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033);

and my mouth hath spoken when I was in trouble; this refers to the time
when the people of God were under antichristian tyranny and bondage; and
when they vowed and promised, that, if the Lord would deliver them, they
would give him all praise and glory.

\(e\) "aperuerunt", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Gejerus.

[Psalms 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 66:15</span></span>

I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings,.... Of the fattest
of the flock; that is, of the best; such as Abel offered, [Gen
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004);

with the incense of rams; or "rams with incense" (f); the Targum is,

"with sweet incense, the sacrifice of rams;''

Kimchi interprets it of incense of the fat of rams.

I will offer bullocks with goats; he proposed to offer all kind of
offerings, to show gratitude and thankfulness for the favours received;
by all which are meant the calves, or fruit of the lips, the sacrifices
of praise, thanksgiving to God, in the name of the whole church and
people of God; see [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(f\) "arietes cum incenso", Gejerus; so Campeusis in ibid.

[Psalms 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 66:16</span></span>

Come and hear, all ye that fear God,.... Who have a reverential
affection for him, and by whom he is worshipped and served with
reverence and godly fear; these have good things done for themselves,
and will glorify God for what he does for others: these know the nature,
worth, and value of the good things the Lord does for the souls of men,
and hear them with pleasure and profit; when to tell them to others is
casting pearl before swine, and giving that which is holy to dogs; and
therefore only such as fear the Lord are called upon to come and hear
what follows. Jarchi interprets this character of proselytes; see [Act
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026);

and I will declare what he hath done for my soul: not what he had done
for God, or offered unto him, or suffered for his sake; nor what God had
done for his body in the make and preservation of it; but what he had
done for his soul, and the salvation of that: what God the Father had
done in setting him apart for himself; in making a sure, well ordered,
and everlasting covenant with him in Christ; in blessing him with all
spiritual blessings in him; in providing for the redemption of his soul
by him; in pardoning his sins, justifying his person, adopting him into
his family, and regenerating, quickening, and sanctifying him: also what
God the Son had done for him; in engaging to assume a true body and a
reasonable soul on his account; and to make that soul an offering for
his sin, and thereby obtain for him eternal redemption, even the
salvation of his immortal soul: likewise what God the Spirit had done
for him; in quickening and enlightening his soul; in implanting
principles of grace and holiness in it; in showing Christ unto him, and
bringing near his righteousness, and leading him to him for salvation
and eternal life; in applying exceeding great and precious promises to
him, and remembering to him such on which he had caused him to hope; in
delivering him out of temptation and troubles, and in carrying on the
work of his grace in him hitherto: these are things that are not to be
concealed in a man's breast, but to be told to the church and people of
God, to their joy and comfort, and to the glory of divine grace; see
[Mar 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#019).

[Psalms 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 66:17</span></span>

I cried unto him with my mouth,.... Crying designs prayer, and supposes
distress; and crying with the mouth denotes vocal, ardent, and fervent
prayer;

and he was extolled with my tongue: at the same time the psalmist prayed
for deliverance out of his distresses, he praised God for the mercies he
had received: and did, as the Apostle Paul directs, make known his
requests with thanksgiving, [Phi 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006);
or "he was exalted under my tongue" (g); that is, in his heart, as some
interpret it; his heart and his mouth went together; and out of the
abundance of his heart his tongue spoke of the goodness, kindness, and
mercy of God to him. The Targum is,

"and his promise was under my tongue;''

and so he was very different from a wicked man, who keeps iniquity under
his tongue, as a sweet morsel, [Job
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012).

\(g\) "sublingua mea", Montanus, Tigurine version, Vatablus, Musculus,
Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 66:18</span></span>

If I regard iniquity in my heart,.... There was iniquity in his heart,
as there is in every good man's heart, and a great deal too; it is full
of it; and it should be regarded in some sense, so as to guard against
it, and pray to be kept from it, that it may not break forth into
action; and so as to loath it, abhor it, and be humbled for it; but not
so as to nourish and cherish it, to take delight and pleasure in it: or
"if I look upon it" (h), as it may be rendered; that is, with
approbation of it, and satisfaction in it, and ordered his conversation
according to it; or acted the deceitful and hypocritical part in prayer;
or had any evil intention in his petitions, to consume on his lusts what
he asked for;

the Lord will not hear me; for the Lord hears not sinners that delight
in sin, and live in it; neither profane sinners nor hypocrites; see [Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031).

\(h\) "si vidi", Pagninus, Montanus; "si aspexi", V. L. "si conspexi",
Gejerus.

[Psalms 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 66:19</span></span>

But verily God hath heard me,.... So that it was a plain case that he
had not regarded iniquity in his heart; had not lived a vicious course
of life, nor was an hypocrite; otherwise God would not have heard his
prayer; whereas he had, and which is confirmed in the following clause;

he hath attended to the voice of my prayer; which is an instance of the
grace and condescension of God, and showed in what high favour the
psalmist was with the Lord, and what regard he had unto him; and
therefore could not be the man his enemies represented him to be.

[Psalms 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 66:20</span></span>

Blessed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer,.... Has not been
angry against it, shut it out, or covered himself with a cloud that it
might not pass through, which sometimes saints have complained of, [Psa
80:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004); but graciously heard and
received it;

nor his mercy from me; for that endures for ever, and is from
everlasting to everlasting on them that fear the Lord, [Psa
103:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#017); all which require thankfulness
and praise, which is here given.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 67](psa067)

</div>
