<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa015)  [Next](psa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 16:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 16

Michtam of David. This is a new title, not met with before, though it
afterwards is prefixed to "five" psalms running, the fifty sixth, the
fifty seventh, the fifty eighth, the fifty ninth, and the sixtieth
psalms. Some take the word "michtam" to be the name of a musical
instrument, as Kimchi on [Psa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001);
others the name of one of the tunes, as Jarchi; and others the tune of a
song which began with this word, as Aben Ezra observes, to which this
psalm was sung; the Septuagint translate it "stelography", or an
inscription upon a pillar; such an one as is erected by conquerors, as
Theodoret observes, having writing on it declaring the victory obtained;
suggesting that the psalm, or the subject of it, the death and
resurrection of Christ, was worthy to be inscribed on a pillar of
marble; and the Targum renders it, "a right engraving", that deserves to
be engraven in a monument of brass: but what seems to be the best sense
of the word is, that it signifies a work of gold, and may be rendered,
"a golden \[psalm\] of David"; so called, either because it was a dear
and favourite song of his; or from the subject matter, which is more
valuable and precious than the most fine gold: the title of it in the
Syriac and Arabic versions is,

"concerning the election of the church, and the resurrection of
Christ;''

and certain it is from [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), the
resurrection of Christ is spoken of in it, as is clear from the
testimonies of two apostles, Peter and Paul, who cite it in proof of it,
[Act 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025); and since there is but one
person speaking throughout the psalm, and Christ is he that speaks in
[Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), and which cannot be
understood of David, nor of any other person but Christ, the whole of
the psalm must be interpreted of him.

[Psalms 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 16:1</span></span>

Preserve me, O God,.... Prayer is proper to Christ as man; he offered up
many prayers and supplications to Cost, even his Father, and his God,
and as the strong and mighty God, as the word (i) here used is commonly
rendered by interpreters; with whom, all things are possible, and who is
able to save; see [Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007); and this
petition for preservation was suitable to him and his case, and was
heard and answered by God; he was very remarkably preserved in his
infancy from the rage and fury of Herod; and very wonderfully was his
body preserved and supported in the wilderness under a fast of forty
days and forty nights together, and from being torn to pieces by the
wild beasts among which he was, and from the temptations of Satan, with
which he was there assaulted; and throughout the whole of his ministry
he was preserved from being hindered in the execution of his office,
either by the flatteries, or menaces, or false charges of his enemies;
and though his life was often attempted they could not take it away
before his time: and whereas Christ is in this psalm represented as in
the view of death and the grave, this petition may be of the same kind
with those in [Joh 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027); and put up
with the same submission to the will of God; and at least may intend
divine help and support in his sufferings and death, preservation from
corruption in the grave, and the resurrection of him from the dead; and
it may also include his concern for the preservation of his church, his
other self, and the members of it, his apostles, disciples, and all that
did or should believe in his name, for whom he prayed after this manner
a little before his death; see [Luk
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031);

for in thee do I put my trust: or "have hoped" (k); the graces of faith
and hope were implanted in the heart of Christ, as man, who had the
gifts and graces of the Spirit without measure bestowed on him, and
these very early appeared in him, and showed themselves in a very lively
exercise, [Psa 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007); and were in a
very eminent manner exercised by him a little before his death, in the
view of it, and when he was under his sufferings, and hung upon the
cross, [Isa 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006), [Mat
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046); and this his trust and
confidence in God alone, and not in any other, is used as a reason or
argument for his preservation and safety.

\(i\) "Deus fortis seu potens", Muis; "Deus omnipotens", Cocceius,
Michaelis. (k) "speravi in te", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Psalms 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 16:2</span></span>

O my soul, thou hast said unto the Lord,.... Some take these to be the
words of David speaking to the church, who had owned the Lord to be her
Lord, and had declared what follows; others think they are the words of
God the Father to his Son, suggesting to him what he had said; but they
are rather an apostrophe, or an address of Christ to his own soul; and
the phrase, "O my soul", though not in the original text, is rightly
supplied by our translators, and which is confirmed by the Targum, and
by the Jewish commentators, Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi;

thou art my Lord; Christ, as man, is a creature made by God; his human
nature is the true tabernacle which God pitched and not man, and on this
consideration he is his Lord, being his Creator; and as Mediator Christ
is his servant, and was made under the law to him, obeyed him, and
submitted to his will in all things; so that he not only in words said
he was his Lord, but by deeds declared him to be so;

my goodness extendeth not to thee; such who suppose that David here
speaks in his own person, or in the person of other believers, or that
the church here speaks, differently interpret these words: some render
them, "my goodness is not above thee" (l); it is far inferior to thine,
it is not to be mentioned with it, it is nothing in comparison of it;
all my goodness, happiness, and felicity lies, in thee, [Psa
73:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#025); others, "I have no goodness
without thee": the sense is the same as if it was "I have said", as read
the Greek, Vulgate Latin, and Oriental versions, and so Apollinarius; I
have none but what comes from thee; what I have is given me by thee,
which is the sense of the Targum; see [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017); others, "my goodness is not upon
thee" (m); does not lie upon thee, or thou art not obliged to bestow the
blessings of goodness on me; they are not due to me, they spring from
thy free grace and favour; to this sense incline Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and
Kimchi; see [Luk 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010); others, "thou
hast no need of my goodness"; nor wilt it profit thee, so R. Joseph
Kimchi; see [Job 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002); or the words
may be rendered, "O my goodness", or "thou art my good, nothing is above
thee" (n); no goodness in any superior to God. But they are the words of
Christ, and to be understood of his goodness; not of his essential
goodness as God, nor of his providential goodness, the same with his
Father's; but of his special goodness, and the effect of it to his
church and people; and denotes his love, grace, and good will towards
them, shown in his incarnation, sufferings, and death; and the blessings
of goodness which come thereby; such as a justifying righteousness,
forgiveness of sin, peace, and reconciliation, redemption, salvation,
and eternal life. Now though God is glorified by Christ in his
incarnation, sufferings, and death, and in the work of man's redemption,
yet he stood in no need of the obedience and sufferings of his Son; he
could have glorified his justice another way, as he did in not sparing
the angels that sinned, in drowning the old world, and in burning Sodom
and Gomorrah, and in other instances of his vengeance; though there is
glory to God in the highest in the affair of salvation by Christ, yet
the good will is to men; though the debt of obedience and sufferings was
paid to the justice of God, whereby that is satisfied and glorified, yet
the kindness in paying the debt was not to God but to men, described in
[Psa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008).

\(l\) "bonum meum non est supra te", Gejerus. (m) "Bonum meum non est
super te", Montanus, Cocceius. (n) So Gussetius, p. 299.

[Psalms 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 16:3</span></span>

But to the saints that are in the earth,.... Who are sanctified or set
apart by God the Father in election; whose sins are expiated by the
blood of Christ in redemption, and who are sanctified or made holy by
the Spirit of God in the effectual calling; and who live a holy life and
conversation: these are said to be "in the earth", not to distinguish
them from the saints in heaven, to whom the goodness of Christ extends
as to them, unless it be to distinguish them from the angels in heaven,
who are called saints, [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); as
Aben Ezra observes; but to point out the place of their abode, scattered
up and down in the earth; and to show that love, grace, goodness, and
kindness of Christ reaches to them in the present state of things,
notwithstanding all their meanness and imperfection in themselves, and
their despicableness in the eyes of others; see [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001);

and to the excellent; the same with the saints, who though reckoned by
men the faith of the world, and the offscouring of all things, are in
high esteem with Christ; they are "nobles" (o) in his account, as the
word is rendered in [Jer 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021); they
are princes in all the earth, and these princes are kings; they are made
kings and priests unto God by Christ; they wear and live like kings, and
have the attendance, power, riches, and glory of kings; they are guarded
by angels, they have power with God, they are rich in faith, and heirs
of a kingdom;

in whom is all my delight; Christ's delights were with these sons of men
before the world was, and have always continued with them; they are his
"Hepbzibah" and "Beulah", as in [Isa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004); hence he became incarnate, and
suffered and died for them, and makes application of all the blessings
of his grace and goodness to them.

\(o\) "magnificis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Rivetus; "nobilibus
delectationis meae", Gejerus; "ducibus eorum", Cocceius; so Michaelis.

[Psalms 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 16:4</span></span>

Their sorrows shall be multiplied,.... Not the sorrows of the saints and
excellent ones, by seeing the idolatry of men, as Aben Ezra interprets
it; but the sorrows of such

that hasten after another god; a false god, an idol, to serve and
worship it; for, generally speaking, idolaters are more forward, eager,
and hasty to attend a false worship, than the worshippers of the true
God are to attend his service: now their sorrows are many, even in their
worship, by cutting their bodies with knives and lancets, as the
worshippers of Baal did; and by sacrificing their own children, which,
notwithstanding their rash and precipitate zeal, could not fail of
giving them pain and uneasiness; and, besides temporal punishments
inflicted on them for their idolatry by God, and stings of conscience,
which must sometimes attend them, the wrath of God lies upon them, and
they will have their portion in the lake of fire, and the smoke of their
torment will ascend for ever and ever. Some render the words, "their
idols are multiplied"; and so the Chaldee paraphrase,

"they multiply their idols, and after that hasten to offer their
sacrifices;''

when men leave the true God, they know not where to stop; the Heathens
had not less than thirty thousand gods, and the Jews when they fell into
idolatry ran in the same way, [Jer
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028). The word "god" is not in the
original text, though the supplement is countenanced by the Jewish
writers (p), who interpret it in this way; but I rather think the text
is to be understood not of Heathen idolaters, but of unbelieving Jews,
who, rejecting the true Messiah, hasten after another Messiah, king, and
saviour; when Jesus the true Messiah came they received him not; but
when another came in his own name they were eager to embrace him, [Joh
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043); and to this day they are
hastening after another; and in their daily prayers pray that the coming
of the Messiah might be "in haste", in their days (q); and the sense of
the passage is, that the sorrows of the Jews, rejecting the Messiah and
hastening after another, would come thick and fast upon them, until
wrath came upon them to the uttermost, [Mat
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006), [Th1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016); and it holds good of all,
whether Jews or Gentiles, that hasten after another saviour; that say to
the works of their hands, that they are their gods, or go about to
establish a righteousness of their own, or seek for life and salvation
by their own doings; these, sooner or later, will lie down in sorrow,
[Isa 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011);

their drink offerings of blood will I not offer: meaning not the
libations of the Gentiles, which were not wine, according to the law,
[Num 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#010); but blood, even sometimes
human blood; but the sacrifices of the Jews, which were either got by
blood, murders and robberies, and on that account were hateful to God,
[Isa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008); or rather the sacrifices of
bloodthirsty persons, whose hands were full of blood, [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011); and such were the offerings of
the priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, in Christ's time, who were the
children of them that killed the prophets, and sought after the blood of
Christ. Or it may be rendered, "I will not offer their drink offerings
because of blood" (r); meaning his own blood shed for the remission of
sins, which being obtained, there remains no more offering for sin; and
so the words may express the abolition of all legal sacrifices, and the
causing of them to cease through the blood and sacrifice of Christ. This
shows the person speaking to be a priest, and therefore could not be
David, but must be the Messiah, who is a priest after the order of
Melchizedek; and who had a better sacrifice to other up than any of the
offerings of the Jews, even his own self, by which he has put away sin
for ever. He adds,

nor take up their names into my lips; not the names of idol deities, nor
of their worshippers, but of the Jews that rejected him as the Messiah,
for whom he would not pray, [Joh 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#009);
and so as he refused to offer their sacrifices, he would not perform the
other part of his priestly office for them in intercession; though this
may also have respect to the rejection of the Jewish nation as the
people of God; writing a "Loammi", [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009), upon them, declaring them to be
no longer the children of the living God; leaving their names for a
curse, a taunt, and a proverb in every place; expressing the utmost
abhorrence of them, and showing the utmost indignation at them, as
persons whose names were not worthy or fit to be mentioned, [Eph
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003).

\(p\) Jarchi, Aben Ezra, Kimchi, Ben Melech, & Abendana in loc. (q)
Seder Tephillot, fol. 128. 2. (r) "propter sanguinem", Cocceius,
Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 16:5</span></span>

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup,.... This is
said by Christ as a priest, and in allusion to the Levitical priests,
who had no inheritance in the land of Canaan with their brethren, but
the Lord was their part and portion, and their inheritance, [Num
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020); and it expresses the strong
love and affection Christ had for the Lord as his God, the delight and
pleasure he had in him, and the satisfaction he had in the enjoyment of
him and communion with him, and that it was his meat and drink to serve
him, and to do his will; and though his goodness did not extend to him,
yet his goodness and happiness as man lay in him: unless the sense
should be,

"the Lord is he who gives me the portion of mine inheritance;''

meaning his church and people, all the elect of God, who are Christ's
portion and inheritance, given him by the Father; see [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009); And assigns to me my cup, as of
blessings, so of sorrows and sufferings, which being measured out,
filled up, and put into his hand by his Father, he freely took it, [Joh
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011);

thou maintainest my lot; that is, either his interest in God himself, as
his covenant God, which always continued; or the lot of goods, of grace
and glory, put into his hands for his people, which always remains; or
rather the saints themselves, who, as they are Christ's portion and
inheritance, so they are his lot; in allusion to the land of Canaan,
which was divided by lot: these Jehovah took hold of, kept, preserved,
and upheld, as the word (s) signifies; so that they shall never totally
and finally fall and perish; and this sense is countenanced by what
follows.

\(s\) "sustentas", Musculus, Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so
Ainsworth; "sustentans", Montanus, Michaelis; "tenuisti", Cocceius;
"tenendo quasi sustentans", Gejerus.

[Psalms 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 16:6</span></span>

The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places,.... The allusion is to
the measuring of land by lines, and appropriating each part to the
proper owners; and lines design the land that is measured out by them,
and here the church and people of God, the chosen ones who are given to
Christ, as his portion and inheritance; and the sense is, that Christ's
portion lies among or in pleasant persons; such as were so to him, as he
saw them in his Father's purposes and decrees; and as they are clothed
in his righteousness, and washed in his blood; and as they are adorned
with the graces of his Spirit; and as they will be as a bride adorned
for him in the New Jerusalem state, for rather persons than places are
here meant: though as the bounds of the saints' habitations are set, and
they are known to Christ, so they were pleasant to him, and he took
delight and rejoiced in the very spots of ground where he knew they
would dwell, [Pro 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031); and the word
"places" is supplied by Aben Ezra and Kimchi: but the former sense seems
best, and agrees with what follows;

yea, I have a goodly heritage: so the Lord's people are called, [Pe1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003); these are Christ's heritage, his
peculiar treasure, his jewels, with whom he is greatly delighted and
well pleased; more than men are with their gold and silver, houses and
land, and their greatest wealth and substance: these persons are the
inheritance with which he is contented and fully satisfied.

[Psalms 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 16:7</span></span>

I will bless the Lord,.... As prayer, so thanksgiving belongs to Christ,
as man and Mediator; see [Mat 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025);
and here he determines to praise the Lord, and give thanks to him for
counsel and instruction:

who hath given me counsel; for though he himself is the Counsellor, with
respect to his people, yet as man he received counsel from God, and the
spirit of counsel rested on him, [Isa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002); and fitted him for and directed
him in the execution of his prophetic office; for the doctrine he taught
was not his own, but his Father's; and he said nothing of himself but
what his Father taught him, and instructed him to speak, [Joh
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#016). And he also gave him counsel
about the execution of his priestly office, or about his sufferings and
death, and drinking of the cup, which he, with submission to the divine
will, desired might pass from him; but having advice in this matter,
most cheerfully and courageously yielded to take it, see [Mat
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039);

my reins also instruct me in the night seasons; when engaged in prayer
to God, in which he sometimes continued a whole night together, [Luk
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012); and especially in that dark and
dismal night in which he was betrayed, when it was the hour and power of
darkness with his enemies; then, his inward parts being influenced by
the spirit of wisdom and counsel, directed him how to behave and conduct
himself. Or "the reins" being the seat of the affections, and being put
for them, may signify, that his strong affection for God, and love to
his people, put him upon and moved him to take the steps he did, to
deliver up himself into the hands of sinful men, in order to suffer and
die for his friends, and obtain eternal salvation for them.

[Psalms 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 16:8</span></span>

I have set the Lord always before me, Not his fear only, or the book of
the law, as Jarchi interprets it, but the Lord himself; or, "I foresaw
the Lord always before my face", [Act
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#026); as Christ is set before men in
the Gospel, to look unto as the object of faith and hope, to trust in
and depend upon for life and salvation; so Jehovah the Father is the
object which Christ set before him, and looked unto in the whole course
of his life here on earth; he had always an eye to his glory, as the
ultimate end of all his actions; and to his will, his orders, and
commands, as the rule of them; and to his purposes, and counsel, and
covenant, to accomplish them; and to his power, truth, and faithfulness,
to assist, support, and encourage him in all his difficulties and most
distressed circumstances;

because he is at my right hand: to counsel and instruct, to help,
protect, and defend: the phrase is expressive of the nearness of God to
Christ, his presence with him, and readiness to assist and stand by him
against all his enemies; see [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031); so the Targum paraphrases it,
"because his Shechinah rests upon me";

I shall not be moved: as he was not from his place and nation, from the
duty of his office, and the execution of it, by all the threats and
menaces of men; nor from the fear, worship, and service of God, by all
the temptations of Satan; nor from the cause of his people he had
espoused, by all the terrors of death, the flaming sword of justice, and
the wrath of God; but, in the midst and view of all, stood unshaken and
unmoved; see [Isa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004).

[Psalms 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 16:9</span></span>

Therefore my heart is glad,.... Because he had the Lord always in view;
he was at his right hand, for his support and assistance, as well as
because of what is expressed in the next verses: this is the same with
rejoicing in spirit, [Luk 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021); it
denotes an inward joy, and fulness of it, because of the Lord's presence
with him; see [Act 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#028);

and my glory rejoiceth; meaning either his soul, which is the most
glorious and noble part of man, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech
interpret it; or rather his tongue, as in [Act
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#026); the faculty of speaking in man
being what gives him a superior glory and excellency to other creatures,
and is that whereby he glorifies God; and so the word is often used in
this book; see [Psa 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012); and here
the phrase designs Christ's glorifying God, and singing his praise with
joyful lips, among his disciples, a little before his sufferings and
death;

my flesh also shall rest in hope; in the grave, which, as it is a
resting place to the members of Christ, from all their sorrow, toil, and
labour here; so it was to Christ their head, who rested in it on the
Jewish sabbath, that day of rest, and that berth "in safety" (t), as the
word used may signify, and in of his resurrection from the dead, as
follows.

\(t\) "in tuto", Tigurine version; "secure", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Cocceius; "in confidence", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 16:10</span></span>

For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell,.... Meaning, not in the place
of the damned, where Christ never went, nor was; for at his death his
soul was committed to his Father, and was the same day in paradise: but
rather, "sheol" here, as "hades" in the Near Testament, signifies the
state of the dead, the separate state of souls after death, the
invisible world of souls, where Christ's soul was; though it was not
left there, nor did it continue, but on the third day returned to its
body again; though it seems best of all to interpret it of the grave, as
the word is rendered in [Gen 42:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#038);
and then by his "soul" must be meant, not the more noble part of his
human nature, the soul, in distinction from the body; for as it died
not, but went to God, it was not laid in the grave; but either he
himself, in which sense the word "soul" is sometimes used, even for a
man's self, [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). For it might be
truly said of him, God's Holy One, that he was laid in the grave, though
not left there; or rather his dead body, for so the word "nephesh" is
rendered in [Num 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006); so "anima" is
used in Latin authors (u): this was laid in the grave; for Joseph having
begged it of Pilate, took it down from the cross, and laid it in his own
new tomb; though it was the will of God it should not be left there, but
be raised from the dead, as it was on the third day, before it was
corrupted, as follows:

neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption; that is, to
lie so long in the grave as to putrefy and be corrupted; wherefore he
was raised from the dead on the third day, according to the Scriptures,
before the time bodies begin to be corrupted; see [Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039); and this was owing not to the
care of Joseph or Nicodemus, in providing spices to preserve it, but of
God who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; and who would not
suffer his body to be corrupted, because he was holy, and because he was
his Holy One; that so as there was no moral corruption in him, there
should be no natural corruption in him; so the Jewish Midrash (w)
interprets it, that

"no worm or maggot should have power over him;''

which is not true of David, nor of any but the Messiah. This character
of "Holy One" eminently belongs to Christ above angels and men, yea, it
is often used of the divine Being, and it agrees with Christ in his
divine nature, and is true of him as man; he is the holy thing, the holy
child Jesus; his nature is pure and spotless, free from the taint of
original sin; his life and conversation were holy and harmless, he did
no sin, nor knew any, nor could any be found in him by men or devils;
his doctrines were holy, and tended to promote holiness of life; all his
works are holy, and such is the work of redemption, which is wrought out
in consistence with and to the glory of the holiness and righteousness
of God; Christ is holy in all his offices, and is the fountain of
holiness to his people; and he is God's Holy One, he has property in him
as his Son, and as Mediator, and even as an Holy One; for he was
sanctified and sent into the world by him, being anointed with the holy
oil of his Spirit without measure. The word may be rendered, a
"merciful" (x) or "liberal" and "beneficent one": for Christ is all
this; he is a merciful as well as a faithful high priest, and he
generously distributes grace and glory to his people.

\(u\) "--animamque sepulchro coudimus--". Virgil. Aeneid. 3. v. 67. (w)
Apud Kimchi in v. 9. (x) "misericordem tuum", Pagninus, Montanus;
"beneficus tuus", Piscator.

[Psalms 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 16:11</span></span>

Thou wilt show me the path of life,.... Not the way of life and
salvation for lost sinners, which is Christ himself; but the
resurrection of the dead, which is a passing from death to life; and was
shown to Christ, not doctrinally, or by illuminating his mind, and
leading him into the doctrine of it, for so he himself has brought it to
light by the Gospel; practically and experimentally, by raising him the
dead, or by causing him to pass from death to life; and he was the first
to whom the path of life was shown in this sense, or the that who ever
trod in it, and so has led the way for others: hence he is called the
that fruits of them that slept, the firstborn and first begotten from
the dead; for though others were raised before, yet not to an immortal
life, never to die more, as he was; now the view, the faith, and hope of
this, of not being left in the grave so long as to see corruption, and
of being raised from the dead to an immortal life, caused joy and
gladness in Christ, at the time of his sufferings and death, as well as
what follows;

in thy presence is fulness of joy: Christ, being raised from the dead,
ascended to heaven, and was received up into glory into his Father's
presence, and is glorified with his own self, with his glorious
presence, for which he prayed, [Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005); and which fills his human nature
with fulness of joy, with a joy unspeakable and full of glory; see [Act
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#028); and as it is with the head it
will be with the members in some measure; now the presence of God puts
more joy and gladness into them than anything else can do; but as yet
their joy is not full; but it will be when they shall enter into the joy
of their Lord, into the presence of God in the other world then
everlasting joy will be upon their heads;

at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore; Christ being entered
into heaven is set down at the right hand of God in human nature, an
honour which is not conferred on any of the angels, [Heb
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013); where the man Christ Jesus is
infinitely delighted with the presence of God, the never fading joys of
heaven, the company of angels and glorified saints; here he sits and
sees of the travail of his soul; he prolongs his days and sees his seed,
souls called by grace, and brought to glory one after another, until
they are all brought in, in whom is all his delight; and which was the
joy set before him at the time of his sufferings and death: or the words
may be rendered "in thy right are pleasant things for ever" (y), and may
design those gifts and graces, which Christ, being exalted at the right
hand of God, received from thence and gives to men, for the use and
service, of his church and people, in the several successive ages of
time; and so Aben Ezra takes the words to be an allusion to a man's
giving pleasant gifts to his friend with his right hand.

\(y\) "amoenorum quae sunt in dextera tua perpetuo", Cocceius;
"delectationes in dextera tua usque in seculum", Musculas.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 17](psa017)

</div>
