<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa033)  [Next](psa035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 34:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 34

A Psalm of David, when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech; who
drove him away, and he departed. The author of this psalm is expressed
by name; and the time and occasion of it are plainly intimated: it was
composed by David, "when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech"; not
Ahimelech the priest, sometimes called Abimelech, [Ch1
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#016); to whom David went alone for
bread, pretending he was upon a private business of the king's; to which
sense the Syriac version inclines, rendering the words, "when he went to
the house of the Lord, \[and\] gave the firstfruits to the priests". But
this Abimelech was king of Gath, the same with Achish, [Sa1
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010); who either had two names; or
this of Abimelech, as it should seem, was a common name to all the kings
of the Philistines; see [Gen 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002); as
Pharaoh was to the Egyptian kings, and Caesar to the Roman emperors: the
name signifies a "father king", or "my father king", or a "royal
father"; as kings should be the fathers of their country: before him
"David changed his behaviour", his taste, sense, or reason: he imitated
a madman; behaved as if he was out of his senses, scrabbling on the
doors of the gates, and letting his spittle fall down upon his beard;
for he being known and made known by the servants of the king, he was in
great fear of losing his life, being in the hands of an enemy, and who
he might justly fear would revenge the death of their champion Goliath;
wherefore he took this method to get himself despised and neglected by
them, and escape out of their hands: and which succeeded; for Abimelech,
or Achish, seeing him behave in such a manner, treated him with
contempt, was displeased with his servants for bringing him into his
presence, and ordered them to take him away, or dismiss him; which is
here expressed by this phrase, "who drove him away", with scorn and
indignation; "and he departed" to the cave of Adullam, glad at heart he
had escaped such danger: upon which, under a sense of divine goodness,
and by the inspiration of the Spirit of God, he composed the following
psalm; see [Sa1 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010).

[Psalms 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 34:1</span></span>

I will bless the Lord at all times,.... That is, ascribe blessing, give
honour, praise, and glory to him, both as the God of nature and
providence, for every temporal mercy; and that every day, and at all
times in the day; since these are renewed every morning, and continue
all the day long: and as the God of grace, for all spiritual blessings;
and that continually, because these last always; they are irreversible,
unchangeable, and without repentance; yea, saints have reason to bless
God in times of adversity as well as prosperity, since it might have
been worse with them than it is; they have a mixture of mercy in all,
and all things work together for their good;

his praise shall continually be in my mouth; not the "praise" of which
God is the author, but of which he is the object; which is due unto him,
and is given him on account of the perfections of his nature, and the
works of his hands, and the blessings of his providence and grace; this,
the psalmist says, should be in his mouth: his meaning is, that he
should not only retain in his heart a grateful sense of the divine
favours, but should express it with his lips; should both make melody in
his heart to the Lord, and vocally sing his praise; and that
"continually", as long as he lived, or had any being, [Psa
146:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002).

[Psalms 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 34:2</span></span>

My soul shall make her boast in the Lord,.... Not in men, nor in any
outward enjoyment, nor in any works of righteousness, but in the Lord;
"in the Word of the Lord", as the Targum; in the Lord Jesus Christ; in
his wisdom, strength, riches, righteousness, redemption, and salvation;
in interest in him, and communion with him: and this is not tongue but
soul boasting; and not flashy and selfish, but solid, spiritual, and
hearty; and with all the powers and faculties of the soul; see [Co1
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029);

the humble shall hear thereof; either of the deliverance the psalmist
had out of the hands of his enemies; or of his blessing and praising the
Lord for the same, and making his boast in him as the God of his
salvation; or of both: of these humble ones; see Gill on [Psa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#012);

and be glad; for such rejoice with them that rejoice, and are glad at
heart that others share in the goodness and grace of God; and also
because by such an instance of the divine power and kindness they are
encouraged to hope that he will, in his own time, deliver them out of
their afflictions and distresses also.

[Psalms 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 34:3</span></span>

O magnify the Lord with me,.... The psalmist invites the humble ones,
who he knew would rejoice at the goodness of God to him, to join with
him in ascribing greatness to the Lord, which is meant by magnifying
him; for he cannot be made great by men, only declared how great he is,
and that can only be done in an imperfect manner;

and let us exalt his name together: by proclaiming him to be the most
High; by making mention of his glorious perfections and works, that he
be exalted; and by praising him in the highest strains; or by having the
high praises of him in their mouths; and there is more pleasure as well
as more glory brought to God by doing this in a social way, or by a
number of saints joining together in such service.

[Psalms 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 34:4</span></span>

I sought the Lord, and he heard me,.... Not that he sought the Lord
publicly in his house and ordinances, for he was now at Gath; but
privately by prayer and supplication; and that not vocally, but
mentally; for he was in the midst of the servants of the king of Gath;
yet earnestly, diligently, and with his whole heart, being in great
distress; when it was right to seek the Lord, and which showed him to be
a good man; and the Lord heard and answered even his silent groans,
which could not be uttered;

and delivered me from all my fear; of being seized on by Achish, king of
Gath, and of losing his life for killing Goliath: and many are the fears
of God's people, both from within and from without, by reason of sin,
Satan, and the world; but the Lord saves them out of the hands of all
their enemies, grants them his presence, and shows them their interest
in himself, which, scatters all their fears.

[Psalms 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 34:5</span></span>

They looked to him, and were lightened,.... That is, "the humble" ones,
[Psa 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002); and so this is a reason why
they should join in praising and magnifying the Lord; these "looked" up
to God in prayer and by faith, when in distressed and uncomfortable
circumstances, for help and deliverance, and a supply of every needful
good thing; and they were "enlightened"; so the Targum renders it,
"their faces were enlightened"; as Jarchi and Aben Ezra interpret it, in
opposition to what follows: they must have been enlightened before they
could look, but by looking to the Lord more light was gained: this
chiefly designs the light of joy, peace, and comfort, which is had in a
way of believing: some render the word "and flowed" (l), as a river
does, that is, to the Lord, as in [Jer
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012). So Kimchi and Ben Melech
explain the word; and it denotes both the numbers of them that looked up
to the Lord in their distress, and the swiftness of their motion to him,
and their earnestness and fervour of mind; so faith is not only a
looking to Christ, but a going forth unto him;

and their faces were not ashamed; having what they prayed and looked
for, and what they hoped and believed they should have; namely,
deliverance and salvation, and so peace and pleasure.

\(l\) "et confluunt", Junius & Tremellius, Michaelis; "et instar fluvii
irruerint", Piscator, Amama; "et confluxerunt", Gejerus.

[Psalms 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 34:6</span></span>

This poor man cried,.... Singling out some one person from among the
humble, who was remarkably delivered; it is the common case of the
people of God to be poor and afflicted, and in their afflictions they
cry unto the Lord to be supported under them, and delivered out of them:
or this may be understood of David himself, who was poor, not with
respect to outward things, but in spirit; was much afflicted, and
especially greatly distressed when in the court of Achish; at which time
he cried unto the Lord, as was his usual way, and that internally, as
Moses did, [Exo 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015). Some think
Jesus Christ is intended by this poor man, who was poor in temporals,
though rich, and Lord of all; and was greatly afflicted, both in body
and soul; and who, in the days of his flesh, offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007);

and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles; so the
Lord always heard his son Jesus Christ, and especially in the day of
salvation, and delivered him out of all his troubles, both of body and
soul, when he raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; and he heard
David his servant, as he often did; particularly when at Gath, and made
way for his escape from thence; and from whence he came safe to the cave
of Adullam; and the Lord hears all his poor and afflicted ones, when
they cry unto him, and in the issue saves them from all their troubles,
by reason of a body of sin and death, the temptations of Satan, and the
persecutions of men.

[Psalms 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 34:7</span></span>

The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him,.... By
whom may be meant, either the uncreated Angel, the Lord Jesus Christ,
the Angel of God's presence, and of the covenant, the Captain of
salvation, the Leader and Commander of the people; and whose salvation
is as walls and bulwarks about them; or as an army surrounding them: or
a created angel may be intended, even a single one, which is sufficient
to guard a multitude of saints, since one could destroy at once such a
vast number of enemies, as in [Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035); or one may be put for more,
since they are an innumerable company that are on the side of the Lord's
people, and to whom they are joined; and these may be said to encamp
about them, because they are an host or army; see [Gen
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001); and are the guardians of the
saints, that stand up for them and protect them, as well as minister to
them;

and delivereth them; out of the hands of all their enemies. David had a
guard, an army of these about him, in the court of Achish, who preserved
him from being seized, and receiving any harm there; and who brought him
from thence in safety: there is no doubt but he here speaks his own
experience.

[Psalms 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 34:8</span></span>

O taste, and see that the Lord is good,.... He is essentially,
infinitely, perfectly, immutably, and solely good in himself; and he is
communicatively and diffusively good to others: he is the author of all
good, but not of any evil, in a moral sense; this chiefly regards his
special grace and goodness through Christ: all the divine Persons in the
Godhead are good; the Father is good, he has good designs towards his
people, has provided good things for them, made good promises to them,
and bestows good gifts on them: the Son is good; the good Shepherd that
has laid down his life for the sheep; he is the fountain of all grace
and goodness to his churches, and to particular believers; he has
wrought a good work for them, the work of redemption, and he speaks a
good word on their behalf in the court of heaven: the Spirit is good; he
works good things in the hearts of the sons of men, and shows good
things unto them; and gracious souls, such as the psalmist here calls
upon, are capable of tasting and discerning how good the Lord is in some
measure; see [Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). While
unregenerate, their taste is vitiated, and remains unchanged, and sin is
what they feed upon with pleasure, and so detest everything that is
good; but in conversion a new taste is given, so as to have a saving
experimental knowledge of the grace and goodness of God in Christ, an
application of it to them; and in such manner as to live upon it, and be
nourished by it; and though this is not a superficial taste of things,
like that of hypocrites, nor a single one only, being frequently
repeated; yet it is but a taste in comparison of the enjoyment of it in
the heavenly state; and every taste now influences and engages trust in
the Lord, as follows;

blessed is the man that trusteth in him; See Gill on [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012); the Targum renders it, "that
trust in his word".

[Psalms 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 34:9</span></span>

O fear the Lord, ye his saints,.... Who are sanctified by his Spirit,
and so are openly and manifestly his; these are exhorted to fear the
Lord with reverence and godly fear; and great reason there is why they
should fear him, since he is King of saints, and fear is due to him from
them; and seeing they have received many instances of grace and goodness
from him, and therefore should fear him for his goodness's sake; and
besides they, and they only, know him, and have the grace of fear in
them, and so only can exercise it on him;

for there is no want to them that fear him; not in spirituals, since so
much goodness is laid up for them; the heart of God is towards them, his
secret is with them, his eye is upon them, and the sun of righteousness
arises on them; and both grace and glory are given to them; nor in
temporals, since godliness, or the fear of God, has the promise of this
life, as well as of that which is to come.

[Psalms 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 34:10</span></span>

The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger,.... According to
Apollinarius,

"the needy rich, whom famine presses;''

see [Job 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010);

but they that seek the Lord; by prayer, diligently, with their whole
heart, and in the sincerity of their souls; the Targum is, "that seek
the doctrine of the Lord"; that seek instruction from him, and to be
taught by him: these

shall not want any good thing: which God has purposed to bestow upon
them, which he has promised unto them, and provided for them; nor any
thing that shall be for their good.

[Psalms 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 34:11</span></span>

Come, ye children,.... Meaning either his own children, those of his own
family, judging it his duty to instruct them, and bring them up in the
fear of the Lord; or his subjects, to whom he stood in the relation of a
father, as every king does; or all his hearers, as those who attended
the prophets are called the children or sons of the prophets; or young
people in common may be designed, who should be taught early their duty
to God and men: unless the children of God in general are here meant; or
particularly the least among them, called babes and little children, who
are little in their own eyes, are modest and humble; and who, as they
need instruction, are most forward to receive it; and the word "come"
does not so much design local motion, a drawing near to hear, as
readiness to hear, and a close attention of mind; as follows;

hearken unto me; as unto a father, giving good doctrine and wholesome
advice; [Pro 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001);

I will teach you the fear of the Lord; which he had so often spoken of,
and so many good things are promised to them that have it, and even in
the context: this the psalmist could not give, nor can any man, only
teach it, show the nature of it, in what it lies, how it shows itself,
and what are the effects it produces: this is the first lesson to be
taught and learnt; for it is the beginning of wisdom; it includes all
grace, and every duty, and regards the whole worship of God, and the
manner of it.

[Psalms 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 34:12</span></span>

What man is he that desireth life?.... Every man desires life, even a
natural life; it is more desirable than all things in it; especially an
healthful life, without which the blessings and mercies of life cannot
be comfortably enjoyed; and still more a life of prosperity; life, with
an affluence of good things, and even a long one: though it may be
rather that a spiritual life is here meant, and a comfortable one; a
life free from the remorses of a guilty conscience, from the fear of
hell, damnation, and wrath; from the bondage of the law, and the dread
of death; a life of faith on Christ, and communion with him; and a life
of sobriety, righteousness, and holiness; and perhaps it may be best of
all to understand it of eternal life, which is life eminently and
emphatically; it follows,

and loveth many days; that is, good ones; as they are interpreted in
[Pe1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010); not of this life, for the
days of it are evil, and especially when they are lengthened out; the
days of old age, [Ecc 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#001); unless the
days of the son of man, the days of enjoying the presence of God in his
house and ordinances, should be intended; though rather the good and
many days of eternity, even length of days, for ever and ever, in which
will be fulness of joy, and never ceasing and never fading pleasures;

that he may see good; there is good to be seen and enjoyed in this life,
which if the saints did not believe they should see and enjoy, they
would often faint; and this good lies in the participation of the
blessings of grace, and in fellowship with Father, Son, and Spirit: but
the great and lasting good to be seen and enjoyed is in the world to
come, when God shall be all in all, be seen as he is, and the saints
shall inherit all things.

[Psalms 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 34:13</span></span>

Keep thy tongue from evil,.... This, and what follows in this verse and
[Psa 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014), point at the things
wherein the fear of God shows itself; and suggest, that those who have
it, and which is known by these fruits, shall enjoy the desirable and
good days before mentioned. The tongue is an instrument of much evil, an
unruly member, and needs restraint; and it is from evil, and not from
good, it is to be kept; from evil speaking of God, from cursing and
swearing; from evil speaking of men, reproaching and reviling them; from
filthy speaking, from all obscene and unchaste words, and from all lying
ones; for where such evil speaking is indulged, the fear of God cannot
be in that man;

and thy lips from speaking guile; hypocritical and deceitful words,
speaking with flattering lips and a double heart: some speak bad words
in common conversation, through an evil habit and custom; and some speak
good words with an ill design; and in neither of them is the fear of God
before their eyes, nor in their hearts.

[Psalms 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 34:14</span></span>

Depart from evil,.... This denotes that evil is near to men; it keeps
close to them, and should be declined and shunned: and it regards all
sorts of evil; evil men, and their evil company; evil things, evil words
and works, and all appearance of evil; and the fear of the Lord shows
itself in an hatred of it, and a departure from it, [Pro
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#013);

and do good; not only acts of beneficence to all in necessitous
circumstances, but every good work; whatever the word of God directs, or
suggests should be done; and which should be done from right principles
of faith and love, and to right ends, the glory of God, and the good of
his interest; and Christ should be looked and applied unto for grace and
strength to perform; all which are evidences of the true fear of God;

seek peace, and pursue it; in the world, and with all men, as much as
possibly can be; in neighbourhoods, cities, and states, and in the
churches of Christ, and with the saints, as well as with God through
Christ; and which in every sense is to be pursued after with eagerness,
and to be endeavoured for with diligence; see [Rom
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018).

[Psalms 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 34:15</span></span>

The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,.... These are the same with
them that fear the Lord, and do good; not that they become righteous in
the sight of God, or are justified before him, by their fear of him, and
by their good works; but these are the fruits and effects of grace,
showing them to be righteous persons; for it is only by the
righteousness of Christ that men are righteous before God: and upon
these the eyes of the Lord are; not only his eye of Providence, to watch
over them, protect them, and supply them with good things, but his eye
of love; with complacency and delight he looks upon them, as clothed
with the righteousness of his son; and it is with pleasure he looks upon
them, that being well pleasing in his sight; seeing by it the law is
magnified and made honourable; nor does he ever withdraw his eyes from
them, [Job 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#007);

and his ears are open unto their cry; for though they are righteous,
they are sometimes in distress; their afflictions are many; the good
days they are to see are hereafter; and at those times they cry unto the
Lord; which is to be understood of prayer, and of the vehemency and
fervency of it, when they have the ear of God, and he shows himself to
be a God hearing and answering prayer.

[Psalms 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 34:16</span></span>

The face of the Lord is against them that do evil,.... Not against
everyone that sins; for the righteous are not without sin; they have sin
in them, and they do no good without it; but against them that live in
sin, whose course of life is a series of wickedness, and they are
workers of iniquity; and have no sense of sin, nor sorrow for it, go on
in it without shame or fear; against these the face of the Lord is, he
shows his resentment, and stirs up his wrath. For the Lord to be against
a man is dreadful; a fearful thing it is to fill into his hands as a God
of vengeance; there is no standing before him when once he is angry: and
to have the face of God against a man is intolerable, when it is to
destroy, and

to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth; so that they shall be
no more thought of, nor spoken of, but with contempt and reproach; an
everlasting mark of infamy being upon their names; see [Pro
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007).

[Psalms 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 34:17</span></span>

The righteous cry,.... The word "righteous" is not in the original text,
but is rightly supplied in our version, as it is in the Targum, and by
Jarchi; and so Kimchi and Ben Melech observe, that these words are not
to be connected with [Psa 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016), but
with [Psa 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015); and they are indeed
an amplification of the last clause of it; and the cry of the righteous
is meant, to which the ears of the Lord are open; though Aben Ezra
thinks that these words are to be understood of them that do evil, and
of their cry to the Lord, when they turn from their evil ways; but the
former sense is best;

and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles;
their inward troubles, through the workings of corruption in their
hearts; through the violent assaults of Satan, the blasphemous thoughts
he injects into them, and his solicitations of them to sin; and through
divine desertions, and their outward troubles; through afflictions of
body, losses of estate and friends, and the reproaches and persecutions
of men; out of all these the Lord sooner or later delivers his people
who cry unto him.

[Psalms 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 34:18</span></span>

The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart,.... Who are
pressed and bore down with afflictions, by the sorrow of heart under
which their spirits are broken, [Pro
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#013); or with a sense of sin, and
sorrow for it, for which their hearts smite them, and they are wounded
by it, and broken with it: to these the Lord is "nigh"; not in a general
way only, as he is to all men, being God omnipresent, but in a special
manner; he comes and manifests himself to them in a gracious way, pours
in the oil and wine of his love, and binds up their broken hearts; yea,
comes and dwells with them: he does not pass by them and neglect them,
much less make the breach worse; he does not break the bruised reeds,
but he heals their breaches;

and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit; not in a legal, but in an
evangelical way; who are humbled under a sense of sin, and melted down
in true repentance, under a view of the love and grace of God; and are
poor and mean in their own eyes: to these the Lord has respect; the
sacrifices of a broken and contrite spirit are not despised by him, but
accepted through faith in Christ; and such he saves with an everlasting
salvation in him.

[Psalms 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 34:19</span></span>

Many are the afflictions of the righteous,.... This may be understood of
some one particular righteous person, since the singular number is here
made use of; whereas the plural is always used before, when the
righteous are made mention of; and the Lord Jesus Christ may be
designed, who is eminently and emphatically "the righteous"; he is
righteous both as God and man, and as Mediator, in the discharge of
every branch of his office; and his afflictions were many, which he
endured from men, from devils, and from God himself: many were the
afflictions of his body, which he bore when buffeted, scourged, and
crucified; and many were the afflictions of his soul, when he bore the
sins of his people, endured the wrath of God for them, and was forsaken
by him; though none of these were for any sins of his own, but for the
sins of others; and out of them all the Lord delivered him at last, and
set him at his own right hand; or this may be understood of everyone of
the righteous; who, though they are justified from sin, and are saved
from wrath, yet have many afflictions; which are "evils" in themselves,
as the word (m) may be rendered, and are very troublesome and
distressing; and these are great and grievous for quality, and many and
abundant for quantity; though no more than it is the will of God should
be, and not one too many;

but the Lord delivereth him out of them all; as Christ was, and all his
people will be; if not in this life, by giving respites and intervals,
as he sometimes does; yet hereafter, when the righteous are completely
delivered out of all their trials and exercises, so as that they shall
never return more upon them. The word translated "afflictions", as it
signifies "evils", may be safely interpreted of moral evils, as well as
of evils of afflictions: it is the same word that is used for moral evil
in [Psa 34:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#021); and then the sense is,
that many are the sins committed by righteous persons; for there are
none without sin, in many things they all offend; yet they shall not
perish by them, but they shall be delivered from them; as, from the
dominion of them by the power of grace, and from the guilt of them by
the blood of Christ, and from condemnation for them through his
righteousness; so hereafter from the very being of them, and all
molestation and disturbance by them.

\(m\) "mala", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Cocceius, Gejerus,
Michaelis; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 34:20</span></span>

He keepeth all his bones; not one of them is broken. This is literally
true of Christ, in whom the type of the passover lamb had its
accomplishment, and this passage also; see [Exo
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046); and seems better to agree with
him than with any of his members, since the bones of many of them have
been broken by one accident or another; and especially many of the
martyrs of Jesus have had all their bones broken upon the rack or wheel;
wherefore, to understand these words of them might tend to create
uneasiness and despondency in the minds of such who by any means have
their bones broken; as if they were not righteous persons, this promise
not being fulfilled in them: and to interpret this of the Lord's keeping
the bones of his people in the grave, and in the resurrection putting
them together again; this is no other than what will be done to the
wicked; it seems therefore best to understand the whole of Christ; and
it looks as if this passage was had in view as fulfilled in [Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036); since a Scripture is referred
to; but if it is interpreted of the righteous in general, it must be
with a limitation; as that their bones are all kept by the Lord, and not
one is broken without his knowledge and will; and that they are not
broken finally, but restored again perfect and whole in the
resurrection, and so will continue to all eternity: the phrase, without
entering into particulars, may in general design the care of Providence
over the righteous; with this compare [Mat
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029).

[Psalms 34:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 34:21</span></span>

Evil shall slay the wicked,.... Meaning either the evil they designed
against the righteous shall return and fall upon their heads, to their
own ruin; or the evil of affliction, which to them is the evil of
punishment, both here and hereafter, from which they will have no
deliverance in the end; though the righteous have from their
afflictions, being not properly punishments, but chastisements for sin,
and are but for a time; or else the evil of sin, which is the cause of
death corporeal and eternal;

and they that hate the righteous shall be desolate; or "shall be guilty"
(n); be found so; or "shall be condemned", or "damned", as the Targum
renders it. All wicked men hate the righteous, both Jesus Christ the
righteous, and his people; and that because they are righteous, and do
not run into the same excess of wickedness with them, these will be
arraigned at the day of judgment, and will be convicted of all their
hard speeches which they have spoken against Christ and his members; and
will be pronounced guilty, and will be punished with everlasting
destruction.

\(n\) "rei fiunt", Cocceius; "reatum habebunt", Schmidt; "damnabuntur",
Gejerus; "shall be condemned as guilty", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 34:22</span></span>

The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants,.... Who are made so by his
grace in the day of his power, and are willing to serve him, and to
serve him with their minds, readily and cheerfully; and the soul of
these, which is the more noble part of them, and is of more worth than a
world, the redemption of which is precious, and requires a great price,
the Lord redeems; not that their bodies are neglected, and not redeemed;
but this is mentioned as the principal part, and for the whole; and this
redemption is by the Lord, who only is able to effect it, and which he
has obtained through his precious blood; and here it seems to denote the
application of it in its effects; that is, the forgiveness of sin,
justification, and sanctification, since it respects something that is
continually doing;

and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate; or "be guilty"
(o), or "condemned", or "damned"; because they are justified from all
the sins they have been guilty of, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus; and having believed in him, they shall not be damned,
according to [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016); and they
shall be far from being desolate, and alone, and miserable; they shall
stand at Christ's right hand, be received into his kingdom and glory,
and be for ever with him.

\(o\) "non rei fiunt", Cocceius; "non punientur", Gejerus; "shall not be
condemned as guilty", Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 35](psa035)

</div>
