<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa081)  [Next](psa083) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 82](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 82:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 82

A Psalm of Asaph. This psalm was written for the use of persons in
power, for the instruction of kings and princes, judges and civil
magistrates; according to Kimchi, it was written about the times of
Jehoshaphat, who appointed new judges throughout the land; those that
were before having been very corrupt, to whom he gave a charge agreeably
to the purport of this psalm, [Ch2
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#005), but it seems rather to be
written by Asaph, in the times of David, under a spirit of prophecy, and
has respect to the times of Christ, when there was a great corruption
among the judges and rulers of the Jews, both civil and ecclesiastic.
The Syriac version calls it, "a reproof of the ungodly Jews"; our Lord
cites a passage out of it in vindication of himself from their charge of
blasphemy, [Joh 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034).

[Psalms 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 82:1</span></span>

God standeth in the congregation of the mighty,.... The Syriac version
renders it, "in the congregation of angels"; they are mighty, and excel
in strength, and there is a large company of them, even an innumerable
one, and who surround the throne of the Majesty on high. Christ, who is
God over all, was among those on Mount Sinai, and when he ascended to
heaven; and with these he will descend when he comes a second time, [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017). The Targum interprets it of the
righteous thus,

"God, whose majesty (or Shechinah) dwells in the congregation of the
righteous that are strong in the law.''

It may be better understood of such as are strong in the Lord, in the
grace that is in Christ, and in the exercise of grace upon him; who are
gathered out of the world unto him, and unto distinct societies and
congregations; in the midst of which God is, where he grants his
presence, bestows the blessings of his grace, and affords his divine aid
and protection; and where Christ the Son of God is, and will be to the
end of the world. The words may be rendered, "God standeth in the
congregation of God" (a): that is, in his own congregation, his church
and people; but it seems best of all to understand the words of rulers
and civil magistrates, of the cabinet councils of princes, of benches of
judges, and courts of judicature; in all which God is present, and
observes what is said and done; perhaps reference may be had to the
Jewish sanhedrim, the chief court of judicature with the Jews,
consisting of seventy one persons; in the midst of which Christ, God
manifest in the flesh, God in our nature, stood, and was ill used, and
most unjustly judged by them, of whose unjust judgment complaint is made
in the next verse:

he judgeth among the gods: which the Syriac version renders "angels"
again; and so Aben Ezra interprets it of them, who are so called, [Psa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005), but rather civil magistrates are
meant, the rulers and judges of the people, who go by this name of
"elohim", or gods, in [Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006), and
are so called because they are the powers ordained of God, are
representatives of him, are his vicegerents and deputies under him;
should act in his name, according to his law, and for his glory, and are
clothed with great power and authority from and under him; and therefore
are before styled the "mighty". Among these Christ, the Son of God,
judges, to whom all judgment is committed; he qualifies these for the
discharge of their office, he directs them how to judge, and all the
right judgment they make and do is from him, "by" whom "kings"

reign, and princes decree justice; by whom princes rule, and nobles,
even all the judges of the earth; and to whom they are all accountable,
and will be themselves judged by him another day, [Pro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#015) so the Targum,

"in the midst of the judges of truth he judges.''

\(a\) "in congregatione Dei", Pagninus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis; so
Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Ainsworth.

[Psalms 82:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 82:2</span></span>

How long will ye judge unjustly,.... These are the words not of the
psalmist, but of the divine Person that stands in the congregation of
the mighty, and judges among the gods; calling the unjust judges to an
account, and reproving them for their unrighteous proceedings and
perversion of justice, in which they had long continued, and which was
an aggravation of their sin; this is very applicable to the rulers and
judges of the Jewish nation in the times of Christ, who had long dealt
very unjustly, and continued to do so; they judged wrong judgment, or
judgment of iniquity, as Aben Ezra renders it, both in civil and
ecclesiastical things; their judgment was depraved concerning the law,
which they transgressed and made void by adhering to the traditions of
the elders; they passed an unrighteous judgment on John the Baptist, the
forerunner of Christ, rejecting his baptism, and calling him a devil;
and upon Christ himself, adjudging him to death for crimes he was not
guilty of; and upon his followers, whom they cast out of the synagogue;
the character of an unjust judge see in [Luk
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002),

and accept the persons of the wicked? gave the cause in favour of them,
and against the righteous, because they were rich, or related to them,
or had bribes from them, contrary to the law in [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019), so the judges among the Jews,
in Christ's time, judged according to appearance, the outward
circumstances of men, and not righteous judgment, as our Lord suggests,
[Joh 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024).

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 82:3</span></span>

Defend the poor and fatherless,.... Or, judge (d) them; such as have no
money to enter and carry on a suit, and have no friends to assist and
advise them, and abide by them; these should be taken under the care and
wing of judges; their cause should be attended to, and justice done
them; their persons should be protected, and their property defended and
secured for, since they are called gods, they ought to imitate him whose
name they bear, who is the Father of the fatherless, the Judge of the
widows, and the helper of the poor that commit themselves to him, [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014), such a righteous judge and good
magistrate was Job; see [Job 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012),

do justice to the afflicted and needy; or "justify" (e) them, pronounce
them righteous, give the cause for them, not right or wrong, nor because
they are poor and needy, but because they are in the right; for, if
wicked, they are not to be justified, this is an abomination to the
Lord; see [Lev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015).

\(d\) "judicate", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Junius &
Tremellius, Gejerus, Michaelis. (e) "justificate", V. L. Pagninus,
Montanus, Vatablus, Musculus, Cocceius, &c.

[Psalms 82:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 82:4</span></span>

Deliver the poor and needy,.... From his adversary and oppressor, who is
mightier than he, and draws him to the judgment seat; when it is not in
his power to defend himself against him, and get out of his hands,
unless a righteous judge will show a regard to him and his cause; and
sometimes even an unjust judge, through importunity, will do this, as
everyone ought, and every righteous one will:

rid them out of the hand of the wicked; this was what the poor widow
importuned the unjust judge for, and obtained, [Luk
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#003).

[Psalms 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 82:5</span></span>

They knew not,.... The Targum adds, to do well. This is to be understood
of unjust judges and wicked magistrates, who know not God, and have not
the fear of him before their eyes, though he stands in the midst of
them, and judges among them; which is the source of their unjust judging
and unrighteous proceedings: for because they know not God, nor fear
him, therefore they regard not men: nor do such know themselves; they
are called gods, and they think they are so, and do not consider they
are but men; they are the ministers of God, deputies under him, and are
accountable to him: nor do they know their duty before pointed out; it
is for them to know judgment, what is right, and what is wrong, that
they may pronounce righteous judgment, [Mic
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#002), but they do not know it, at least
so as to practise it: nor did the Jewish rulers know Christ, which was
the reason of their unrighteous dealing with him and with his followers;
they put him to death, and so they did them, because they knew him not,
[Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008),

neither will they understand: the Targum adds, by way of explanation,
"the law", the rule of judgment, which judges ought to understand; so
the Jewish rulers, Pharisees and Sadducees, were upbraided by Christ
with ignorance of the Scriptures, and the law of God, their false
glosses of which he refutes, [Mat 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)
and their ignorance was wilful and affected, they shut their eyes
against light and evidence, especially with respect to Christ; they
could discern the face of the sky, but not the signs of the times, [Mat
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#003), who so blind as they that will
not see? and such were the Jewish rulers; see [Isa
42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019),

they walk on in darkness; they chose darkness rather than light, and so
were blind leaders of the blind, and were wilfully so, having their eyes
blinded with gifts, [Deu 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019),

all the foundations of the earth are out of course; or "shaken" or
"moved" (f): by the perversion of justice, towns, cities, commonwealths,
kingdoms, and states, are thrown into the utmost disorder and confusion:
as the king by judgment establisheth the land; [Pro
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#004), so when judgment is not
executed, it is unsettled, and thrown into confusion; or though (g) "the
foundation", &c. though this is the case, yet unjust judges will go on,
perverting judgment, even though, as at the deluge, the foundations of
the earth were shaken and moved, for the violence, rapine, and
oppression, the earth was then filled with, which Kimchi thinks is here
referred to; and though a dissolution of the Jewish polity, civil and
ecclesiastical, was threatened, because of such injustice; that God
would once more shake the heavens and the earth, remove their church and
civil state, when they should cease to be a nation, their city be
destroyed, and their temple, not one stone left upon another; and yet
such was the obstinacy of their wicked judges, that they would persist
their wicked ways.

\(f\) "moventur", Vatablus; "dimoventur", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator;
"commoventur", Gejerus; "nutant", Tigurine version. (g) So Ainsworth.

[Psalms 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 82:6</span></span>

I have said, ye are gods,.... In the law, [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006) or they were so by his
appointment and commission; he constituted them judges and magistrates,
invested them with such an office, by which they came to have this
title; see [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001), and so our Lord
interprets these words, that they were gods "to whom" the word of God
came, which gave them a commission and authority to exercise their
office, [Joh 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035), or rather "against
whom" it came, pronouncing the sentence of death on them, as in [Psa
82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007), to which the reference is;
declaring, that though they were gods by office, yet were mortal men,
and should die. The Targum is, "I said, as angels are ye accounted"; and
so judges and civil magistrates had need to be as angels, and to have
the wisdom of them; see [Sa2 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#020).
Jarchi interprets it of angels, but magistrates are undoubtedly meant:

and all of you are children of the most High; the Targum here again
renders it,

"the angels of the most High:''

and so Aben Ezra explains it of them who are called the sons of God,
[Job 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007) but men in power are meant,
who, because of their eminency and dignity, their high office, post, and
place, are so called; see [Gen 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002).

[Psalms 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 82:7</span></span>

But ye shall die like men,.... As men in common do, to whom it is
appointed to die, [Heb 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027) or as
common men, as men in the lowest class of life: the wise man dies as the
fool, the king as the peasant, high as the low, rich as the poor; death
levels and makes all alike: or as Adam, as the first man, so Jarchi, who
was lord of the whole universe; but being in honour, abode not, but
became like the beasts that perish; sinning he died, and so all his
posterity, even those who have the greatest power and authority on
earth; see [Psa 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#002) and not only die
a corporeal death, but an eternal one, dying in their sins; as Christ
threatened the Jewish rulers, Scribes, and Pharisees, if they believed
not in him, [Joh 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021).

and fall like one of the princes; or the chief of them, Satan, who fell
like lightning from heaven, [Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)
or rather as one of the giants that lived in the old world, famous for
their injustice and oppression, that fell in the deluge, [Gen
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004) or any of the Heathen princes,
tyrants and oppressors, such as are mentioned in the following psalm,
[Psa 83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009). This may have respect to
the destruction of the Jewish nation, which is called the falling of
them, [Rom 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011) and the words may be
rendered, "and ye shall fall together, equally and alike, O ye princes"
(a); when the Jewish state, civil and ecclesiastical, fell, they fell
with it, and together; the princes of this world then came to nought, or
were abolished, they and their authority, as the Apostle Paul says they
should, [Co1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006) the sceptre then
departed from Judah, and the lawgiver from between his feet; all rule
and authority ceased among them, as Jacob foretold it would, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010).

\(a\) "pariter; sive ex aequo", Maius apud Gataker. Cin. c. 10. p. 292.

[Psalms 82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 82:8</span></span>

Arise, O God,.... These are the words of the prophet, or of the church,
whom he represents, addressing Christ, who is God over all; that seeing
there was such a corruption and degeneracy in the world, and such
wretched perversion of justice, that he would arise and exert himself,
and show himself strong on the behalf of his people:

judge the earth: who is the Judge of the whole earth, to whom all
judgment is committed, and who will judge the world in righteousness:

for thou shalt inherit all nations; which he will do in the latter day,
when he shall be King over all the earth, and the Heathen shall be given
him for his inheritance, he being heir of all things; and universal
justice will not take place in the world till that time comes; and
therefore it is to be wished and prayed for, as by the prophet and
church here.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 83](psa083)

</div>
