<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa030)  [Next](psa032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 31:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 31

To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David. This psalm, according to Arama,
was composed by David when in Keilah; but, according to Kimchi and
others, when the Ziphites proposed to deliver him up into the hands of
Saul; and who, upon their solicitations, came down and surrounded him
with his army, from whom in haste he made his escape, and to which he is
thought to refer in [Psa 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022).
Theodoret supposes it was written by David when he fled from Absalom,
and that it has some respect in it to his sin against Uriah, in that
verse.

[Psalms 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 31:1</span></span>

In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust,.... Not in any creature, but in the
Lord Jehovah; the Targum, "in thy Word"; the essential Logos, or Word,
which was in the beginning with God, and was God, and so an equal object
of faith, trust, and confidence, as Jehovah the Father: this act
includes a trusting all with God, body and soul, and the welfare of
them, in time, and to eternity; and a trusting him for all things, both
of providence and grace, and for both grace and glory, and is a
continued act; for the psalmist does not say, "I have trusted", or "I
will trust", but "I do"; and this was a very consider able thing to do
in this time of his distress: the Lord is to be trusted in at all times;

let me never be ashamed; neither in this world, nor in that to come. The
believer has no reason to be ashamed of anything in this life but sin,
and the imperfection of his own righteousness, and his trust in it; not
of the Lord, in whom he trusts; nor of his Word, or Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom he believes as his Saviour and Redeemer; nor of the
Spirit, and his work of grace upon him; nor of his faith, hope, trust,
and confidence in them; nor of the Gospel, the means of faith, and of
the support of it; nor of, the reproaches, afflictions, and sufferings,
he endures for the sake of Christ and his Gospel; nor of his ordinances
and his people; nor will he be ashamed hereafter at the coming of
Christ, when he will appear in his righteousness, be clothed with white
robes, have palms in his hands, and shall stand at his right hand, and
be received into glory;

deliver me in thy righteousness; not in his own, by which he knew there
was no acceptance with God, no justification before him, nor any
deliverance and salvation from sin and death; but by the righteousness
of God, which the Son of God has wrought out, God the Father accepts of
and imputes, and the Spirit of God reveals and applies; by this there is
deliverance from sin, its guilt, and damning power, and from the curses
and condemnation of the law, and from wrath to come, and from the second
death.

[Psalms 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 31:2</span></span>

Bow down thine ear to me,.... Which is said after the manner of men,
who, when they give attention, and listen to anything, stoop, and
incline the ear; and this for God to do, as he sometimes does, is
wonderful condescending grace!

deliver me speedily; which shows that he was in great danger, and his
case required haste: the Lord does help right early, and is sometimes a
present help in time of need, and delivers at once, as soon as the mercy
is asked for;

be thou my strong rock: for shelter and security from enemies, as well
as to build his everlasting salvation on, and to stand firmly upon, and
out of danger;

for an house of defence to save me; both for an house to dwell in, Lord
being the dwelling place of his people in all generations, and a strong
habitation to which they may continually resort; and for protection and
safety, their place of defence in him being the munition of rocks, a
strong hold, and a strong tower from the enemy.

[Psalms 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 31:3</span></span>

For thou art my rock and my fortress,.... What he prayed for he knew him
to be, and to have been in times past, and could claim his interest in
him; and therefore entreats that he would appear to be to him what he
was in himself, and what he had been to him;

therefore for thy name's sake lead me, and guide me; either as a
shepherd does his flock, gently, as they are able to bear it; into the
green pastures of the word and ordinances, and beside the still waters
of divine love, and to the overflowing fountain, and fulness of grace in
himself; or as a general leads and guides his army; Christ being a
Leader and Commander of the people, and the great Captain of their
salvation, and who being at the head of them, they fear no enemy; or as
a guide leads and directs such as are ignorant, and out of the way. The
psalmist desires the Lord would lead him in the way of truth and paths
of righteousness, according to his word; and guide him with his counsel,
and by his Spirit, that so he might walk in the way in which he should
go; and this he entreats he would do "for his name's sake"; not for any
merit or worthiness in him; but for the glory of his own name, and for
the honour of his free grace and mercy, for which the Lord often does
many things; he defers his anger, he purges away the sins of his people,
he forgives their transgressions, and remembers their sins no more, for
his name's sake.

[Psalms 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 31:4</span></span>

Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me,.... The
Ziphites, and Saul, and his men; the former intending treacherously to
betray him, and the latter encompassing him about in order to take him;
and such was his danger and difficulty, that he saw none but God could
deliver him; and he it is that breaks the nets of men, and the snares of
the devil, which they secretly lay for the people of God, that they may
stumble, and fall, and be taken, and delivers them out of them;

for thou art my strength; the author, giver, and maintainer, both of his
natural and spiritual strength; and who was able, and was only able, to
pull him out of the net, and extricate him out of the difficulties in
which he was.

[Psalms 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 31:5</span></span>

Into thine hand I commit my spirit,.... Either his life, as to a
faithful Creator and Preserver, who was the God of his life, gave him
it, and upheld his soul in it; or his soul, and the eternal salvation of
it, which he committed into the hand of the Lord his Redeemer, where he
knew it would be safe, and out of whose hands none can pluck; or this he
might say, as apprehensive of immediate death, through the danger he was
in; and therefore commits his spirit into the hands of God, to whom he
knew it belonged, and to whom it returns at death, and dies not with the
body, but exists in a separate state, and would be immediately with him.
Our Lord Jesus Christ used the same words when he was expiring on the
cross, and seems to have taken them from hence, or to refer to these,
[Luk 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046);

thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of truth; which may be understood,
either of the temporal redemption of his life from destruction in times
past, which encouraged him to commit his life into the hands of God now,
who was the same, and changed not; or of spiritual and eternal
redemption from sin by the blood of Christ, and which the psalmist
speaks of as if it was past, though it was to come, because of the
certainty of it; just as Isaiah speaks of the incarnation and sufferings
of Christ, [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); and of which he
was assured, because the Lord, who had provided, appointed, and promised
the Redeemer, was the God of truth, and was faithful to every word of
promise; and Christ, who had engaged to be the Redeemer, was faithful to
him that appointed him; and having an interest therefore in this
plenteous redemption, by virtue of which he was the Lord's, he committed
himself into his hands.

[Psalms 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 31:6</span></span>

I have hated them that regard lying vanities,.... Soothsaying and
divination, as Aben Ezra and others think; made use of by kings, and
generals of armies, to know when it was proper to go out to war, and
what success they should have; see [Eze
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#021); but such men and their
practices David abhorred; he took no such methods when in distress, but
applied to the Lord, and trusted in him; or rather idol gods, as Jarchi,
and others, who are vanity, and the work of errors, and are nothing in
the world; see [Jon 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008); all will
worship and superstition may be included in this phrase, which being not
according to the will and word of God, is worshipping in vain, and
carries off from true spiritual worship; and so is a lying vanity, and
to be detested, and the abettors of it: as also all errors and heresies;
these are great swelling words of vanity, and are lies in hypocrisy; and
likewise all immorality and wickedness, which spring from the vanity of
the mind, and promise much liberty and pleasure, but deceive, and
therefore lying; yea, all worldly enjoyments are vanity and vexation of
spirit, and are fallacious and deceitful when trusted in; and indeed
every false trust and confidence may come under this name; such as trust
in riches, in wisdom and knowledge, in carnal descent, and privileges,
in a moral and legal righteousness, and even in a bare profession of
true religion, and a subjection to Gospel ordinances; for there is no
true object of trust, no Redeemer and Saviour, but the Lord: now such as
regard those lying vanities are they that look to them, love them,
embrace them, and put their confidence in them; and such are to be
"hated"; not their persons, but their principles and practices, and they
themselves are to be shunned and abstained from;

but I trust in the Lord; the God of truth, that cannot lie, deny
himself, nor deceive; who is unchangeable, and without any variableness,
or shadow of turning.

[Psalms 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 31:7</span></span>

I will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy,.... Both because of the nature
of it, which is large and abundant, free and sovereign, from everlasting
to everlasting, and is communicated in and through Christ, and is a good
ground of hope and trust; and because of the effects of it, or what it
has produced; for to it are owing the covenant of grace, and all the
sure mercies of it; the mission of Christ, and redemption by him;
regeneration, and the forgiveness of sins, and even eternal life and
glory; besides a multitude of blessings, deliverances, and salvations in
Providence; on account of all which there is great reason for joy and
gladness; of which the following are particulars;

for thou hast considered my trouble; inward, arising from indwelling
sin, doubts and fears, desertions and darkness, and Satan's temptations;
and outward, from the world, and the men of it, and by reason of bodily
afflictions: now the Lord looks upon the troubles of his people, and
upon them in them, with an eye of pity and compassion; he sympathizes
with them; he considers the nature of their trouble, their weakness to
bear it, and the best way, in tans, and time to deliver out of it; he
working all things after the counsel of his own will; see [Exo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007);

thou hast known my soul in adversities; that is, the Lord had took
notice of him, approved of him, loved him, had visited him, and made
known his love to him, and owned him for his own, and had chosen him in
the furnace of affliction; a time and season when oftentimes friends and
acquaintance are shy, and will not look upon men, know them, and own
them; but the Lord does otherwise, and which is another reason of joy
and gladness in his mercy.

[Psalms 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 31:8</span></span>

And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy,.... When in Keilah,
in the wilderness of Ziph, and Maon, and encompassed about by Saul and
his army, [Sa1 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007); nor does the Lord
suffer his people to be shut up under the power of sin and Satan, so
that they cannot come forth in the exercise of grace, and the discharge
of duty: but he brings their souls out of prison, that they may praise
his name;

thou hast set my feet in a large room; at full liberty from his enemies;
Saul and his army being called off from pursuing him, by tidings of an
invasion by the Philistines, [Sa1
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#027); and this is the case of the
saints when they are brought to Christ, to walk by faith at large on
him; when grace is drawn forth into exercise, and spiritual knowledge is
increased, and they are delivered from their enemies; or, however, can
look upon them as conquered ones, and are sure of victory over them, and
at last of an entire deliverance from them; see [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001).

[Psalms 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 31:9</span></span>

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble,.... A sudden change of
case and frame this! and so it is with the people of God; as soon as,
out of one trouble, they are in another; these are what are appointed
for them, and lie in their pathway to heaven, and are necessary; and
under them it is quite right to betake themselves to the Lord, who is a
merciful God; and it is best to cast themselves upon his mercy, having
no merit of their own to plead with him; and they may freely tell him
all their distresses, as the psalmist here does, and hope for grace and
mercy to help them in time of need;

mine eye, is consumed with grief; expressed by tears; through the
multitude of which, by reason of trouble, his sight was greatly harmed;
according to Jarchi, the word signifies, that his sight was so dim as is
a man's when he puts a glass before his eyes, to see what is beyond the
glass: this shows that the invention of spectacles was before the year
1105; for in that year Jarchi died; and proves it more early than any
other writer has pretended to (a); for the commonly received opinion is,
that they were invented at the latter end of the thirteenth or beginning
of the fourteenth century; but the apostle, as A-Lapide thinks, respects
them, in [Co1 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012); and they are
mentioned by Plautus (b), who lived almost two hundred years before the
birth of Christ: the same Jarchi observes on [Psa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007);

yea, my soul and my belly; perhaps he could not eat his food, or digest
it, which brought upon him internal disorders, and even brought his soul
or life into danger.

\(a\) See Chambers's Dictionary on the word "Spectacles". (b) Vid.
Ainsworth's Lat. Dict. in voce "Conspicill". & Panciroll. Rer. Memorab.
par. 2. tit. 15. & Salmath. in ib. p. 268.

[Psalms 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 31:10</span></span>

For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing,.... Which
shows the continuance of his troubles, and that his whole life had been,
as it were, an uninterrupted series of sorrows;

my strength faileth because of mine iniquity; this opens the source and
spring of all his grief and trouble; his sin, and the sin of his nature,
in which he was conceived and born; indwelling sin, which remained and
worked in him; and it may be also the sin of unbelief, which beset him,
and prevailed in him, notwithstanding the instances of divine goodness,
the declarations of grace, the discoveries of love, and the exceeding
great and precious promises he had made to him; as also his daily sins
and infirmities, and very likely some great backslidings, which had
brought grief of soul upon aim, and which grief affected the several
parts of his body. Sin was the cause of the failure of natural strength
in Adam and his posterity; of diseases and death, by which their
strength is weakened in the way; and was the cause of impairing moral
strength in men to do that which is good, and has a very great influence
on the spiritual strength of the Lord's people, in the exercise of
grace;

and my bones are consumed; which are the firmest and strongest parts of
the human body, and the support of it.

[Psalms 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 31:11</span></span>

I was a reproach among all mine enemies,.... This is a common case of
the people of God; and though it may be the least of their afflictions,
yet it is not grateful to the flesh; and it is as it is made: under
divine supports saints rejoice, and take pleasure in reproaches, that
they are counted worthy to bear them, and esteem them as great riches;
at other times they seize and feed upon their spirits, and are ready to
break their hearts;

but especially among my neighbours; who knew him, and knew he did not
deserve to be so treated; and who ought, as neighbours, to have loved
him, and done all good offices to him; so that this is an aggravation
both of their sin and his distress;

and a fear to mine acquaintance; not that they were afraid that he
should do them any mischief; but they were afraid to own him, and to do
him any service; unless the sense is, that they were afraid that evil
would befall him, that he should not escape with his life; which, though
it may express the affectionate concern of his friends, yet shows the
danger he was exposed to;

they that did see me without fled from me; as if he had something very
pestilential and infectious about him.

[Psalms 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 31:12</span></span>

I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind,.... Either by his friends,
being out of sight, out of mind; as even the nearest relations and
acquaintance are, in process of time, when dead, [Ecc
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#005); or by the Lord; which shows the
weakness of his faith, the uncomfortable frame he was in, through
darkness and desertion; see [Psa 88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005);

I am like a broken vessel; or a "perishing vessel" (c); or "a vessel of
perdition" (d): the Septuagint version renders it "a lost vessel" (e);
one entirely useless, wholly lost, and irrecoverably so; like a broken
vessel, which can never be put together again, [Isa
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014); a most sad apprehension he had
of himself, as if his case was desperate, and he a vessel of wrath;
compare with this, [Rom 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022).

\(c\) "sicut vas periens", Montanus, Cocceius, Gejerus. (d) So
Ainsworth. (e) V. L. Pagninus, Musculus, Piscator.

[Psalms 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 31:13</span></span>

For I have heard the slander of many,.... Both enemies and neighbours;

fear was on every side; his enemies were a "Magormissabib" to him, [Jer
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003); encompassed him around, so that
he was in fear from every quarter;

while they took counsel together against me; how to apprehend him, and
what to do with him;

they devised to take away my life; nothing short of that would satisfy;
but life is in the hand of God; men may devise, but God disappoints, and
his counsel stands; hence the psalmist was encouraged, after all, to
trust in him, in this time of imminent danger, as follows.

[Psalms 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 31:14</span></span>

But I trusted in thee, O Lord,.... His faith revived again under all the
discouraging views he had of things, and was exercised upon the Lord; he
committed himself to him, believing he was able to help him in his time
of trouble, and deliver him;

I said, thou art my God; he claimed his covenant interest in him, and
used it as an argument with him to have regard unto him, and as a
support to his faith in his present distress; See Gill on [Psa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001).

[Psalms 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 31:15</span></span>

My times are in thy hand,.... And not in the hand of his enemies; as his
time of life and death, which was only by the direction and appointment
of God, was in his power, and fixed by him; nor could his enemies take
away his life before his time, and without the will of his covenant God:
the time of his coming to the throne, and what was gone over him during
his reign hitherto, [Ch1 29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#030); and
all his times of trouble in it; times of prosperity and of adversity; of
darkness, desertion, and temptation; and of joy, peace, and comfort;
these were all in the hands of the Lord, at his disposal, and ordered by
him for the good of his servant, and for the glory of his own name; and
this was a quieting consideration to the psalmist under his present
trials and exercises; the Targum is, "the times of my redemption"

deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute
me; a good man has many enemies, and even his very goodness creates him
such; for wicked men are enemies to all that is good; and those are
persecuting ones, in one way or other; either by words or deeds; and
deliverance out of their hands is by the Lord, who sometimes gives his
people rest from adversity, and suffers not the rod of the wicked to
continue on them; and therefore it is best to apply to him for it.

[Psalms 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 31:16</span></span>

Make thy face to shine upon thy servant,.... In which he prays for the
gracious presence of God, the manifestations of himself unto him, the
discoveries of his love, the enjoyment of him in Christ, communion with
him, the comforts of his Spirit, and joys of his salvation; see [Num
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025);

save me for thy mercies' sake; not for any merit and righteousness of
his own, but for the sake of the grace and goodness of the Lord; which
is putting salvation, whether temporal or spiritual, upon its right foot
and foundation; which is never wrought out by, or is for works of
righteousness done by men, but according to the grace and mercy of God.

[Psalms 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 31:17</span></span>

Let me not be ashamed, O Lord,.... The same petition as in [Psa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001);

for I have called upon thee; who is nigh unto all that call upon him in
truth, and is rich unto them, and has promised to help and save them;
which should he not do, not only he would be made ashamed, but the
promise of God would seem to fail: for the psalmist does not plead any
duty of his, nor make a merit of his prayers; but has respect to the
promise and faithfulness of God;

let the wicked be ashamed; as they will be, sooner or later, of their
wickedness, and of their false trust and confidence; of their being
incensed against Christ, and their rage against his people, and
persecution of them;

and let them be silent in the grave; as all are that are there; and the
sense is, let them be brought to the grave, where they will be silent,
or cease (f); that is, from their evil words and works, and particularly
from troubling the saints, [Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017).

\(f\) "Verbum est" "quod significat cessare ab aliquo opere, vel
sermone", Psal. iv. 5. Gejerus.

[Psalms 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 31:18</span></span>

Let the lying lips be put to silence,.... Being convicted of the lies
told by them, and so silenced and confounded; or being cut off and
destroyed, as all such will be in the Lord's own time, [Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003). It is very likely the psalmist
may have respect either to Doeg the Edomite, who loved lying rather than
righteousness; or to others that were about Saul, who lying said to him
that David sought his harm, even to take away his kingdom and his life,
[Psa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003);

which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the
righteous; meaning himself; not that he thought himself righteous in the
sight of God by any righteousness of his own, but by the righteousness
of Christ imputed to him; see [Psa
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002). Though he may have regard here
to the righteousness of his cause before men, and assert himself
righteous, as he might with respect to the "grievous things", the hard
and lying speeches, which were spoken against him, in a proud, haughty,
and contemptuous manner. And it is no unusual thing for such false
charges to be brought against righteous men; nay, such hard speeches
were spoken by ungodly men against Jesus Christ the righteous himself,
[Jde 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). The Targum interprets it of
"reproaches".

[Psalms 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 31:19</span></span>

O how great is thy goodness,.... Not the natural and essential goodness
of God; for though that is large and abundant, yea, infinite, as every
perfection of his is, yet it cannot with propriety be said to be laid up
and wrought out; but rather the effects of his goodness, and not those
which appear in Providence, for they, though very large and plenteous,
are common to all, and are not restrained to them that fear the Lord,
and trust in him; but such as are displayed in a way of special grace
and favour to his own people, and which the psalmist saw his interest in
and was affected with; and which supported his faith under his present
troubles, and appeared to be so great, both for quality and quantity,
that he could not well say how great the blessings of his goodness were;

which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee; both grace and glory;
the blessings of grace were laid up in God's heart, in his thoughts and
purposes, from everlasting; and in Christ, in whom the fulness of all
grace dwells; he was loaded with the blessings of goodness, and his
people were blessed in him with all spiritual blessings, and had all
grace given them in him before the world was; and these were likewise
laid up in the covenant of grace, ordered in all things, and sure;
eternal glory is the hope and crown of righteousness laid up in heaven,
where it is reserved for the saints, who are heirs of it: and the laying
up of all this goodness shows it to be a treasure, riches of grace, and
riches of glory; and that it is an hidden treasure, and riches of secret
places, which are out of the view of carnal men, and not perfectly seen
and enjoyed by the people of God themselves as yet; and also that it is
safe and secure for them, and can never be lost; and it expresses the
paternal care of God, his great love and affection for them, to lay up
so early so much goodness for them: and this is said to be "for them
that fear him"; not naturally, but by his grace; for the fear of God is
not in man naturally, but is put there by the grace of God; and such who
have it are those who are brought to a true sight and sense of sin, so
as to loathe it and forsake it; for the fear of the Lord is to hate
evil, and by it men depart from it, and because of it cannot sin as
others do; such have an humble sense of themselves, their own
insufficiency and weakness, and trust in the grace of God and
righteousness of Christ; they have a filial reverence of God, and
worship him in spirit and in truth: but now this fear of the Lord is not
the cause of goodness being laid up for them, for that only is the will
of God; and besides the fear of God is a part of the goodness which is
laid up in promise in the covenant of grace, [Jer
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039); and it is the goodness of God
displayed in the blessings of it, such as pardon of sin, &c. which
influences, promotes, and increases the fear of God, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005); but, goodness being manifested to
and bestowed upon them that fear the Lord, it appears eventually to be
laid up for them;

which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of
men! by which may be meant the work of redemption, in which the goodness
of God greatly appears; in calling and appointing Christ unto it, in
sending him to effect it, in strengthening him as man and Mediator to do
it; and in the work itself, in which many things are wrought, the law is
fulfilled, justice satisfied, a righteousness brought in, peace made,
pardon procured, and everlasting salvation obtained. And whereas this is
said to be "wrought for them that trust in" the Lord, it is not to be
understood as if trusting in the Lord was the cause of this work being
wrought out, which is the love of God and grace of Christ; but inasmuch
as those that trust in the Lord have openly an interest in redemption,
and they that believe in Christ shall be saved; therefore it clearly
appears in the issue of things to be wrought out for them. The phrase
"before the sons of men", may be connected either with the goodness
wrought, and so signifies that the work of redemption was done in a most
public manner, openly before men, even the enemies of God's people; nor
was it in the power of men and devils to hinder it; or else with
trusting in the Lord, and so is expressive of a public profession of
faith and confidence in the Lord before men, which ought to be done:
moreover this goodness wrought may include the good work of grace upon
the soul; and the Lord's fulfilling the good pleasure of his goodness in
the hearts of his people, and the work of faith with power on them; and
also the many deliverances of them out of afflictions and temptations,
and the many salvations from their enemies he works for them in the
earth, before the sons of men.

[Psalms 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 31:20</span></span>

Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence,.... That is, those
that fear the Lord and trust in him; and therefore they are called his
"hidden ones", [Psa 83:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#003); these the
Lord preserves in times of trouble and danger, and when his indignation
is out against others; and so the Targum is, "in the time of thine
anger"; see [Isa 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020); the presence
of God is their protection, he himself is a wall of fire round about
them, his favour compasses them as a shield, and they are kept as in a
garrison by his power; see [Psa 91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001);
and that "from the pride of man", which otherwise would at once oppress,
bear them down, and destroy them, [Psa
124:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001);

thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues;
which areas a sharp sword, and from whence proceed devouring words, such
contradiction of sinners as Christ endured; not that the saints are kept
free from the reproaches of men, from the lash of their tongues, but
from being harmed by them; and sometimes, through the strivings and
contentions of men with one another, they privately escape and are
preserved, as the Apostle Paul was, [Act
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009).

[Psalms 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 31:21</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord,.... A form of thanksgiving, in which the psalmist
calls upon himself and others to bless and praise the Lord for the
singular mercy granted him, expressed in the next clause; See Gill on
[Psa 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046);

for he hath showed me his marvellous kindness in a strong city; either
in the city Keilah, so Jarchi; a city which had gates and bars, where
Saul thought he had David safe, and he could not escape his hands; but
notwithstanding that, and though the inhabitants of that place intended
to deliver him up, yet he was marvellously saved; as he also was from
the Ziphites; and when Saul and his army had encompassed him about, by a
surprising incident, a messenger coming to Saul just as he was about to
seize him, informing him that the Philistines had invaded the land, [Sa1
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007). Or the city of Jerusalem, which
was fortified both by nature and art, whither he was brought and placed
as king, and enjoyed rest from all his enemies round about him, [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006). Or this may spiritually design
the church of God, which is called a strong city, being built on Christ
the Rock, and having salvation for walls and bulwarks, [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001), where the Lord displays his
banner of love, makes discoveries of his marvellous kindness, and
commands his blessing for evermore. Some render it "as in a strong city"
(g), and take the sense to be, that he was safe, through the kindness of
God showed to him in the salvation of him, as if he was in a fortified
city (h), and this was marvellous in his eyes, as every instance of
providential goodness is to the people of God; especially his
lovingkindness showed in spiritual things, in choosing them in Christ,
saving them by him, regenerating them by his Spirit, and taking them
into his family; which love is free and sovereign, distinguishing,
unchangeable, from everlasting to everlasting; and so wonderful and
astonishing; and which was hid in God until revealed; and sometimes the
manifestations of it are withdrawn, and then it is showed again, and
fresh discoveries of it are made, and effects of it applied, and the
blessings of it bestowed, which occasion thankfulness.

\(g\) "ut in civitate munita", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; Michaelis.
(h) Aben Ezra, Kimchi, & Ben Melech in loc.

[Psalms 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 31:22</span></span>

For I said in my haste,.... When he made haste to get away for fear of
Saul, [Sa1 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026); and so the Targum
renders it, "I said when I sought to flee away"; or else he said this
hastily and rashly, in the hurry of his mind, being in the utmost
confusion and distress, as in [Psa
116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011);

I am cut off from before thine eyes; his case was very bad, he was
reduced to the utmost extremity, and his faith was as low; he thought it
was all over with him, and there was no way of escape, nor hope of it;
and that he was like a branch cut off, ready to be cast into the fire;
that he was cut off from the house of God, and from communion with him;
that he would never look upon him more, and he should never enjoy his
presence: this instance of weakness and unbelief is mentioned to
illustrate the goodness of God, and to make his kindness appear to be
the more marvellous in the salvation of him; so sometimes the Lord
suffers his people to be in the utmost distress, and their faith to be
at the lowest ebb, when he appears to their help, and makes it manifest
that their salvation is by his own arm, and of his own good will, and
not by them, or for any goodness of theirs;

nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried
unto thee; for though faith was very low, and unbelief strongly
prevailed, yet he was not so far gone as to stop praying; for though he
saw no rational way of escape, and feared the Lord would take no notice
of him; yet he knew that nothing was impossible with him, and therefore
he still looked up to him, as Jonah did when he thought himself in a
like condition, [Jon 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004); and such was
the grace and goodness of God, that he did not despise but regard his
prayer, though attended with so much weakness and unbelief.

[Psalms 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 31:23</span></span>

O love the Lord, all ye his saints,.... To whom his goodness extends;
who are favoured with the blessings of his grace, as pardon, peace, and
righteousness; and who particularly are sanctified by his Spirit, and
have principles of grace and holiness wrought in their hearts: these,
even all of them, are called upon to love the Lord, having that grace
implanted in their souls; that is, to express it, not by words, but by
deeds, under a sense of the love and kindness of God to them; and to
join with the psalmist in an affectionate reverence of him, trust in
him, and thankfulness to him, on account of his marvellous kindness
showed him;

for the Lord preserveth the faithful; such as trust in him, believe in
Christ, and are faithful to his word and ordinances, abide by them, and
stays near his people; these he not only preserves in a providential
way, but he preserves them in a way of special grace; he keeps them
"from evil", as the Targum; from the evil of sin; from a total and final
falling away by it; from the evil of the world, so as not to be drawn
off from Christ and his ways, either by its frowns or flatteries; and
from the evil one, Satan, from being destroyed by him and his
temptations; and these are preserved safe to the kingdom and glory of
Christ, by the mighty power of God: some render the words, "the Lord
keepeth faithfulness" (i); he will never suffer his own faithfulness to
fail; he is a covenant keeping God, and is always true to his word and
promise;

and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer; such as all self-righteous
persons are, and all that speak grievous things proudly and
contemptuously against the truly righteous, [Psa
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018); who bear hard upon them, and
oppress them; and such as antichrist and his party, who exalts himself
above all that is called God; but in what those deal proudly, God is
above them, an more than a match for them, and he sets himself against
them; he resists them, and will reward them according to their works.

\(i\) "fidelitatem", Gejerus; or "fidelitles", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 31:24</span></span>

Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart,.... See Gill on
[Psa 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014); by this instance of God's
wonderful kindness to the psalmist, he would have the saints take heart,
and be of good cheer, even in the greatest distresses, since their case
cannot be worse than his was; and yet he had deliverance out of it;

all ye that hope in the Lord; for the eye of the Lord is on such, and he
takes delight in them, [Psa 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018). The
Targum is, "who hope for", or "trust in the word of the Lord"; the
essential Word, the promised Messiah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 32](psa032)

</div>
