<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa032)  [Next](psa034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 33:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 33

Though this psalm has no title to it, it seems to be a psalm of David,
from the style and matter of it; and indeed begins with the same words
with which the preceding psalm is ended. Theodoret is of opinion it was
written by David as a prophecy concerning Hezekiah, as a song to be sung
by the people after the destruction of the Assyrian army.

[Psalms 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 33:1</span></span>

Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous,.... See Gill on [Psa
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011);

for praise is comely for the upright; it becomes them; it is their duty;
they are bound unto it by the mercies and favours they have received;
should they not give praise to God, the stones of the wall would cry
out, and rebuke them for their ingratitude: it is beautiful, and looks
lovely in them; it is an ornament to them, and is, in the sight of God,
of great esteem: it is very acceptable to him, and when grace is in
exercise, and their hearts in tune, being sensibly touched and impressed
with the goodness of God, it is desirable by them, and is pleasant and
delightful to them.

[Psalms 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 33:2</span></span>

Praise the Lord with harp,.... An instrument David was well skilled in
the use of, the inventor of which was Jubal, [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021);

sing unto, him with the psaltery; the name of this instrument is in the
Hebrew language "nebel": the account which Josephus (w) gives of this,
and of the former, is,

"the harp is extended with ten strings, and is plucked with a quill; the
"nabla", or psaltery, has twelve sounds, and is played upon with the
fingers;''

some make this and the next to be the same:

and an instrument of ten strings; and read them together thus, "with the
psaltery of ten strings": and so the Targum, Septuagint, and other
versions (x): but it seems from Josephus that it was not a stringed
instrument, but had holes, and those twelve; and besides it is
distinguished from the instrument of ten strings, [Psa
92:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#003); it was in the form of a bottle,
from whence it had its name.

\(w\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 12. s. 3. (x) Vid. Jarchium in loc. & R. Mosem in
Aben Ezra in loc.

[Psalms 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 33:3</span></span>

Sing unto him a new song,.... One newly composed on account of recent
mercies received; and as the mercies of God are new every morning, there
ought to be a daily song of praise to him; and so a new song is a
continual song, as Christ is called the "new and living way", [Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020); because he is the everliving
way; or the constant and only one, which always was, is, and will be. Or
it may denote some famous and excellent song, as a new name is an
excellent name, an unknown and unspeakable one; see [Rev
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017); compared with [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002); or respect may be had to the New
Testament dispensation, in which old things are passed away, and all
things become new; a new covenant is exhibited, a new and living way
opened, and new ordinances instituted, and at the end of it there will
be new heavens and a new earth; and so here is a new song made mention
of, as suited to it;

play skilfully with a loud voice: either with the quill upon the harp,
and the instrument of ten strings; or with the fingers upon the
psaltery, at the same time, vocally, and aloud, expressing the new song.

[Psalms 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 33:4</span></span>

For the word of the Lord is right,.... The revealed word of God: the law
of God is right; its precepts are holy, just, and good; its sanction or
penalty is righteous; it is impartial unto all; it is just in condemning
the wicked, and in acquitting believers on the account of Christ's
perfect righteousness, by which it is magnified and made honourable: the
Gospel part of the word is right; it publishes right and good things; it
directs to the right way, to heaven and happiness; it makes men right
when it works effectually in them; it engages them to walk in right
ways; and its doctrines are right or plain to them that have a spiritual
understanding given them; and all this is matter of joy and praise;

and all his works are done in truth; his works of creation are done in
the truth of things, with the utmost exactness and accuracy, and are a
wonderful display of his power, wisdom, and goodness: his works of
providence are according to the counsel of his own will, and are done in
the wisest and best manner; and his work of redemption is a proof of his
veracity and faithfulness to his covenant oath and promise; and his work
of grace upon the hearts of his people is truth in the inward parts; and
which, as he has promised to carry on and finish, he is faithful and
will do it; in short, his way of acting both towards the godly and
ungodly agrees with his promises to the one and his threatenings to the
other, and so is in truth; and the whole of this is a reason why the
saints should praise the Lord.

[Psalms 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 33:5</span></span>

He loveth righteousness and judgment,.... Or "righteous judgment" (y);
he delights in the administration of it himself, [Jer
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024); and he is well pleased with acts
of righteousness done by others, when done according to his word, from
love to him, by faith in him, and with a view to his glory; especially
he loves the righteousness of his son, being satisfactory to his law and
justice, and his people, as clothed with it; and he delights in the
condemnation of sin in the flesh of Christ, and in the righteous
judgment of the world, and the prince of it, by Christ;

the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord; of the providential
goodness of God, of which all creatures partake; and of the special
goodness or grace of God manifested in Christ Jesus; it was full of it
particularly when Christ was here on earth, who is full of grace and
truth; and when the Gospel of the grace of God was preached everywhere
by his apostles, according to his order, and appeared to all men; and so
it will be especially in the latter day, when multitudes will be called
by grace and converted, and when the earth will be full of the knowledge
of the Lord; and still more when it will become a new earth, wherein
only righteous men will dwell.

\(y\) "judicium justum", Gejerus.

[Psalms 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 33:6</span></span>

By the word of the Lord were the heavens made,.... The aerial and starry
heavens, and the heaven of heavens, the third heaven, the seat of the
divine Majesty, and the habitation of angels and glorified saints; these
were "made" even out of nothing, not out of any pre-existent matter, nor
were they eternal; and being made are creatures, and so not to be
worshipped, neither they nor their hosts after mentioned; angels, sun,
moon, and stars; these were made by the Word of God, the essential Word
of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, who often goes by this name, [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001); and very fitly agrees with him,
who spoke for all his people in the council and covenant of grace, and
undertook to be their surety; is the Word spoken of by all the holy
prophets since the beginning of the world; is the interpreter of his
Father's mind and will, of which he must be capable, since he lay in his
bosom; and now he speaks for his saints in heaven, whose advocate he is;
and especially he may be so called because he so often spake on the six
days of creation, and said, let this and the other thing be, and it was
so; and to him, as the Word of God, is the creation of all things
frequently ascribed, [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003), and particularly the heavens,
[Heb 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010). This is a proof of the
deity of Christ, and of the dignity of his person; and shows how fit he
is to be the Saviour of men; how safe the saints are in his hands; and
that he ought to be trusted in, adored, and worshipped;

and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth: by "the host" of
the heavens are meant the angels of heaven, who dwell in the third
heaven, and are the militia of it; they are called the heavenly host,
[Luk 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013); these are under Jehovah, as
their Lord and King, and are the army among whom he does according to
his will, [Kg1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019); these attended
him whenever he has made any remarkable appearance; and they have been
employed by him against his enemies, and in defence of his people, about
whom they encamp, [Kg2 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035). The sun,
moon, and stars, are the host of the next heaven, these are ranged in
their proper order by the Lord, and he keeps the muster roll of them,
[Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026); and these are used by him
as his militia; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera, [Jdg
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020); and the winged tribe are the
host of the lower heaven; and even the lower class of these, as the
locusts and grasshoppers, go forth in bands and troops, and encamp in
the hedges, and at the command of God pass through and devour whole
countries, [Pro 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#027); and all these
are made by "the breath" or "spirit (z) of Jehovah's mouth"; that is, by
the Spirit of God, the third Person in the Trinity; a name which is
suitable to him who is breathed forth, and proceeds from the Father and
the Son, and to whom creation is ascribed, [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002); and which is no inconsiderable
proof of his deity; and shows that he must be equal to the work of
sanctification, which he begins and carries on. Now though the creation
of the heavens is attributed to the Word, and the host of them to the
Spirit, yet we are not to suppose that one Person took one part, and
another Person another part of the creation; but they were all, Father,
Word, and Spirit, jointly concerned in the whole.

\(z\) "spiritu oris ejus", V. L. Gejerus, Michaelis; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 33:7</span></span>

He gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap,.... Which was
done on the third day of the creation, by means of which the dry land
appeared, [Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009); when the waters of
the sea were piled up as an heap, and stood higher than the earth, as
they now do; and which is a wonderful instance of the power and
providence of God, to bound them, and preserve the earth from being
overflowed by them, [Job 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#009);

he layeth up the depth in storehouses; that is, large quantities of
water, for which he has his treasure houses, as for the wind, hail and
snow, [Psa 135:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#007); and these are the
clouds of heaven above, and the fountains of the great deep below, which
the Lord opens and stops at his pleasure; see [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011).

[Psalms 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 33:8</span></span>

Let all the earth fear the Lord,.... That is, all the men that dwell
upon the face of the earth. As it follows,

let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him; which fear and
awe design a reverence of the divine Majesty, whose divine perfections
are so manifest in the works of creation; and a carefulness not to
offend him, into whose hands it must be a fearful thing to fall; and the
whole worship of him, which is often in Scripture expressed by the fear
of him: and this is to be understood either as what is the duty of all
men; for to "fear God, and keep his commandments, is the whole duty of
man", [Ecc 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013); and which is
incumbent on all men, in consideration of his being the Creator of them;
and the obligation to it is yet more increased through his providential
care of them and goodness to them; and still more should be found in
them, seeing he will be the Judge of them, and has a despotic and
uncontrollable power over them; and what is it that he cannot do, who
has done all this before related? though none can fear him aright but
such who have the grace of fear put into their hearts by the Spirit of
God: or else this may be prophetically said, as what will be in the
latter day, when not only the Jews shall fear the Lord and his goodness,
[Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005), but when the fulness of the
Gentiles being brought into the church, it shall fear and be enlarged;
yea, all nations shall fear the Lord and glorify his name, and come and
worship before him, [Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005).

[Psalms 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 33:9</span></span>

For he spake, and it was done,.... Or "it was" (a), it came into being
by a word speaking, almighty power going along with it; see [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003);

he commanded, and it stood fast; every created thing continued in its
being; not only all things were produced into being by his all
commanding word and power, "nutu Jovis", as Maximus Tyrius speaks (b);
but by the same all things are upheld and consist, [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003), [Col
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017). The poet (c) uses the same word
of God in the creation of things; and is the phrase in [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003) admired by Longinus (d): or this
may refer to the implantation of the grace of fear in the hearts of his
people; for as he speaks life into them in regeneration, commands light
to shine in their dark heart, and says to them, when in their blood,
Live; so by the mighty power of his word he commands the fear of him in
them, and it continues.

\(a\) "et fuit", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Gejerus; so Ainsworth.
(b) Dissert. 25. (c) "Jussit et extendi campos", &c. Ovid. Metamorph. l.
1. Fab. 1. v. 43. (d) De Sublimi.

[Psalms 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 33:10</span></span>

The Lord bringeth the counsel of the Heathen to nought,.... The psalmist
having taken notice of the works of creation, in order to excite the
saints to praise, proceeds to observe the providence of God, and
particularly that branch of it which lies in disappointing the designs
of wicked men; it is wickedness which they consult and devise, and thin
is against the Lord's people, his cause and interest, and so against
himself; and though their schemes are formed and contrived with a great
deal of subtlety, yet they are commonly blasted; whether laid by
particular persons, as by Ahithophel against David; or by nations, whole
bodies of men, as of the Egyptians and Assyrians against Israel; and of
Jews and Gentiles against Christ and his cause;

he maketh the devices of the people of none effect; the same thing is
expressed here as before, in different words, for the further
confirmation of it, and that it might be attended to. This is the Lord's
doing, he is omniscient, and knows all the secret plots and designs of
men; and he is omnipotent, and counteracts them, and confounds them in
all their measures; and is faithful to his people, cause, and interest.

[Psalms 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 33:11</span></span>

The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever,.... By which are meant, not
the doctrines of the Gospel, nor the ordinances of it; though these will
stand firm, and remain to the end of the world; but the purposes and
decrees of God, which are wisely formed in himself, are eternal and
unfrustrable, and relate to all things in providence and grace. The Lord
does all things according to the counsel of his will in the government
of the world, and in the salvation of men: the choice of persons to
everlasting life is according to it; and so are their redemption,
effectual calling, and glorification;

the thoughts of his heart to all generations; which, with respect to his
own people, are thoughts of peace, grace, and mercy; these are many, and
within himself, were very early, even from all eternity, and have their
sure and certain effect, [Isa 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024);
see [Pro 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021).

[Psalms 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 33:12</span></span>

Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord,.... Who have an interest in
such a wonder working God, both in creation and in providence, and
especially in grace: which, though it may have a principal regard to the
nation of Israel, whose God he was in a very distinguishing manner, yet
must not be limited to them; for he is the God of the Gentiles also:
this nation is the chosen generation, the holy nation and peculiar
people, both among Jews and Gentiles; and the Lord is the God of these;
not only as the God of nature and providence, but as the God of all
grace; who must be happy, since he is their portion and exceeding great
reward; nor shall they want any good thing, nor need they fear any evil;
they are on the heart of God, and cannot be separated from his love;
they are engraven on the palms of his hands, and shall be helped,
strengthened, and upheld with the right hand of his righteousness; all
things work together for their good; and this God of theirs will be
their God and guide unto death; they may expect every needful good thing
now, and all glory and happiness hereafter;

and the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance; not Israel
only, but the Gentiles also; not all mankind, but a peculiar people,
whom the Lord has chosen out of the world to be his possession, and who
are his jewels and peculiar treasure; these are happy, being the Lord's
portion, and the lot of his inheritance; and he chooses an inheritance
for them, adopts and begets them unto it, and makes them meet to be
partakers of it.

[Psalms 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 33:13</span></span>

The Lord looketh from heaven,.... Where his throne and temple are, upon
the earth and men, and things in it, as follows;

he beholdeth all the sons of men; the evil and the good; which is
contrary to the sense of many wicked men, who imagine he takes no notice
of what is done here below; but his eye is upon all, upon all the
workers of iniquity, how secret soever they may be; and not only his eye
of Providence is upon good men, but his eye of love, grace, and mercy;
and he has a special and distinct knowledge of them: agreeably to this
are some expressions of Heathen writers; says one (e),

"the eye of God sees all things;''

says another (f),

"there is a great God in heaven who sees all things, and governs.''

\(e\) , &c. Hesiod. Opera & Dies, l. 1. v. 263. (f) , &c. Sophoclis
Electra, v. 174, 175.

[Psalms 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 33:14</span></span>

From the place of his habitation,.... Which is heaven, that is, the
habitation of his holiness, and of his glory, [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015);

he looketh upon all the inhabitants of the earth; good and bad; and not
the nation of Israel only, but the Gentile world, whom in former times
he overlooked, but under the Gospel dispensation visits in a way of
mercy; by sending his son to die for them, by spreading his Gospel among
them, by calling them by his grace, by planting churches in the midst of
them, and by continuing his word and ordinances with them.

[Psalms 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 33:15</span></span>

He fashioneth their hearts alike,.... The Lord is the former and
fashioner of the heart, spirit, or soul of man, even of all hearts and
spirits; whence he is called the Father of spirits, [Heb
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009); see [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001); and he is the former of them
alike; which seems to intimate as if all seals were alike, as they are
made by the Lord; and it may be the difference there appears to be
between them afterwards, nay be owing to the make and constitution of
their bodies, to their education, and different situation,
circumstances, and advantages in life, whereby the hearts of some may be
more opened and enlarged than others. Some render it "together", or
"altogether" (g); which must not be understood of time, as if they were
all made at once, but of equality; the one was made by him as well as
the other; he is the fashioner of one and all of them, every whit of
them; they are wholly fashioned by him, and all that is in them, all the
powers and faculties of the soul; and by him only, and not by the
instrumentality of another; for souls are created, not generated; they
are produced out of nothing, and not out of pre-existent matter, as
bodies; parents contribute somewhat to the bodies of their children, but
not anything to their souls. God only "is the God of the spirits of all
flesh", [Num 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022); some translate the
word "singly" (h); one by one, one after another in the several ages of
time; for he continues to fashion them, and is always doing it; see [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001). And he forms the hearts of his
own people anew for himself, for his own glory; he forms Christ in them,
and every grace of his Spirit; he forms them into one, and knits and
unites them together in love, and makes them like to one another; for as
face answers to face in water, so do the hearts and experiences of the
saints one to another, [Pro 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#019); all
which he does wholly and alone; and since he fashions the hearts of all
men in every sense, he must know them, which is the design of this
expression; he knows the hearts of wicked men, and all the wickedness
that is in them; he knows the hearts of good men, the worst that is in
them, and also the best, which he himself has put there;

he considereth all their works; the works of evil men, not only their
more open ones, but their more secret ones, and will bring them into
judgment; and the works of good men, even their good works, which he
will remember and reward in a way of grace.

\(g\) "simul", Musculus, Gejerus; so Ainsworth. (h) Sept. "sigillatim",
V. L.

[Psalms 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 33:16</span></span>

There is no king saved by the multitude of an host,.... He may be at the
head of a numerous army, and yet not get the victory over a lesser one,
nor escape safe, but be taken by it: there have been such instances; and
if he is saved, or gets the victory, it is not owing to the multitude
with him, but to the Lord, that gives salvation to kings, [Psa
144:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#010). Hence it appears that even
such men need salvation themselves, and cannot save themselves, though
they have ever so many at command, and therefore are not to be trusted
in; salvation is only of the Lord;

a mighty man is not delivered by much strength; as Goliath, with his
great strength, could not deliver himself out of the hands of David, a
stripling; wherefore the mighty man should not glory in his might.

[Psalms 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 33:17</span></span>

A horse is a vain thing for safety,.... Though it is prepared for the
day of battle, and is a very warlike creature, and of great service in
war, yet safety only is of the Lord, [Pro
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#031); this is put for all kinds of
military preparations which men are apt to trust in, but should not, for
they are "a lie" (i), as the horse is here said to be; that is, deceives
and disappoints when trusted to; in like manner the olive is said "to
lie", [Hab 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017); when hope of fruit
from it is disappointed; so "fundus mendax" in Horace (k);

neither shall he deliver any by his great strength; in the time of
battle; either by fighting for him, or fleeing with him.

\(i\) "mendacium", Pagninus, Montanus; "fallax", V. L. (k) Epod. l. 1.
Ode 16. ver. 45. Carmin. l. 3. Ode 1. v. 30. "Spem mentita seges", ib.
Epist. l. 1. ep. 7. v. 87.

[Psalms 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 33:18</span></span>

Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,.... Not with
dread of his wrath, or distrust of his grace, or for sinister ends and
selfish views, but with a godly fear; by which men hate evil, depart
from it, are careful not to offend God by it, but to serve and worship
him; on such is not only his eye of Providence to protect from danger,
to supply with the necessaries of life, but of love and grace; he looks
upon them with delight and pleasure; his eye is upon them to watch over
them for good, to guard them from every enemy, and from all evil, and to
communicate to them every needful measure of grace;

upon them that hope in his mercy; not his absolute mercy, but his
special mercy in Christ; which appears in the provision of him as a
Saviour, in the mission of him into this world, and redemption by him;
and is displayed in regeneration, the pardon of sin, and eternal life:
and such that hope in it are they that see themselves miserable
creatures, and in need of it; and who are encouraged to hope in it from
the plenty and abundance of it in the heart of God; and from the many
instances of it among men, and even some the chief of sinners; and they
do hope in it for the forgiveness of their sins, and for salvation and
eternal glory; and on these the eye of the Lord is, as before,

[Psalms 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 33:19</span></span>

To deliver their soul from death,.... Not a corporeal death, for the
soul dies not, and is never in any danger of death; and should life, or
the whole man, be intended here, yet those that fear the Lord, and hope
in his mercy, are not exempted and secured from a corporeal death, but
die as other men; though sometimes indeed they are remarkably preserved
from death, and even in a time of general calamity; but a spiritual
death is meant, which, while in a state of nature, they are under; but,
being quickened at conversion, they live spiritually, and are preserved
from dying any more in this sense; and also from an eternal death, which
shall never harm them, nor have any power over them;

and to keep them alive in famine; not corporeal, though the Lord does
give meat to them that fear him, and sometimes in a miraculous way
provides for them; as by sending ravens to feed them, and by increasing
the cruse of oil; see [Isa 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#017); but
spiritual, a famine of hearing the word of the Lord; the Lord prepares a
place for his church and people in the wilderness, where they are
privately nourished with the word and ordinances, and their souls kept
alive, [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006).

[Psalms 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 33:20</span></span>

Our soul waiteth for the Lord,.... This, and what follows, are the words
of the church, expressing her expectation, faith, and joy, by reason of
what is suggested in the preceding verses. She signifies her expectation
of good by waiting for the Lord; either for his coming in the flesh, and
salvation by him; for which the patriarchs, prophets, and all the Old
Testament saints, waited, [Gen 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018);
and so the Targum paraphrases it, "our soul waiteth for the redemption
of the Lord"; or for his spiritual coming, his appearance to them, and
gracious presence with them, he having been for some time absent; and it
is right and good so to do, and in the issue proves advantageous, [Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017); and this being soul waiting, it
denotes the heartiness, sincerity, and earnestness of it;

he is our help and our shield; the Lord is the help of his people in
time of trouble, when none else is or can be; and he is a present one,
and helps right early, and at the best season: and he is their shield,
who encompasses them about with his love and favour, and keeps them by
his power in the greatest safety; all which encourages their waiting
upon him, and expectation of good things from him.

[Psalms 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 33:21</span></span>

For our heart shall rejoice in him,.... Not in sin, nor in themselves
and in their boastings, all such rejoicing is evil; but in the Lord, "in
his Word"; as the Targum is, in the essential Word of God, Christ Jesus;
in his person, righteousness, and salvation; and this joy is heart joy,
inward joy, real joy, joy in the Holy Ghost; and is unspeakable and full
of glory. This is what the psalmist calls upon the saints to do, in the
beginning of the psalm; and so his end in composing it is answered;

because we have trusted in his holy name; that is, in himself, who is
holy, just, and good; and so faithful to every word of promise, to every
engagement of his, and therefore to be trusted in: and hence it appears
that the joy before spoken of is the joy of faith.

[Psalms 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 33:22</span></span>

Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us,.... That is, an application of it in
its effects: it is a prayer for a communication of grace and mercy to
help in a time of need; and for a discovery of pardoning grace and
mercy; and it is a prayer of faith; for the mercy of the Lord is upon
his people in great plenty, and it continues; and they have reason to
believe it ever will, [Psa 103:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#017);

according as we hope in thee; not according to any merits of theirs, but
according to the measure of grace, of the grace of hope which God had
bestowed on them, and encouraged them to exercise on him, in expectation
of finding grace and mercy with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 34](psa034)

</div>
