<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa039)  [Next](psa041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 40:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 40

To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David. Jarchi interprets this psalm of
the Israelites, and of their deliverance and song at the Red sea. The
title of it, in the Syriac version, is,

"A psalm of David according to the letter, when Shemaiah brought the
names of those who minister in the house of the Lord;''

see [Ch1 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006); according to Kimchi,
the subject of this psalm is the same with that of the two preceding;
and R. Obadiah thinks it was composed by David, when he was recovered of
a leprosy; but though it might be written by David, it was not written
concerning himself, or on his own account, but of another. The title of
this psalm is somewhat different from others in the order of the words;
whereas it is usually put "a psalm of", or "for David"; here it is, "for
David, a psalm"; and may be rendered, as Ainsworth observes, "a psalm
concerning David"; not literally, but typically understood; not
concerning David himself, but concerning his antitype and son, who is
called by his name, [Eze 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024); and
that it is to be interpreted of him is evident from the application of
[Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006), unto him by the apostle in
[Heb 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005); and the whole of it is
applicable to him; some apply it to Jeremiah in the dungeon, and others
to Daniel in the den, as Theodoret observes.

[Psalms 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 40:1</span></span>

I waited patiently for the Lord,.... Or "waiting I waited" (i); which
denotes continuance, constancy, and patience; and which Christ exercised
in the garden, when he submitted himself entirely to the will of God;
and on the cross, when he continued in sure hope and firm expectation of
his help and assistance, though he was for a while forsaken by him; see
[Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007);

and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry; both in the garden, by
delivering him from fear of death; and on the cross, by upholding,
helping, and assisting him, by carrying him through his sufferings and
death, and raising him from the dead; see [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008).

\(i\) "expectando expectavi", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus Musculus,
Rivetus, Gejerus, Michaelis; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 40:2</span></span>

He brought me up also out of an horrible pit,.... Which, with the
following phrase,

out of the miry clay, expresses the state and condition Christ was in at
the time of his bloody sweat, his crucifixion, and his lying in "sheol",
the pit or grave, sometimes rendered hell, which these figurative
phrases fitly signify; when it is observed, that he was made sin, and
had the sins of all his people on him; and, as the type of Joshua, was
clothed with their filthy garments; he might be truly said to be in the
miry clay; and also that he was made a curse for them, and bore the
wrath of God in their room and stead; and was forsaken by his God and
Father, and so endured both the punishment of loss and sense, and what
was tantamount to the sufferings of the damned in hell; see [Psa
69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001); to which may be added the noisy
insults of malignant men, and the infernal fiends, who surrounded him on
the cross; when he was in an horrible, or "noisy pit", as the words may
be rendered (k), the allusion being to subterraneous caverns or pits, in
which the falls of water make so horrible a noise as is intolerable; or
to deep pits, into which anything cast makes a great sound: and the
issue of all this was, that he was laid in the pit of the grave, and
held under the power and with the cords of death; from all which he was
delivered when he was raised from the dead, justified in the Spirit, and
glorified in the human nature by his God and Father;

and set my feet upon a rock; on Mount Zion in heaven, whither he was
carried up after his resurrection; where he will remain until his second
coming, being set down at the right hand of God, in a most stable, firm,
and unalterable state, as well as an honourable one; for he will die no
more, and death shall no more have dominion over him;

and established my goings; in treading the path of life, which was shown
him at his resurrection; in passing through the air, the territory of
Satan, at his ascension; and in his entrance into his glory, and making
his way to his Father's right hand and throne.

\(k\) "e cisterna sonitus", Pagninus, Montanus; "strepitus", Vatablus,
the Targum & Kimchi; and to the same purpose Musculus, Cocceius, Junius
& Tremellius, Piscator; "out of the pit of sounding calamity",
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 40:3</span></span>

And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God,.... Sung
by him in the midst of the great congregation of angels and saints, upon
his resurrection, ascension, and session at the right hand of God; see
[Psa 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022); when he went to his God
and ours, to his Father and ours; and in which song he is joined by all
his people above and below, [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009);

many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord; even all the
elect of God, as many as are ordained to eternal life; the many whose
sins Christ bore, for whom he became a ransom, whom he justifies and
brings to glory: these all "see" him in the horrible pit and miry clay,
in his state of humiliation, as bearing their sins, and the punishment
due unto them; as wounded, bruised, and crucified; as rising again for
their justification; and as on Mount Zion crowned with glory and honour;
and a multitude of harpers with him, singing the new song; these see the
salvation he has wrought out, the glory, fulness, and suitableness of
it, and their interest in it; and they "fear" not with a fear of hell
and damnation, which is inconsistent with the trust after mentioned; but
with a godly and filial fear, which arises from and is encouraged by the
grace and goodness of God, their faith in the sufferings, death, and
resurrection of Christ Jesus, and which render him a proper object of
trust and confidence; for he is so both as suffering, crucified, and
slain, and as risen again, and exalted at the Father's right hand, [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020).

[Psalms 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 40:4</span></span>

Blessed is the man that maketh the Lord his trust,.... For such are safe
and secure in him, are possessed of all blessings of grace through him,
have peace in their own souls now, and shall enjoy eternal happiness
with him hereafter;

and respecteth not the proud; such as the Pharisees, and all
self-righteous persons, who trust in themselves and their own
righteousness, submit not to the righteousness of Christ, and despise
others; to these such who trust in Christ have no respect; they neither
esteem them, nor imitate them;

nor such as turn aside to lies; to idols, the lying vanities of the
Gentiles; or to any doctrines injurious to the person, office, blood,
righteousness, sacrifice, and grace of Christ; which are no other than
lies, and which those who believe in Christ have no respect to, but
abhor both them and the abettors of them.

[Psalms 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 40:5</span></span>

Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done,....
This is the "new song", as Aben Ezra rightly observes, which is said in
[Psa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003), to be put in the mouth of
the Messiah; who sometimes speaks in the plural number, being the
representative of his people, and sometimes in the singular; for it is
the same person that speaks here who is continued speaking in [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006), and following; and which are
applied to Christ, [Heb 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005); the
"works" here said to be done, and to be "many" and "wonderful", are not
the creation of the world, the dividing of the sea, and feeding the
people of Israel forty years in the wilderness, as Jarchi interprets
them; but the incarnation of Christ, redemption by him, the resurrection
of him from the dead; regeneration and conversion, and the preservation
of the saints from the evil of the world, safe to the kingdom and glory
of God; all which, as they are many and various, and display the
manifold wisdom and grace of God, so they are marvellous, and will be
the subject of the wonder of saints to all eternity;

and thy thoughts which are to us-ward; that is, the decrees of God, as
Aben Ezra truly explains them; the purposes, counsels, and intentions of
God; which, though mentioned last, are before his works, and are the
spring of them: these were in the mind of God from everlasting, were
unknown till revealed, were thoughts of peace, and not of evil, and are
unfrustrable, and ever fulfilled, and are manifold, precious, and
amazing, [Psa 139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017); and these were
concerning all the elect of God as considered in Christ, and members of
his; and therefore he says to us-ward; and all the works before
mentioned were done to them, or for them, and on their account; and so
Jarchi and Aben Ezra interpret the phrase, "because of us", or "for our
sakes"; even the incarnation, sufferings, death, and resurrection of
Christ, and the thoughts of them, were for them;

they cannot be reckoned up in order to thee; or "there is none can order
them unto thee" (l); there is no power in man to do it, as Aben Ezra
observes; or "there is none like unto thee", as Jarchi and the Oriental
versions; see [Exo 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); though this
sense seems to break in upon the account of the wonderful works and
thoughts of God, which are still designed in the following clause;

if I could declare and speak of them, they are more than can be
numbered; that is, by men: from this general account of, the many and
wonderful works and thoughts of God, the Messiah passes on to take
notice of one particular design and work of the Lord, the redemption of
his people by the sacrifice of himself.

\(l\) "non est qui ordinet apud te", Pagninus; "none can count them in
order to thee", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 40:6</span></span>

Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire,.... These were desired,
willed, and appointed by God, and that very early, even from the times
of our first parents; and, when performed aright, were acceptable to
God, quite down to the times of the Messiah: indeed, when offered
without faith in Christ, and with a wicked mind, to merit any thing at
the hand of God, they were always abominable to him; and he likewise
ever preferred love to himself, and of the neighbour, obedience to the
commands of the moral law, and works of mercy to men, before all the
sacrifices of the ceremonial law, [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022); nor were these ever in such
esteem with him as the sacrifices of a broken and contrite heart, or of
praise and thanksgiving, [Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016);
nor were they ever regarded by him but as they respected Christ; nor
were they ever designed to cleanse from sin, and take it away, but to
lead to the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ: but none of these senses
have place here: the meaning of the words is, that it was not the will
of God, at the time this passage refers to, that legal sacrifices should
continue any longer; and that they should not be offered up, even by
good men, in the best manner, and to the best ends and purposes; the
time being come that a better sacrifice should be offered, which was the
sum and substance of them, and was prefigured by them;

mine ears hast thou opened; or "dug", or "bored" (m); in allusion, as is
thought by many, to [Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); though
the phrase rather signifies the formation and excavation of the ear; or
the preparing and fitting it for its use; that is, to hearken to the
will of his heavenly Father, to become man, offer himself a sacrifice,
and suffer and die in the room of his people; to which he became
obedient, taking upon him the form of a servant, when found in fashion
as a man; and was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; see
[Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004); in [Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005), the words are rendered as by the
Septuagint, "but a body hast thou prepared me"; and with it the Arabic
and Ethiopic versions agree; and so Apollinarius,

"flesh of mortal generation;''

a part of the body being put for the whole; and which, indeed, is
supposed: for unless a body had been prepared for him, his ears could
not have been opened; and it was in the body, in human nature, that he
was the obedient servant; and this is to be understood, not only of a
preparation of this body, in the purposes, counsel, and covenant of God;
but chiefly of the formation of it in the womb of the virgin, where it
was curiously wrought and prepared by the Holy, Ghost, that he might
have something to offer, and in it become, as he did, an offering and a
sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling savour;

burnt offering and sin offering hast thou not required; any longer; this
body being prepared for the Messiah to be offered up in.

\(m\) "fodisti", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Gejerus, Michaelis;
"perfodisti", Tigurine version, Musculus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator;
"perforasti", Cocceius.

[Psalms 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 40:7</span></span>

Then said I,.... As in the council and covenant of peace, when and where
he declared his willingness to come into the world, and make
satisfaction for the sins of his people; so when the fulness of time was
come for his appearance in human nature he repeated the same; for of the
time of his coming into the world are these words interpreted, [Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005); when sacrifice and offering God
would not have any longer continued, and when a body was prepared him,
then he said,

Lo, I come; O Father; as Apollinarius, in his metaphrase, adds; that is,
freely, and without compulsion; immediately, at once, without any delay;
and he himself, and not another; and this not by change of place, but by
assumption of nature; taking the body, or human nature, prepared for
him, and uniting it to himself; to which the word "lo" is prefixed as a
note of attention and admiration; the incarnation of Christ being a
wonderful affair, and of the utmost moment and importance;

in the volume of the book it is written of me; either in the book of
divine predestination, in the purposes and decrees of God, [Psa
139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016); or in the book of the
Scriptures; either in general, [Joh
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039), [Luk
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027); or particularly in the book of
the Psalms, [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); or rather in the
book of the law, the five books of Moses, since these were the only
books or volumes that were composed at the writing of this psalm; and it
has respect not to [Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015); nor
[Deu 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018); nor [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); but rather [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); and seeing the coming of Christ
into the world was not only appointed of God, agreed unto by Christ, but
was prophesied of, and penned down in the sacred writings; therefore at
the appointed time he came, freely and willingly. This book is called a
volume, or roll, alluding to the manner of writing formerly; when what
was written was finished, it was rolled about a stick in the manner of a
cylinder; and in this form is the book of the law with the Jews to this
day; See Gill on [Luk 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017).

[Psalms 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 40:8</span></span>

I delight to do thy will, O my God,.... This he came down from heaven to
do, and this he did do, by preaching the Gospel, and working miracles;
and above all by obtaining eternal redemption for his people, which he
effected by fulfilling the law, becoming a sacrifice, and suffering and
dying in their room; all which were the will of God, and grateful to
him, and in doing which Christ took the utmost delight and pleasure,
[Joh 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034);

yea, thy law is within my heart; either the whole moral law, under which
he was, as man, and the surety of his people; and which was written upon
his heart, and which he perfectly obeyed; or that particular law,
injunction, and command laid upon him by his Father, to offer himself a
sacrifice, and lay down his life for men; which he agreed to, had it in
his mind, his heart was set upon it, and he cheerfully complied with it,
[Joh 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018).

[Psalms 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 40:9</span></span>

I have preached righteousness in the great congregation,.... Not the
righteousness which the law requires men to do; but the righteousness
which Christ himself wrought out, for the justification of them that
believe; this he was a preacher, as well as the author of, and is part
of the glad tidings he was anointed to preach, [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); and the word (n) here used
signifies, for the most part, the publishing of good tidings; and this
our Lord did publicly, before all the people, in the synagogues of the
Jews, and in the temple, whither the people in great numbers resorted;
especially at the three great festivals in the year; the feasts of
passover, pentecost, and tabernacles, when all the males were obliged to
appear, and made up a great congregation indeed; see [Joh
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023);

lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest; Christ appeals
to his divine Father, the searcher of hearts, and trier of reins, for
the truth of this; that he had not laid any restraint upon his lips, nor
kept back anything in his ministry that was profitable; but had taught
the way of God in great integrity and sincerity; had opened his mouth,
and spoke freely and fully, and used great plainness of speech.

\(n\) Sept. "evangelizavi", Schmidt, Michaelis; "I have preached the
glad tidings of justice", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 40:10</span></span>

I have not not hid thy righteousness within my heart,.... Meaning not
the essential righteousness of God, though that was abundantly declared
in the wounds, sufferings, and death of Christ; and which was the end
indeed of his being a propitiation for sin, [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025); but his own righteousness, as
before, which he wrought out, and brought in; and which is called the
righteousness of God his Father, because it is approved of by him, and
accepted with him, and which he imputes to all his people;

I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: trial is, the
"faithfulness" of God in executing all his purposes, counsels, and
decrees, which are said to be faithfulness and truth; and in fulfilling
his covenant and promises, relating to the redemption and salvation of
men by Christ; and in the mission of Christ into this world on that
account; and in the accomplishment of all the prophecies of the Old
Testament concerning him; and in making good all the particular promises
of support, help, and strength, made to the Messiah himself: and by his
"salvation" is meant, that which is of God the Father's appointing,
continuing, and settling, in the council and covenant of grace; which he
sent his Son to be the author of, and which he has obtained; and is the
great doctrine of the Gospel preached by himself, and his faithful
ministers, [Luk 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009);

I have not concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great
congregation; or "in the great congregation", as the Targum. By the
"lovingkindness" of God is designed both his love to Christ, which was
before the foundation of the world, and continued in his lowest state of
humiliation, and which our Lord was far from concealing, but gave openly
instances of it, [Joh 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024); and this
love to his people; and which he declared to be the same with that which
he is loved with, and instances in the gift of himself to them by his
Father, as the great evidence of it, [Joh
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023); and by "truth" is intended the
Gospel in general, which came by Christ, was preached by him, which he
bore witness to, to do which was one end of his coming into the world;
and this was not concealed by him, who is truth itself; but was fully
and plainly declared by him, as it had not been before, [Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017).

[Psalms 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 40:11</span></span>

Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord,.... this is a
petition of Christ to his Father, when in the midst of his sorrows and
sufferings, before related; and particularly when he hid his face from
him, and withheld the discoveries of his tender and affectionate love;

let thy lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me; as he had
promised; of which promise some notice is given, [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008), in the fulfilment of which the
lovingkindness, truth, and faithfulness of God, would appear. Some read
these words as expressive of faith in these things, "thou wilt not
withhold", &c. "thy lovingkindness and thy truth shall continually
preserve me" (o).

\(o\) "non cohibebis", Gejerus, Michaelis; "custodient me", Vatablus,
Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 40:12</span></span>

For innumerable evils have compassed me about,.... Like floods of water
all around him; see [Psa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004); these
are the evils of punishment inflicted on him, as the surety and Saviour
of his people; such as the sorrows and griefs he bore all his days; the
cruel mockings and scourges he endured; his being buffeted and spit
upon; his head crowned with thorns, and his hands and feet pierced with
nails; insulted by men and devils; crucified between two thieves, and so
died the shameful and painful death of the cross;

mine iniquities have taken hold upon me; not any committed by him; he
was conceived, born, and lived without sin, knew none, nor did he any;
but the sins of his people, which were imputed to him, laid upon him,
and which he voluntarily took and bore; and which he reckoned as his own
and was responsible for them; these, when he hung upon the cross, came
upon him from all quarters, and he bore them in his own body upon the
tree;

so that I am not able to look up; or "cannot see" (p); either the end of
these iniquities, they being so numerous, as is after related; or he
could not bear to look upon them, they were so filthy and nauseous, and
he so pure and holy; or he could not behold his Father's countenance,
which these sins that were upon him separated him from, and caused to be
hid from him; or, like one pressed down with the guilt of sin, as the
poor publican was, could not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, [Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013);

they are more than the hairs of mine head; as they must needs be, since
they were the iniquities of all the elect of God, of the whole general
assembly ad church of the firstborn, written in heaven, [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006);

therefore my heart faileth me; as man; see [Psa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014); though being supported by his
divine nature, and by his divine Father and eternal Spirit, he failed
not, nor was he discouraged, [Isa
42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004); this is said to show the truth
of the human nature, the greatness of men's sins, the strictness of
divine justice, and what strength was necessary to accomplish man's
salvation.

\(p\) "non potai videre", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus; "cernere",
Cocceius; "intueri", Gejerus.

[Psalms 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 40:13</span></span>

Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me,.... From the innumerable evils which
compassed him about; from sinful men, and from devils, signified by the
sword, dog, and lion, [Psa 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020); and
from the power and dominion of death and the grave; all which was done
when he was raised from the dead, and as the fruit and effect of God's
well pleasedness in him, and with what he did and suffered; see [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008);

O Lord, make haste to help me; See Gill on [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019).

[Psalms 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 40:14</span></span>

Let them be ashamed and confounded together,.... As they will be at the
last day, when they shall see him whom they have pierced come in the
clouds of heaven, in his own and his Father's glory, and in the glory of
the holy angels;

that seek after my soul to destroy it; that is, his life, as did Herod
in his infancy, and the Scribes and Pharisees, chief priests and elders
of the people of the Jews, frequently, and at last accomplished what
they sought after;

let them be driven backward; as those were who came with Judas into the
garden to apprehend him, [Joh 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006);

and put to shame that wish me evil: as did the Jews, who sought all
opportunities to ensnare him, and that they might have to accuse him to
the Roman governor; and who earnestly desired his crucifixion, and
vehemently wished his death; see [Psa
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005).

[Psalms 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 40:15</span></span>

Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame,.... Of their shameful
wishes, words, and actions, as they were: their habitations in Jerusalem
were desolate, and so was their house or temple there, and their whole
land, and they themselves were stripped of everything, when Jerusalem
was taken and destroyed; see [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038), [Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020);

that say unto me, Aha, aha; words expressive of joy, [Psa
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#021), exulting at his miseries and
sufferings on the cross, [Mat 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039);
so the Targum,

"we have rejoiced at his destruction, with joy at his affliction.''

[Psalms 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 40:16</span></span>

Let all those that seek thee,.... In the first place, with their whole
hearts, earnestly and diligently, in Christ, and under the influences of
his Spirit, for pardon, righteousness, communion, larger measures of
grace, and for honour, glory, immortality, and eternal life;

rejoice and be glad in thee: as their covenant God, the Father of their
mercies, the God of all comfort and salvation, who pardons their sins,
clothes them with the robes of righteousness and garments of salvation,
and accepts their persons in Christ; all which is matter of joy and
gladness: Christ is concerned for the joy of his people, [Joh
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#011); the Targum is, "they shall", or
"let them rejoice, and be glad in thy word": in himself, the essential
Word, in whom there is always ground and reason of joy and gladness;
because of his person, blood, righteousness, and sacrifice;

let such as love thy salvation; either Christ, who is God's salvation,
[Gen 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018); and who is loved by his
people, universally, superlatively, and sincerely; or the salvation of
him, his deliverance from the grave, resurrection from the dead, and
exaltation; the benefits of which believers share in, and so have reason
to love it: or the salvation he is the author of, which is loved by
those that know it; partly because agreeable to the divine perfections,
the glory of God is great in it; and partly because it is so full and
complete in itself, and so suitable to them;

say continually, the Lord be magnified; let this be their constant
employment in this world, as it will be for ever in the next, to ascribe
greatness to God; or greatly to praise him, because of the great
salvation wrought out for them.

[Psalms 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 40:17</span></span>

But I am poor and needy,.... As Christ was literally, [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009); and in a spiritual sense, when
deserted by his Father, forsaken by his disciples, and surrounded by his
enemies; and had the sins of his people, the curse of the law, and the
wrath of God upon him;

yet the Lord thinketh upon me; thinketh good for me, as the Targum; or
thinks highly of me; has me in great esteem though despised of men, and
in such a suffering state;

thou art my help and my deliverer; he believed he should have what he
prayed for, [Psa 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013); see [Isa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007);

make no tarrying, O my God; which is a repetition of the request in [Psa
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 41](psa041)

</div>
