<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa044)  [Next](psa046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 45:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 45

To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah, Maschil, A
Song of loves.

There are some things in this title we have met with already in other
psalms; as the direction, "to the chief Musician, for the sons of
Korah"; and one of its names, "Maschil". The word "shoshannim",
according to Kimchi and Ben Melech, is the name of a musical instrument,
on which this psalm was sung; an instrument of six strings, as Junius:
but Aben Ezra thinks it was the first word of a song, to the tune of
which it was sunny; though others are of opinion that it points at the
persons, the subjects of this psalm, and may be rendered, "concerning
Shoshannim"; that is, as the Targum interprets it, "concerning those
that sit in the sanhedrim of Moses": and Jarchi's note is, "for the
glory of the disciples of the wise men", comparable to lilies; for so
this word signifies, and may be translated, "concerning the lilies" (t);
that is, concerning Christ and his church, who are manifestly the
subject of this psalm, and are compared to lilies, [Sol
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001). This psalm is called "a song of
loves", an epithalamium, or marriage song, setting forth the mutual love
of Christ and his church; or "a song of the beloved ones" (u) or
"friends"; of Christ, who is the beloved and friend of his church; and
the church, who is the beloved and friend of Christ; see [Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001); and the word here used being in
the feminine gender, some have supplied the word "virgins", and render
it thus, "a song of the beloved virgins" (w); sung by them on account of
the marriage between Christ and his church, who are the companions of
the bride, mentioned in [Psa 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014),
and friends and lovers of the bridegroom; see [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003). The writer of this psalm is not
mentioned; it was not written by the sons of Korah, as say the Targum
and Syriac version; but most probably by David, though not concerning
his son Solomon, as some have thought, who, though wiser than all men,
is never said to be fairer; nor was he a warrior, as the person is
represented; nor was his throne and kingdom for ever and ever; nor he
the object of worship; nor was his marriage with Pharaoh's daughter so
commendable a thing; nor is she ever praised, as the queen herein
mentioned is: but the person who is spoken of is the Messiah, as is
owned by several Jewish writers: the Targum interprets [Psa
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002) of the King Messiah; and Ben
Melech says, he is meant by the King in [Psa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001). Aben Ezra observes, that this
psalm is said concerning David, or concerning the Messiah his son, for
so is his name, [Eze 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#026); and Kimchi
expressly says, it is spoken concerning the Messiah; and Arama affirms,
that all agree that it treats of him.

\(t\) "de liliis", Tigurine version. (u) "canticum amicarum", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "amatarum", Cocceius. (w) "Dilectarum sen de
dilectis Christo virginibus", Michaelis; "a song of the well beloved
virgins", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 45:1</span></span>

My heart is inditing a good matter,.... What is valuable and excellent,
concerning the excellency of Christ's person, of his kingdom, of his
love to the church, and of the church itself; what is pleasant and
delightful, comfortable, useful, and profitable: this his heart was
inditing; which shows that it was under the sanctifying influences of
the Holy Spirit, and denotes the fervour of it; it "boiling up", as the
word (x) signifies; being heated by the fire of the divine Spirit,
whereby it was hot within him, and caused him to speak with his tongue;
and also the abundance that was in it, it "bubbling up" (y), as some
choose to render it: from whence this good matter flowed like water out
of a fountain;

I speak of the things which I have made touching the King; the King
Messiah; the King of the whole world, and of the kings of it, and of the
saints in it; over whom he reigns in a spiritual manner, and in
righteousness; concerning whom this psalm or poem was composed by David
under divine inspiration, and which he here delivers:

my tongue is the pen of a ready writer; or as (z) one; such an one as
Ezra was, [Ezr 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006), that writes
swiftly and compendiously; suggesting, that as he was; full of matter,
he freely communicated it, being moved by the Holy Spirit, who spake by
him, and whose word was in his tongue; which made him so ready and
expert in this work. The allusion is to scribes and notaries, and such
like persons, that are extremely ready and swift in the use of the pen.
The word for "pen" is derived either from which signifies "to fly" (a),
and from whence is a word used for a "flying fowl"; yet we are not to
imagine that here it signifies a pen made of a bird's quill, as now in
common use with us: for this did not obtain until many hundred years
after David's time. It seems that Isidore of Seville, who lived in the
seventh century, is the first person that makes mention of "penna", a
"pen", as made of the quill of a bird (b), but rather the pen has its
name in Hebrew, if from the above root, from the velocity of it, as in
the hand of a ready writer; or rather it may be derived from "to
sharpen", in which sense it seems to be used, [Eze
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#015); and so a pen has its name from
the sharp point of it: for when the ancients wrote, or rather engraved,
on stone, brass, lead, and wood, they used a style or pen of iron; see
[Job 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024); so when they wrote on
tables of wood covered with wax, they used a kind of bodkin made of
iron, brass, or bone; See Gill on [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002); and when upon the rind and leaves
of trees, and on papyrus and parchment, they made use of reeds,
particularly the Egyptian calamus or reed; and the word here is
translated calamus or reed by the Targum, Septuagint, and all the
Oriental versions. Now as the Jews had occasion frequently to copy out
the book of the law, and other writings of theirs, their scribes, at
least some of them, were very expert and dexterous at it; but whether
the art of "shorthand" was to any degree in use among them is not
certain, as it was in later times among the Romans, when they used
marks, signs, and abbreviations, which seems to have laid the foundation
of the above art, and had its rise, as is said, from Cicero himself,
though some ascribe it to Mecaenas (c): and in Martial's time it was
brought to such perfection, that, according to him, the hand could write
swifter than a man could speak (d).

\(x\) "ebullit", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so Ainsworth. (y)
"Eructavit", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Munster. (z) So the
Targum, Tigurine version, Gejerus, & Michaelis. (a) Vid. Kimchi Sepher
Shorash. rad. (b) Origin. l. 6. c. 13. (c) Vid. Kipping. Antiqu. Roman.
l. 2. c. 4. p. 554. (d) "Currant verba licet, manus est velociter illis;
nondum lingua suum, dextra peregit opus", Martial. Epigr. l. 14. ep.
189. of the origin of shorthand with the Romans, and among us, with
other curious things concerning writing, and the matter and instruments
of it, see a learned treatise of Mr. Massey's, called, "The Origin and
Progress of Letters", p. 144. printed 1763.

[Psalms 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 45:2</span></span>

Thou art fairer than the children of men,.... Here begins the psalm, and
this is an address to the King Messiah, the subject of it, commending
him for his beauty and comeliness; which is not to be understood of his
divine beauty or his glory, as the only begotten of the Father, in which
he is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person;
for this admits of no comparison, nor is the beauty of angels and men to
be mentioned with it; but of the beauty of his human nature, both in
body and soul, which being the immediate produce of the Holy Spirit, and
without sin, and full of wisdom, grace, and holiness, must transcend
that of any or all the sons of Adam. They are all deformed by sin; and
whatever spiritual beauty there is in any of them, they have it from
Christ; they are comely through his comeliness the outward beauty of men
is vain and deceitful, and soon perishes; but Christ is ever the same,
and he esteemed of by all that know him, as exceeding precious,
altogether lovely, and transcendently excellent and glorious. The Hebrew
word here used is doubled in its radicals, which denotes the exceeding
great fairness and beauty of Christ, especially as Mediator, and as full
of grace and truth. It follows,

grace is poured into thy lips; by which is meant the matter of his
speech, or the Gospel preached by him; these words of grace, as Kimchi
on the text expresses himself; or gracious words which proceeded out of
his mouth, [Luk 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022). The Gospel of
the grace of God was given him to preach; it was put into his mouth, and
that in great abundance; it was given at sundry times and in divers
manners, and by piecemeal, to the prophets before him; but it was poured
into his lips, and he was abundantly qualified for preaching it, by
having the Spirit without measure given him; and so was poured out in a
graceful manner, with great authority, and as never man before him
spake, in doctrines of grace, gracious invitations, precious promises,
excellent prayers, and even words of eternal life; see [Sol
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#013);

therefore God hath blessed thee for ever; or, "because (e) God hath
blessed thee for ever"; in his human nature, with the grace of union to
the Son of God, and with all the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God;
and as Mediator, with all spiritual blessings, with grace and glory for
his people. Hence all his comeliness, grace, and gracefulness.

\(e\) "eo quid", Tigurine version; "propterea quod", Musculus, Piscator;
"quia", Gejerus.

[Psalms 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 45:3</span></span>

Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty,.... As Christ is, the
mighty God, even the Almighty, and which appears by his works of
creation and providence; by the redemption of his people; by his care
and government of them; by succouring them under all their temptations
and afflictions; by strengthening them for every service, duty, and
suffering; by pleading their cause, and supplying their wants; by
preserving them to his kingdom and glory; by raising them from the dead
at the last day, and by introducing them into the possession of the
heavenly inheritance. This mighty One is called upon to "gird on his
sword": by which is meant either the sword of the Spirit, the word of
God; which is sharp in convincing of sin, reproving for it, and
threatening on account of it, as well as in refuting error and heresy;
and a twoedged one, consisting of law and Gospel, and which Christ made
use of to great purpose, against Satan in the wilderness, and against
the Scribes and Pharisees; and which he will make further use of in the
latter day, against the man of sin, and his followers: or else the power
of Christ, which, as the Leader and Commander of his people, and the
Captain of their salvation, is called upon to exert, by preparing to
engage with, and by destroying his and their enemies; and which he did
put forth when the year of the redeemed was come, which was the day of
vengeance in his heart; when he combated with and destroyed Satan, and
spoiled his principalities and powers; when he abolished death itself,
and took away sin the sting of it, and the law, the strength of sin;
overcame the world, and delivered his people from it, and out of the
hand of every enemy. It is added,

with thy glory and thy majesty; which may be connected either with the
phrase "and most mighty", and so be expressive of the glory and majesty
of Christ, as the mighty God; or with his sword, as an emblem of his
authority and majesty as a King, and may denote the glory of his Gospel
and of his power; or may point at the end of his girding his sword upon
his thigh, which was to show forth the glory of his majesty, or to
obtain honour and glory: though the word "gird" may be supplied and
repeated, and so make a distinct proposition, "gird with thy glory and
thy majesty"; which was done when he was raised from the dead, and had
glory given him; was crowned with it, and had the glory put upon him he
had with his Father before the world was.

[Psalms 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 45:4</span></span>

And in thy majesty ride prosperously,.... Not literally, as was
prophesied of him he should, and as he did, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009); but mystically and spiritually,
either in the chariots of angels up to heaven, [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017); or on the white horse of the
Gospel, with his bow and arrows after mentioned, conquering and to
conquer, [Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002); and where he rides
"in his majesty", showing forth his glory both as a divine Person and as
Mediator; and which is very conspicuous in the Gospel, and the ministry
of it; and also "prosperously", as he did in the first preaching of the
word by the apostles, when it was made the power of God to salvation to
multitudes, and the Lord caused them to triumph in Christ everywhere;
and as he will in the latter day, when the Jews will be converted, and
the fulness of the Gentiles brought in;

because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness; either because he
himself is "truth", the truth of all types, promises, prophecies, and
doctrines; or because of the Gospel of truth which comes by him; or on
account of his truth and faithfulness in fulfilling his own engagements,
and the promises of his father: and because of the "meekness" which was
so apparent in him, in taking upon him the form of a servant; in his
marriage to sinners, and conversation with them; in ministering: to his
disciples; in his conduct towards his enemies; and in seeking not his
own glory, but his Father's: and because of "righteousness", the
holiness of his nature, the purity of his life and actions; and because
of the righteousness he is the author of to his people, and of his
righteous administration of his offices, especially as a King;

and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things; or thy power, which
the right hand is a symbol of, shall perform terrible things; as it did
in the work of redemption, by conquering and destroying the enemies of
his people, and of himself; and as it does in the conversion of men,
which makes terrible work in their consciences, as the instances of the
three thousand, of Saul, and of the jailer show; and as it has in his
judgments on his enemies the Jews, in the utter ruin of their nation,
city, and temple; and will do on all the antichristian powers in the
latter day. The Targum paraphrases it,

"the Lord shall teach thee to do terrible things with thy right hand
(f).''

\(f\) "Dextra mihi Deus", &c. Virgil. Aeneid. 10. prope finem.

[Psalms 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 45:5</span></span>

Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies,.... Meaning
either the Jews, who were the implacable enemies of Christ, and who
would not have him to reign over them; in the midst of whom were sent
his arrows, of the sword, famine, and pestilence, and which were very
sharp, and made sad havoc among them, and caused such a time of
tribulation as was not before, or has been since, [Mat
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021); or else the doctrines of the
Gospel. The Scriptures are the quiver out of which they are taken; the
Gospel is the bow into which they are put, and out of which they are
shot; and ministers are the archers that draw the bow at a venture, and
shoot them; and which are compared to "arrows" for their swift, sudden,
and secret motion, and for their piercing and penetrating power and
efficacy: and these are Christ's, which he is the author of, and which
he makes use of to good purpose, by striking the hearts of his people
with them, who in their state of unregeneracy are enemies to him; which
appears by their wicked works, and as they were when he died for them,
and reconciled them to God; by means of which arrows fixed in them, and
with which their hearts are pricked and wounded, they submit unto him,
signified by the next clause:

whereby the people fall under thee: acknowledge themselves sinners; fall
down at his feet; humbly implore his grace and mercy; submit to his
righteousness; depend on him alone for salvation; adore him, and give
him the glory of it, as well as become subject to his laws and
ordinances. This is to be understood of those who are God's covenant
people, whom he has given to Christ, and he has redeemed by his blood;
and particularly the Gentiles, who were not a people, but now openly
are, in distinction from the Jews, the enemies of the King Messiah.

[Psalms 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 45:6</span></span>

Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,.... This verse and [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007) are cited in [Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008); and applied to the Son of God,
the second Person in the Trinity; and therefore are not an apostrophe to
the Father, as some have said; nor will they bear to be rendered, "thy
throne is the throne of God", or "thy throne is God"; or be supplied
thus, "God shall establish thy throne". But they are spoken of the Son
of God, who is truly and properly God, the true God and eternal life; as
appears by the names by which he is called, as Jehovah, and the like; by
his having all divine perfections in him; by the works which he has
wrought, and by the worship which is given unto him; and to whom
dominion is ascribed, of which the throne is an emblem, [Gen
41:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040). And this his government is
either general, over angels, good and bad, and over men, even wicked
men, and over the greatest among men, the kings of the earth; or
special, over his own church and people, and which is exercised by his
Spirit and grace in them; by his word and ordinances among them; and
which will be in a glorious manner in the latter day; and in heaven,
though not in the same manner as now, and that to all eternity: for to
this government duration for ever and ever is attributed; Christ will
have no successor, he will die no more; nor can his government be
subverted or taken out of his hands, or he be removed from his throne by
any of his enemies, or by all of them; and though his kingdom will be
delivered up to the Father, it will not cease, it is an everlasting one;

the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre; meaning either the
Gospel, which is the golden sceptre of mercy and grace, stretched out
and held forth for the encouragement of sensible sinners; and is a
sceptre of righteousness, as it directs to the righteousness of Christ
for justification, and encourages works of righteousness to be done by
men: or rather the righteous administration of Christ's government is
meant, the sceptre being an emblem of dominion and government, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010).

[Psalms 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 45:7</span></span>

Thou lovest righteousness,.... Either righteous persons, whom his
countenance beholds, on whom his eyes are, and from whom they are never
withdrawn, and with whom he is exceedingly delighted: or righteous
things; a righteous administration of government; faithfulness and
integrity in whatsoever he is intrusted with, or appointed to by his
father; all righteous actions which the law requires, as appeared in the
whole course of his life; and by working out a righteousness for his
people, and by encouraging them in works of righteousness; and as also
will appear by judging the world in righteousness at the last day, and
by giving the crown of righteousness to his righteous ones;

and hatest wickedness; which was manifest not only by his inveighing
against it and dehorting from it, and by his severity exercised towards
delinquents; but by suffering for it, and abolishing it, and by
chastising his own people on account of it;

therefore God, thy God; or "because (g) God", thy God; who is the God of
Christ, as Christ is man; who prepared and formed his human nature,
supported it in suffering, and glorified it, and to whom Christ prayed,
and whom he believed in, loved, and obeyed as such:

hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows; who
though he is called God, [Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006),
and is truly so, yet was not anointed as such, but as man and Mediator,
to the office of Prophet, Priest, and King; and not with material oil,
but with the Holy Ghost, his gifts and graces; see [Act
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038); called "the oil of gladness",
in allusion to the use of oil at feasts and weddings, for the delight
and refreshment of guests, and particularly of the oil of lilies, "olcum
susinum", so some (h) translate it; well known to the Hebrews, who
inhabited Syria and Palestine, where red lilies grew, of which this was
made, and had in great esteem; and because of its effects in the human
nature of Christ, filling it with alacrity and cheerfulness to go
through the work he came about. This unction rotors to the time of his
conception and birth, and also to the time of his baptism; and the
phrase, "above thy fellows", denotes the abundance of the Spirit's
grace, his having it without measure, and in a transcendent manner to
any of the sons of men, even his own people; for these, and not angels,
nor the princes of the earth, are meant, neither of which are his
fellows; but the saints, who are of the same nature with him, of the
same family he is the head of, of the same dignity through him, being
made kings and priests by him, partakers of the same Spirit and grace;
and will be companions with him, and sit on the same throne with him to
all eternity. The Targum, in the king of Spain's Bible, begins the verse
thus;

"But thou, O King Messiah, because thou lovest, &c.''

\(g\) "propterea quod", Tigurine version, Vatablus, Piscator, Gejerus;
"quia", Rivet. Noldius, p. 727, No. 1730. (h) Vid. Schacchi Elaeochrism,
l. 1. c. 27. & 28.

[Psalms 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 45:8</span></span>

All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia,.... Either his
human nature, as anointed with the oil of gladness, and filled with the
graces of the Spirit, signified by the holy anointing oil in the
tabernacle, of which the things mentioned were ingredients, [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023); or the garments of salvation
and robe of righteousness, wrought out by him for his people, which are
well pleasing and acceptable to his Father, and of a sweet smelling
savour, being agreeable to his law and justice; and also to himself, as
they are put upon his people; see [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011). And likewise to them who rejoice
at being clothed with them, and desire to be found in them: or else his
people themselves, who are sometimes compared to a clothing and to
garments, [Isa 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018); whose persons
are to God as the smell of a field, whom the Lord has blessed; and whose
sacrifices of prayer and praise are sweet odours to him, through the
mediation of his Son;

out of the ivory palaces; see [Sol
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#004); meaning the places from whence
these garments were taken, the wardrobe; or from whence Christ came, and
where he appears; as heaven, the palace of the great King, from whence
he came down, whither he is gone, and from whence he is expected again;
and the human nature of Christ, in which he tabernacled on earth, and
was pure and clear from sin; and his churches, which are his temples and
palaces, where he grants his presence. Or it may be rendered, "more than
the ivory palaces" (i), and so be expressive of the excellency of
Christ's garments above them; and denote the purity of his human nature,
the spotlessness of his righteousness, and the comeliness of his people;

whereby they have made thee glad; or, "wherein" or "from whence" (k); in
which palaces, the churches, the saints make Christ glad, by speaking of
his glory; by ascribing glory to him; and by the exercise of grace upon
him, with which his heart is ravished, [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009). Or "for which" (l); garments of
salvation, and robe of righteousness; they being clothed with them, and
rejoicing in them, cause joy and gladness in Christ: or "more than
they", or "theirs that make thee glad" (m); meaning his fellows and
their garments, his being more odorous than theirs.

\(i\) "prae palatiis eburneis", Cocceius, Gejerus. (k) "unde", Montanus,
Musculus, Muis, Noldius, p. 629, No. 1664. (l) "Propter quod", Muis. (m)
"Prae iis", Junius & Tremellius; "magis quam eorum", Piscator; so
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 45:9</span></span>

Kings' daughters were among thy honourable women,.... Or "maids of
honour" (n); who filled and adorned the king's court, and made a
splendid appearance there, the same with the virgins, the companions of
the bride, in [Psa 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014); and design
truly gracious souls, believers in Christ, who are his "precious ones"
(o), as the word may be rendered; the excellent in the earth, in whom is
all his delight; the precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold; his
portion, his jewels, his peculiar treasure, and the apple of his eye:
and since they have been precious to him, they have been "honourable",
as they are, both by birth and marriage, being born of God, and espoused
to Christ; by their character, kings and priests; and by their company,
being among princes, and especially by their having communion with
Father, Son, and Spirit: and among these are "kings' daughters"; yea,
they are all of them the sons and daughters of the King of kings; not by
their first birth, by which they were mean, base, and dishonourable,
wretched and miserable, and children of wrath, as others; but by their
second birth, or regeneration, through being born from above, and of
God, to an incorruptible inheritance; and so are clothed and fed like
the daughters of kings, and have the attendance of such, angels to wait
upon them and guard them; and through adopting grace, which regeneration
is the evidence of, by virtue of which some of the children of men
become the sons and daughters of the Lord God Almighty; and through
their marriage to the King's Son, the Lord Jesus Christ: the words may
be rendered, "Kings' daughters were in thy precious things" (p); that
is, were arrayed with them: meaning either the graces of the Spirit,
comparable to gems, pearls, jewels, and precious stones; see [Sol
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010); or else the rich robe of
Christ's righteousness, and garments of salvation, with which believers
being clothed, are as a bridegroom decked with ornaments, and as a bride
adorned with jewels, [Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010); and
this agrees with what follows;

upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir; by whom is
meant the church, whose title is a "queen", being the bride, the Lamb's
wife: wherefore, because he is King, she is queen; for this title she
has not of herself; it is founded not in her own right, but upon her
relation to Christ, being married to him; and so is expressive of
relation to him, union with him, and of privilege and dignity through
him; she sharing with him in all he has, even in his kingdom and
government, reigning with him, and on the same throne: her being "on his
right hand" shows the honour she is advanced unto; yet "standing" may
denote subjection to him as her Lord and head; and being so close by him
may suggest her fidelity and inviolable attachment to him, and strict
adherence to his person, cause and interest; as well as her protection
from him, being held and upheld by his right hand; and her reception of
favours from thence, and her enjoyment of his presence, at whose right
hand are pleasures for evermore. Her dress is "gold of Ophir": a place
famous for gold; See Gill on [Kg1
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#028); with which the clothes of great
personages used to be embroidered; so Esther is said (q) to put on her
royal apparel, adorned with the good gold of "Ophir": here it means,
that the queen's or church's clothing was of wrought gold, as in [Psa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013), and intends the righteousness
of Christ, with which she is arrayed, comparable to it for its richness,
purity, lustre, glory, and duration.

\(n\) "inter noblies tuas", Tigurine version. (o) Heb. "pretiosas",
Piscator; so Ainsworth. (p) In "pretiositatibus tuis", Montanus,
Gejerus; so some in Vatablus. (q) Targum Sheni in Esther v. 1.

[Psalms 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 45:10</span></span>

Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear,.... These
words are either spoken by the prophet, the author of the psalm; or by
the King, the bridegroom himself; or, as others think, by Jehovah the
Father, whose daughter the church is; unless it should be rather thought
to be an address of the honourable women, the kings' daughters, the
virgins and companions of the bride, delivered by them to her under the
character of the daughter of Zion, the King's daughter, as she is
called, [Psa 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013), "to hearken,
incline her ear" and listen to her Lord and King, to his Gospel, and the
doctrines of it, which are his voice and words, and to all his precepts
and commands; and to "consider", see, and behold the goodness of God
unto her, the greatness, excellencies, and glories of her husband; to
look to him by faith, as he is held forth in the word and ordinances,
and to him only and that constantly, which is well pleasing to him;

forget also thine own people and thy father's house; Christ is to be
preferred before natural relations; converted persons are not to have
fellowship with carnal men, though ever so, nearly related; former
superstitions, Whether Jewish or Heathenish, are to be buried in
forgetfulness; sinful self, and righteous self, are to be denied for
Christ's sake; and the world, and all things in it, are to be treated
with neglect and contempt by such who cleave to him. The Targum
interprets this of the congregation of Israel hearing the law, beholding
the wonderful works of God, and forgetting the idolatrous practices of
their ancestors.

[Psalms 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 45:11</span></span>

So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty,.... Which lies in the
comeliness or righteousness of Christ put upon her; in the holiness of
Christ reckoned to her; in being washed from all sin in the blood of
Christ; in the graces of the Spirit being implanted in her, in which the
beauty of holiness lies; in the salvation she is interested in, and
beautified with; in enjoying the order and ordinance of Christ's house,
and in having the presence of God and Christ with her: and this beauty
is not natural, nor acquired by her, but what is given her; it is not an
outward, but an inward beauty; nor is it fictitious, but real; it is
perfect through the comeliness of her Lord upon her; and it is durable
as the olive tree: and this is greatly desired by Christ, who delights
in her, and to behold her countenance; seeks after her company, and will
have her where he is, that she may behold his glory, and he may behold
her beauty;

for he is thy Lord; not only by creation, but by redemption, and in
right of marriage, as well as on account of other relations he stands in
to her, as Father, Head, King, and Master; and it is her privilege that
he is her Lord, as well as her duty to own the relation; since, though
he is a sovereign Lord, he is no tyrannical one, but governs with
gentleness, and he has all power to protect her, and all fulness to
supply her wants; and on account of his being her Husband, Lord, and
Head, he has a right of worship from her, as follows;

and worship thou him; both internally, by the exercise of faith, hope,
and love upon him; and externally, by praying to him, praising of him,
and attending on all his ordinances, and doing everything in a religious
way, in his name, according to his word, and by his authority; and such
worship should be in spirit and in truth, in sincerity, and without
hypocrisy, in righteousness and true holiness, and with reverence and
godly fear.

[Psalms 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 45:12</span></span>

And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift,.... That is, among
the honourable women in the king's court and palace: it is a prophecy of
the conversion of the Tyrians, and their admission into a Gospel church,
state, which had its accomplishment in the times of Christ and his
apostles, [Mar 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024); compare with this
[Psa 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004); and though Tyre is only
mentioned, it being, as Kimchi on this place observes, near to the land
of Judea; yet all other Gentiles are meant, to whom the Gospel should
come to the conversion of them, and thereby become members of churches;
where they are "with a gift", of themselves to the churches; see [Co2
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005); joining themselves to them, to
walk with them, and serve the Lord with one consent; and with the gift
or offering of praise and thanksgiving, for the grace and blessings of
it bestowed upon them; and with a free donation out of their substance,
to support a Gospel church state, its ministers, and the interest, of
religion; see [Isa 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018); the allusion
may be to [Exo 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015);

even the rich among the people shall entreat thy favour; either such as
are rich, in a literal sense, both among the inhabitants of Tyre, who
were a very wealthy people, [Isa 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008);
and among other Gentiles, especially in the latter day, when kings shall
be the church's nursing fathers, and bow down to her, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023); or such who are so in a
spiritual sense, enriched by Christ with all spiritual blessings, and
who are particularly rich in faith, and heirs of a kingdom; these shall
"entreat the favour" of the queen the church; not pray unto her, or
worship her in a religious way; for God is only the object of such
worship; but do those things by which they would show that they valued
her friendship, and would gain her good will; as also acknowledge any
former injury done her by them, and entreat her forgiveness; and
particularly desire to have communion with her, and share in her
prayers.

[Psalms 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 45:13</span></span>

The King's daughter is all glorious within,.... The "King's daughter" is
the same with the "queen", [Psa 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009);
the church, who is the King's daughter, the daughter of the King of
kings, through adopting grace, by marriage to Christ the King's son, and
by regeneration, or being born of God: and she is "all glorious within";
within doors, in the inner chamber of the King, where being brought, she
enjoys such communion with him as reflects a glory upon her; in his
banqueting house, where his banner over her is love, and where her
members enjoy fellowship with one another, and this in harmony, unity,
and love; which make her look amiable, pleasant, beautiful and glorious:
or within the hearts of her members, through the internal graces of the
Spirit wrought there; the work of grace is an inward work; it has its
seat in the heart or spirit of man, and is a glorious one, in its
author, original, and usefulness; it is the workmanship of the Spirit,
and a curious piece it is; it is the image of Christ upon the soul, a
partaking of the divine nature; it is pure and spotless; it is clear of
all sin, there is no sin in it, nor any comes from it; it is the saints'
meetness for glory; it is the pledge, earnest, and beginning of it; it
is "all glorious", and so are the persons that are the subjects of it,
as born of God: there is nothing glorious in the old man, or corrupt
nature; but in the new man, or work of grace upon the soul, everything
is glorious, and it will issue in eternal glory and happiness: or all
glorified within (r); like any house or building, to which the church is
sometimes compared, particularly the tabernacle or temple, which were
glorious within side being greatly adorned, and having many glorious
things therein; as the church is with the graces of the spirit, and with
the word and ordinances, and the presence of God in them;

her clothing is of wrought gold; this is different from internal grace,
which is sometimes spoken of as a clothing, [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005); since that is designed in the
preceding clause; and yet this does not intend the outward conversation
garments of the saints, which, though ornamental, are not so glorious as
to be said to be of wrought gold; and yet not the robes of immortality
and glory are meant; but the robe of Christ's righteousness, which he
has wrought out for his church, the Father imputes unto her, and bestows
upon her, and faith receives at his hand, and puts it on as a clothing,
to appear in before God; and this may be said to be "of wrought gold";
because rich and valuable, splendid and glorious, substantial and
durable.

\(r\) "honorata", Junius & Tremellius; "glorificata", Gussetius, p. 362.

[Psalms 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 45:14</span></span>

She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needlework,.... Not in
her sins, and trader the sense and guilt of them; as souls are brought
to Christ, at first conversion, under the drawings of the Father's
grace; nor in the rags of her own righteousness; but in the robe of
righteousness, and garments of salvation, the change of raiment Christ
has put upon her, having before this caused her iniquities to pass from
her; or in the shining robes of immortality and glory: for this
introduction of the church to Christ, her King, Head, and Husband, will
be upon the first resurrection; when she being as a bride adorned and
prepared for her husband, will be brought unto him, and presented to him
by himself, a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing: and she will be introduced, either by the angels, who will be
employed in gathering the elect from the four winds; or by the ministers
of the Gospel, who, at the general harvest, in the end of the world will
bring their sheaves with them; those souls they have been the
instruments of converting, comforting, and ripening for glory; who will
be their joy and crown of rejoicing then; these will be brought in
several companies, which joining together, will make up the general
assembly and church of the firstborn, that will then be presented to
Christ: or by Jehovah the Father, who, as he brought Eve to Adam, when
he had formed her of his rib, and had prepared her as a helpmeet for
him; so when all the elect of God are formed by divine grace, and are
prepared as a bride for the bridegroom, he will then bring them unto
him, and they shall be with him where he is, and behold his glory; which
is what he prays his father for, [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024);

the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee;
such who are betrothed as chaste virgins to Christ, who strictly and
chastely adhere unto him, love him in the singleness of their hearts;
are incorrupt in faith and worship, and of pure and upright
conversations; see [Rev 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004); these
are the "companions" of the church, who are partakers of the same grace,
enjoy the same privileges, and share in the common salvation; and, as
they are partners together in sufferings, they will be in glory: these
"follow" the footsteps of the flock, walk after the church in the path
of doctrine and duty; are followers of her, as she is of the Lord, in
the word and ordinances, and in the exercise of faith and patience;
these, even everyone, shall be brought unto the King, not one shall be
lost, or left behind: whither they shall be brought, and the manner in
which, are expressed in [Psa 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#015).

[Psalms 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 45:15</span></span>

With, gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought,.... With joy
unspeakable, and full of glory in themselves, because of what they shall
be delivered from; from all outward troubles and afflictions; from all
inward distresses, darkness, doubts, and fears; from sin, Satan, and all
spiritual enemies; and because of what they shall enjoy, communion with
God, angels and saints, the vision of God in Christ, conformity to him,
perfect knowledge, complete holiness and happiness, and a glory both
upon their souls and bodies: they shall also be brought with the joy of
Christ's faithful minister, who will rejoice in that day that they have
not run nor laboured in vain; and with the joy of all the holy angels;
and with the joy of Christ the King himself, who always rejoiced in them
and over them; yea, with the rejoicing of Father, Son, and Spirit: the
Father will rejoice to see those brought in whom he has loved with an
everlasting love, has chosen in Christ, given to him, and whom he sent
his Son to redeem: the Son of God will rejoice to see those presented to
him whom he has loved and betrothed to himself; who are the purchase of
his blood, and the travail of his soul; who are his jewels, treasure and
portion: and the Holy Spirit will rejoice to see those brought to glory
whom he has been the convincer, comforter, and sealer of; whom he has
been at work upon, and has wrought them up for this selfsame thing:

they shall enter into the King's palace; into heaven, the palace of the
King Messiah, the King of kings and King of saints; where are mansions
preparing for them, suitable to their high birth and character, as the
daughters of a king; and where they shall enter, not merely to see it
and go out again, but to dwell in it with their Lord, Head, and Husband,
for evermore; and that as in their own palace, upon the foot of their
relation to Christ, interest in him, right and meetness by him.

[Psalms 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 45:16</span></span>

Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children,.... This is an address,
not to the church, the queen, the King's daughter, spoken to and of in
the preceding verses, but to the King Messiah himself, who was of the
Jewish fathers, according to the flesh, [Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004); and though he was rejected by
that people, yet he had children; not only the apostles, who are
sometimes so called, whom he set on twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel, in a doctrinal way, and sent into all the world to
preach his Gospel; and which being attended with his mighty power, made
them triumphant conquerors everywhere; but also a numerous progeny among
the Gentiles: all the elect of God are his children, and he stands in
the revelation of the everlasting Father to them, they being given unto
him as such; and he being concerned in their adoption, by which they
become children, and in their regeneration by which they appear to be
such. Here the children of God, scattered abroad in the Gentile world,
as distinct from the Jews, seem to be meant;

whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth; these children are
princes, being the sons of a King; they look like princes, and have the
spirit of such; they are treated as princes, fed, clothed, and attended
on as such; and are, as princes, heirs of a kingdom: but then, they are
not so originally, they are "made princes"; not by themselves, but by
Christ, and who even makes them kings and priests unto God and his
father: and that "in all the earth"; not with respect to earthly things:
they are not made the princes of this world; but while they are on earth
they are translated into the kingdom of Christ, and have a kingdom which
never can be moved; and besides, they shall reign with Christ on earth a
thousand years: moreover, this may have respect to the several parts of
the world where they shall be, even in all parts of the world,
especially in the latter day; see [Isa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005).

[Psalms 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 45:17</span></span>

I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations,.... These are
the words of the psalmist, spoken to the King Messiah, declaring what he
would do with respect to him; cause his name, that is, not any
particular name or title of his, but rather his Gospel, the good matter
he had endited concerning him; or he himself to be remembered, desired,
loved, thought of, called upon, and praised in all succeeding
generations; and which he did by penning of this psalm, which has been
the occasion of the remembrance of Christ's name in all ages, to the
present time; and of its being remembered by us now, and the same use it
will have in time to come; see [Pe2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#013);

therefore shall the people praise thee for ever and ever; because of the
excellencies of his person; and particularly because of his greatness
and glory as a King; as well as for all mercies, temporal and spiritual,
they have from him; and this is but just, meet, and lovely, and is and
will be their employment, as long as they live in this world, and to all
eternity. This must be understood not of all people, but of God's chosen
and covenant people; those that are given to Christ to be his people,
and whom he has redeemed and purified to himself, a peculiar people; and
particularly his people among the Gentiles: and so the Targum interprets
it of such that are proselytes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 46](psa046)

</div>
