<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa059)  [Next](psa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 60:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 60

To the chief Musician upon Shushaneduth, Michtam of David, to teach;
when he strove with Aramnaharaim, and with Aramzobah, when Joab
returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of Salt twelve thousand. The
words "shushaneduth" are thought, by Aben Ezra, to be the beginning of a
song, to the tune of which this psalm was set; though others, as he
observes, take them to be the name of a musical instrument, on which it
was sung. Some take "shushan" to be an instrument of six chords, an
hexachord; and "eduth", which signifies a "testimony", to be the title
of the psalm, it being a testimony, or lasting memorial, of the victory
obtained over the Syrians and Edomites; though rather they may be
considered as expressing the subject matter of the psalm; and so the
Targum interprets them,

"concerning the ancient testimony of the sons of Jacob and Laban;''

referring to [Gen 31:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#047); they may be
rendered, as they are by some, "concerning the lily of the testimony"
(a); and be applied to the Gospel, the testimony of our Lord Jesus, the
pure, lily white, and unblemished testimony it bears to him, his person,
office, and grace; and particularly to salvation as alone in him, and to
which witness is borne in this psalm, [Psa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011). This psalm is a "michtam", or
golden psalm of David, and its use is "to teach". It is of the
instructive kind, and teaches where help and salvation are to be
expected; see [Col 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016); it was
written when David "strove", or fought, with Aramnaharaim, the Syrians
of Mesopotamia, which lay between the two rivers, Tigris and Euphrates,
from whence is the name; hence the Septuagint render it Mesopotamia of
Syria; and the Targum is,

"he made war with Aram, which is by Euphrates;''

and at the same time David also fought with Aramzobah, or the Syrians of
Zobah, as they are called in [Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006); with Josephus (b), Zobah is the
same with Sophene; but wrongly, as is thought by learned men (c): for
though this is a name which some part of Syria goes by in Mela (d); and
Ptolemy (e) makes mention of a place of this name; yet that was beyond
Euphrates, and in Armenia; whereas this must be nearer the land of
Israel; for it is said (f) that Aramzobah is the country of Syria, which
David subdued, and joined to the land of Israel; concerning which the
Jews so often say, that in some things it was the same with it:
according to Hillerus (g), it is the same country which the Arabians
call Kinnosrina, the chief city of which is Haleb, or Aleppo; and R.
Benjamin Tudelensis (h) making mention of Haleb, says, this is
Aramzobah. Moreover, this psalm was written "when Joab returned, and
smote of Edom in the valley of salt twelve thousand"; the "valley of
salt" was near the Dead Sea, and upon the borders of Idumea; the battle
fought here by Joab was either the same with the former, or different
from it, at or about the same time; and accounts seemingly different
from this are given in [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013); in
the first of these the number is said to be eighteen thousand Syrians,
and the victory is ascribed to David; and in the latter the same number
as there, but said to be Edomites, as here, and the slaughter ascribed
to Abishai. The note of R. Abendana (i), for the reconciling of this, is
worth transcribing: Our Rabbins of blessed memory say there were two
battles; that Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, slew eighteen thousand, and
after that Joab came and smote of them twelve thousand; and this is what
is said; and "Joab returned", &c. the sense is, he returned after
Abishai: and in the book of Samuel the battle is ascribed to David,
because he was the root or chief (that is, under whom Joab and Abishai
fought); but R. David Kimchi writes, that there were between them all
eighteen thousand only; that Abishai began the battle, and smote of them
six thousand, and after that Joab returned, and smote of them twelve
thousand; but of a truth the wise R. Joel Ben Sueb gives the right sense
of this affair, which is this; when David was fighting with the Syrians
of Naharaim and Zobah, it was told him that Edom was come out to meet
him, and help the Syrians; and then he veiled himself in prayer, and
said this psalm; and Joab returned from the army, and went to meet the
Edomites, that they might not pass over to help the Syrians, and join
them, and he smote of them twelve thousand; and David was left fighting
with the Syrians of Naharaim and Zobah, and subdued them under him, and
he turned to help Joab; and Abishai, the son of Zeruiah was over the
army, and he smote of them eighteen thousand, and they were in all
thirty thousand, according to our Rabbins of blessed memory; and the
text in [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013); should be inverted
and explained thus;

"when he returned from smiting the Syrians, he got him in the valley of
salt a name; for his fame went abroad, because he smote there eighteen
thousand, and this was in Edom.''

The Targum very wrongly renders it,

"and there fell of the armies of David and Joab twelve thousand.''

The title of this psalm, in the Syriac version, is,

"which David gave out, saying, if I should come into the hands of Saul,
I shall perish; and he fled, and those that were with him: but to us it
declares the conversion of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the
Jews.''

The former part of which is quite foreign; but the latter seems to be
right; for reference is had to both in this psalm, and to Christ, the
banner displayed, or ensign lifted up, and to his dominion over Jews and
Gentiles in the latter day, and to that salvation which is alone in him.

\(a\) "Super rosa testimonii", Tigurine version; "super flore
testimonii", Musculus. (b) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 5. s. 1. and l. 8. c. 7. s.
6. (c) Vid. Hudson. Not in ibid. (d) De Orbis Situ, l. 1. c. 6. (e)
Geograph. l. 5. c. 13. (f) Gloss. in T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 25. 1. (g)
Onomast. Sacr. p. 586. (h) Itimerar. p. 59. (i) In Miclol Yophi in loc.

[Psalms 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 60:1</span></span>

O God, thou hast cast us off,.... What is said in this verse, and [Psa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002), are by some applied to times
past; to the distress of the people Israel by their neighbours in the
times of the judges; to their being smitten by the Philistines, in the
times of Eli and Samuel; and to the victory they obtained over them,
when Saul and his sons were slain; and to the civil wars between the
house of Saul and David; but rather the whole belongs to future times,
which David, by a prophetic spirit, was led to on the occasion of the
victory obtained, when before this the nation had been in bad
circumstances. This refers to the casting off of the Jews as a church
and nation, when they had rejected the Messiah and killed him,
persecuted his apostles, and despised his Gospel; of which see [Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015);

thou hast scattered us; as they were by the Romans among the various
nations of the world, and among whom they are dispersed to this day; or
"thou hast broken us" (k), as in [Psa
80:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012); not only the walls of their
city were broken by the battering rams of the Romans, but their
commonwealth, their civil state, were broke to pieces by them. Jarchi
applies this to the Romans; his note is this;

"when Edom fell by his hand (David's), he foresaw, by the Holy Ghost,
that the Romans would rule over Israel, and decree hard decrees
concerning them;''

thou hast been displeased; not only with their immorality and
profaneness, with their hypocrisy and insincerity, with their will
worship and superstition, and the observance of the traditions of their
elders; but also with their rejection of the Messiah, and contempt of
his Gospel and ordinances;

O turn thyself to us again; which prayer will be made by them, when they
shall become sensible of their sins, and of their state and condition,
and shall turn unto the Lord; and when he will turn himself to them, and
turn away iniquity from them, and all Israel shall be saved, [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025); or "thou wilt return unto us"
(l); who before were cast off, broken, and he was displeased with; or
others to us.

\(k\) "rupisti nos", Montanus, Michaelis; "disrupisti", Gejerus; so
Ainsworth. (l) "reverteris ad nos", Pagninus, Montanus; "reduces ad
nos", Gussetius, p. 836.

[Psalms 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 60:2</span></span>

Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it,.... As is
frequently done by an earthquake; which, whatever natural causes there
may be of it, is always to be ascribed to God. The ancient Heathens (m)
were of opinion that all earthquakes were of God. This respects not the
whole earth, but the land of Israel only; and so the Targum,

"thou hast moved the land of Israel, thou hast shaken and rent it;''

and it does not design a natural earthquake in it, but a figurative one;
a shaking and rending of their civil and church state; see [Heb
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026);

heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh; which will be done in the
latter day, when they shall return into their own land, and be restored
as at the beginning, [Isa 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030).

\(m\) A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 2. c. 28.

[Psalms 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 60:3</span></span>

Thou hast showed thy people hard things,.... As to have their city and
temple burial, multitudes of them slain, and the rest carried captive,
and put into the hands of cruel lords and hard masters, and made a
proverb, a taunt, and a curse, in all places; and all this done to a
people that were the Lord's by profession, who called themselves so,
though now a "loammi", [Hos 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009); and
these were hard things to flesh and blood, yet no other than what they
deserved;

thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment; or "of trembling"
(n), [Isa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017); that is, to endure
such troubles as made them tremble, and astonished and stupefied them;
took away their senses, and made them unfit for anything, being smitten
with madness, blindness, and astonishment of heart, as is threatened
them, [Deu 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028); see [Rom
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007).

\(n\) "tremoris", Musculus, Vatablus, Amama; "trepidationis", Michaelis;
"horroris", Gejerus.

[Psalms 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 60:4</span></span>

Thou hast given a banner,.... The word is, by Jarchi, taken to signify
"temptation" or "trial" (o); and he interprets it of many troubles which
they had, that they might be tried by them, whether they would stand in
the fear of God, and so considers these words as a continuation of the
account of the distresses of the people of Israel; but they are rather
to be considered as declaring a peculiar blessing and favour bestowed
upon some among them, who are here described, when the rest were
involved in the greatest calamities, signified by a "banner" or "ensign"
given them; by which is meant, not so much David literally, and the
victory he obtained over the Syrians and Edomites, of which the banner
displayed might be a token; but the Messiah, who is said to be given for
a banner, or set up as an ensign for the people, [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010); for the gathering of them to
him, to prepare them for war, and animate them to fight the good fight
of faith, and oppose every enemy; to direct where they should stand to
be on duty, where they should go, and whom they should follow; and is
expressive of the victory over sin, Satan, and the world, they have
through him: and this is given

to them that fear thee; who have the grace of fear put into their
hearts; who fear the Lord and his goodness, and serve him with reverence
and godly fear; who worship him both inwardly and outwardly, in spirit
and in truth, whether among Jews or Gentiles, though the former may be
chiefly intended; such as old Simeon, Anna the prophetess, and others,
to whom Christ was made known; and especially the apostles of Christ,
and those to whom their ministry became useful; whose business it was to
display this banner, set up this ensign, and hold out this flag; as it
follows:

that it may be displayed because of the truth; not because of the truth
of Abraham, as the Targum; nor because of the truth, sincerity, and
uprightness, of those that fear the Lord; but because of his own truth
and faithfulness in the performance of his promises made concerning the
displaying of this banner; or the sending of his son into the world, and
the preaching of his Gospel in it; see [Rom
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(o\) So Yalkut Simconi in loc. par. 2. fol. 103. 1.

[Psalms 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 60:5</span></span>

That thy beloved may be delivered,.... Some think that these words
express the effect or end of the banner being displayed; but because of
the word "Selah" at the end of [Psa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004), which makes so full a stop;
rather they are to be considered in construction with the following
clause. By the Lord's "beloved" ones are meant, not so much the people
of Israel, who were loved and chosen by the Lord above all people on the
face of the earth, as the elect of God, both among Jews and Gentiles,
who are the chosen of God, and precious, and are loved of him with a
free, sovereign, everlasting, and unchangeable love: these are the
beloved of Father, Son, and Spirit; who, falling into a state of
condemnation and death in Adam, and being under the power of sin, and
involved in the guilt and faith of it; and being fallen into the hands
of many enemies, sin, Satan, and the world; stood in need of deliverance
out of all this, which they could not work out of themselves, nor any
creature for them; wherefore, that they might be delivered, the
following request is made;

save with thy right hand; from sin, the cause of damnation; from the
law, which threatens with condemnation and death; from Satan, that would
devour and destroy; and from all their enemies; from wrath to come, from
hell and the second death; or from going down to the pit of corruption.
The persons for whom this petition is put up are not only David himself,
but all the beloved ones; and these God has appointed unto salvation;
Christ is the Saviour of them, and to them salvation is applied in due
time by the Spirit, and in a little while they will be in the full
possession of it: and this is wrought out by the "right hand" of the
Lord; either by his mighty power, the saving strength of his right hand,
who is mighty to save; or by his Son, the man of his right hand, made
strong for himself, who able to save to the uttermost; and by whom God
has determined to save, and does save all his people; or the words may
be rendered, "save thy right hand, thy Benjamins" (p) who are as near
and dear to thee as thy right hand, being his mystical self, to whom
salvation is brought by him, [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001);

and hear me; in so doing, he suggests he would hear and answer him his
prayers would be ended and accomplished; this being the sum of them, his
own salvation, and the salvation of the Lord's beloved ones. The
"Cetib", or writing of this clause, is, "hear us"; the "Keri", or
reading of it, "hear me".

\(p\) .

[Psalms 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 60:6</span></span>

God hath spoken in his holiness,.... Or "in his holy place" (q); in
heaven, the habitation of his holiness and of his glory; or "in the
house of the sanctuary", as the Targum: in the tabernacle, in the holy
place by Urim and Thummim; and in the most holy place by his sacred
oracle, from between the mercy seat: or "by his Holy Ones", as the
Arabic version; by his holy prophets, Samuel and Nathan, by whom he
spoke to David concerning the kingdom; and by his Holy Spirit dictating
this psalm, and the rest unto him; and by his Son, his Holy One, by whom
he has spoken in these last times unto his people, to which this psalm
has reference: or it may be understood of the perfection of his holiness
in which he has spoken, and by which he has swore; not only to David
literally, concerning the extent of his dominion, the perpetuity and
stability of it; but to David's son and antitype, the Messiah,
concerning his seed, possession, and inheritance, [Psa
89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019);

I will rejoice; at the holiness of the Lord, which is matter of joy to
the saints, especially as the is displayed and glorified in salvation by
Christ, [Psa 97:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#012); and at what he
said in his holiness to David, concerning his temporal kingdom, and the
duration of it; because he knew that what he said he would perform; and
at what was spoken to him by the Messiah, in council and covenant,
concerning his seeing his seed, and prolonging his days; which was the
joy set before him, which carried him through his sorrows and
sufferings, [Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002); wherefore he
believed his kingdom should be enlarged, both among Jews and Gentiles,
as follows;

I will divide Shechem; a city in Mount Ephraim, [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007); and so was in the hands of
Ishbosheth the son of Saul; as the valley of Succoth, Gilead, Ephraim,
and Manasseh, after mentioned, and all the tribes of Israel, were, but
Judah, [Sa2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004); but, because of God's
promise, David believed that they would be all in his possession;
signified by dividing, as a land is divided for an inheritance when
conquered, [Jos 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#007); or this is said
in allusion to the dividing of spoils in a conquered place; and so the
Targum,

"I will divide the prey with the children of Joseph, that dwell in
Shechem;''

and as Shechem was the same with Sychar, near to which our Lord met with
the Samaritan woman, and converted her, and many others of that place,
then might he be said to divide the spoils there, [Joh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005);

and mete out the valley of Succoth; with a measuring line, so taking
possession of it, [Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002); Succoth
was near to Shechem, [Gen 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017); and
was in the tribe of Gad, and in a valley, [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027); there was a Succoth in the
plain of Jordan, [Kg1 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#046); it
signifies booths, tents, or tabernacles, and may mystically signify the
churches of Christ, wherein he dwells and exercises his dominion.

\(q\) "in sanctuario suo", Tigurine version, Vatablus; "in sancto suo",
V. L. Musculus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 60:7</span></span>

Gilead is mine,.... This is particularly mentioned, because over this
Abner made Ishbosheth king, [Sa2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#009);
and is the place to which the Jews shall be brought in the latter day,
when converted, [Zac 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010); It was a
country that abounded with pastures fit for feeding cattle, [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001), and may point out those green
pastures where Christ makes his flocks to lie down and rest;

and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head: these
two were also under Saul's son when David first came to the throne, but
afterwards became his, as was promised him, and he believed, [Sa2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#009). And the concord and harmony of
the people of God among themselves, and under David their Prince, the
King Messiah, are signified and Ephraim being one in the hand of the by
the ceasing of the envy of the one, and of the vexation of the other,
[Eze 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#019); Ephraim was more numerous
and populous than Manasseh, and abounded with mighty men, which are the
strength of a prince, and therefore called here the strength of his
head;

Judah is my lawgiver; manifestly referring to [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010); which furnished out persons fit
to be counsellors in enacting laws, and proper to be employed in the
execution of them. The great Lawgiver is Christ himself, who came of
this tribe, [Isa 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022); All this is
expressive of dominion over the whole land of Judea, Ephraim, and
Manasseh, with the places mentioned with them; the house of Joseph
being, as Aben Ezra observes, in the north part of it, and Judah in the
south. Next mention is made of the subjection of the Gentiles, and
dominion over them.

[Psalms 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 60:8</span></span>

Moab is my washpot,.... To wash hands and feet in: and so the Syriac
version, "and Moab the washing of my feet"; a vessel for low and mean
service, and so denotes the servile subjection of the Moabites to David;
see [Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002); and as the words may be
rendered, "the pot of my washing" (r). Great numbers of the Moabites
might be at this time servants to the Israelites, and to David and his
court particularly; and might be employed, as the Gibeonites were, to be
drawers of water, to fill their pots, in which they washed their hands
and feet, and their bathing vessels, in which they bathed themselves:
Aben Ezra explains it,

"I wilt wash their land as a pot;''

and so may not only signify the very great subjection of the Gentiles,
even the chief among them, to Christ and his church, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023); but as Moab was begotten and
born in uncleanness, and his posterity an unclean generation, it may
design the washing, cleansing, sanctifying, and justifying of the
Gentiles in the name of Christ, and by his Spirit, [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011);

over Edom will I cast out my shoe; as a token of possessing their land,
[Rut 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007); so some; or of subduing
them; putting the feet on which the shoe is upon the necks of them, [Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024). So Kimchi interprets it,

"the treading of my foot;''

to which the Targum agrees, paraphrasing it thus;

"upon the joint of the neck of the mighty men of Edom I have cast my
shoe.''

It may allude to a custom (s) in confirming a bargain, or taking
possession, to pluck off the shoe in token of it, may be rendered "my
glove"; as it is by the Targum on [Rut
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007); for, as the shoe encloses and
binds the foot, so the glove the hand: and the allusion may be thought
to be to a custom used by kings, when they sat down before any strong
city to besiege it, to throw in a glove into the city; signifying they
would never depart from the city until they had took it. Hence the
custom, which still continues, of sending a glove to a person challenged
to fight. And indeed the custom of casting a shoe was used by the
emperor of the Abyssines, as a sign of dominion (t). Take the phrase in
every light, it signifies victory and power; that he should be in Edom
as at home, and there pluck off his shoe, and cast it upon him; either
to carry it after him, as some think, which was the work of a servant,
to which the Baptist alludes, [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011); or rather to clean it for him;
for as Moab was his washpot, to wash his hands and feet, in Edom was his
shoe cleaner, to wipe off and remove the dirt and dust that was upon
them (u); all which denotes great subjection: and this was fulfilled in
David, [Sa2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014); and may refer to the
spread of the Gospel in the Gentile world, and the power accompanying
that to the subduing of many sinners in it, carried thither by those
whose feet were shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace;

Philistia, triumph thou because of me: some take this to be an ironic
expression, like that in [Ecc 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009); so
R. Moses in Aben Ezra, and also Kimchi. Triumph now as thou usedst to
do, or if thou canst: but rather they are seriously spoken, seeing they
had reason to rejoice and be glad, because they had changed hands and
masters for the better, being subject to David, [Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001), with this compare [Psa
108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009), and may very well be applied to
the Gentiles, subdued and conquered by Christ, who triumph in him; and
because delivered out of the hands of sin, Satan, and the world, through
his victorious arms.

\(r\) "olla lotionis meae", Pagninus, Montanus, Michaelis, Gejerus; so
Tigurine version, Musculus, Vatablus. (s) Elias in Tishbi, fol. 267. (t)
R. Immanuel apud Castell. Lex. Polygott. col. 2342. (u) Vid. Bynaeum de
Calceis Heb. l. 2. c. 8. Gusset. Ebr. Comment p. 520.

[Psalms 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 60:9</span></span>

Who will bring me into the strong city?.... Which some understand of
Rabbah of the Ammonites, which Joab besieged, and sent to David to come
and take it in person, [Sa2 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026). The
Targum interprets it of Tyre, which was a strong fortified city, [Eze
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004). It rather seems to be the same
with Edom, or the metropolis of the Edomites; since it follows:

who will lead me into Edom? which was situated in the clefts of the
rock, and on the height of the hill, [Jer
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016); but is mystically to be
understood of the city of Rome, the great and mighty city, as it is
often called in the book of the Revelation, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008); whose destruction is certain,
being predicted; and after which there have been desires raised in the
hearts of God's people in all ages; and particularly just before the
time God will put it into the hearts of the kings of the earth to burn
it with fire; who are here represented by David, as desirous of entering
into it in triumph to destroy it, [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016).

[Psalms 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 60:10</span></span>

Wilt not thou, O God?.... This is an answer to the question, and is made
by putting another, which tacitly contains in it an affirmation that God
would do it. He has foretold the destruction of the Romish antichrist;
he has said it shall be: he is faithful to his purposes, predictions,
and promises; he is able to effect it; strong is the Lord that judgeth
Babylon, [Rev 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010); He will put it
into the hearts of the kings of the earth to hate her; he will encourage
them to reward her double; he will give her blood to drink, because she
is worthy; her destruction will be according to his righteous judgment,
and will be irretrievable; he will call upon all his people to rejoice
at it, whose shoutings on this occasion will be like those of persons
that enter into a conquered city in triumph;

which hadst cast us off; who seemed in former times to have cast off his
people, when they were killed all the day long; accounted as sheep for
the slaughter; were slain in great numbers in the Low Countries; burnt
here in England; massacred in France and Ireland: especially God seemed
to have cast off his people, and to have had no regard to his interest,
when antichrist so prevailed, that all the world wondered after the
beast;

and thou, O God, which didst not go forth with our armies: but suffered
the antichristian beast to make war with the saints, and to overcome and
kill them; and which was the case in many pitched battles with the
Waldenses and Albigenses before the Reformation, and with the
Protestants in Germany since. But this will not be always the case; he
whose name is the Word of God, the King of kings, and Lord of lords,
will fight with the antichristian powers, and overcome them, and make
his people more than conquerors over them; and his having formerly
seemed to have cast them off, and not going forth with their armies,
will serve as a foil to set off the glorious and complete victory that
will at last be obtained.

[Psalms 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 60:11</span></span>

Give us help from trouble,.... To have trouble is the common lot of all
men, but especially of the people of God. They have some troubles which
others have not, arising from indwelling sin, Satan's temptations, and
the hidings of God's face; and as for outward troubles, they have
generally the greatest share of them, which are certain to them by the
appointment of God, and the legacy of Christ; though they are needful
and for their good, and lie in their way to heaven. But perhaps here is
particularly meant the time of trouble, which will be a little before
the destruction of antichrist; which will be great, and none like it;
will be the time of Jacob's trouble, though he shall be saved out of it,
[Jer 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007). This will be the time of
the slaying of the witnesses, the hour of temptation, that will try the
inhabitants of the Christian world; and when the saints, as they do in
all their times of trouble, will seek to the Lord for help, in whom it
is, and who has promised it, and gives it seasonably, and which is owing
wholly to his own grace and goodness; and therefore it is asked that he
would "give" it;

for vain is the help of man: or "the salvation of man" (w); man himself
is a vain thing; vanity itself, yea, lighter than vanity; even man at
his best state, and the greatest among men; and therefore it is a vain
thing to expect help and salvation from men, for indeed there is none in
them; only in the Lord God is the salvation of his people, both temporal
and spiritual.

\(w\) "salus hominis", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Psalms 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 60:12</span></span>

Through God we shall do valiantly,.... Or, "through the Word of the
Lord", as the Targum; Christ, whose name is the Word of God, appearing
at the head of his armies, in a vesture dipped in blood, and with a
sharp sword proceeding out of his mouth, will inspire his people to
fight valiantly under him; and who, in his name and strength, will get
the victory over all their enemies, the beast, false prophets, and kings
of the earth, and all under them; see [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011);

for he it is that shall tread down our enemies; as mire in the street,
or as grapes in a winepress; even kings, captains, mighty men, and all
the antichristian nations and states; the beast, false prophet, and
Satan himself, [Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015); and so
there will be an end of all the enemies of Christ and his people; after
which they will spend an endless eternity together, in joy, peace, and
pleasure. The victory is wholly ascribed to God the Word; it is not they
that shall do valiantly, that shall tread down their enemies; but he by
whom they shall do valiantly shall do it; even the mighty "He", to whom
was promised, in Eden's garden, the bruising the head of the serpent,
and all enemies, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); and who
has the same name here as there.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 61](psa061)

</div>
