<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa051)  [Next](psa053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 52:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 52

To the chief Musician, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite
came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of
Ahimelech. Of the title "Maschil", See Gill on [Psa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), title. The occasion of this
psalm is here related, the history of which is in [Sa1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007). The sum of it is this; David
having fled from Saul, came to Ahimelech the priest at Nob, and desired
bread and a sword of him, which were given him, Doeg the Edomite being
present at the same time. Sulpicius Severus (s) calls him a Syrian,
following the Greek version of [Sa1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007); and so does Josephus (t),
through a mistake of the letter for an Aramite instead of an Edomite;
See Gill on [Sa1 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007) and See Gill on
[Sa1 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009); this man observed what was
done for David by the priest; and when Saul complained to his captains
that they all conspired against him, and no man was sorry for him, or
showed him the intrigue between David and his son; Doeg stood up and
related what, and more than what he had heard and seen pass between
David and Ahimelech; upon which Saul sent for the priest, and all his
father's house with him, and charged him with treasonable practices; and
though he solemnly protested his innocency, Saul would not believe him,
but ordered his footmen to fall upon him, and upon all the priests with
him; but they refusing, he commanded Doeg to do it, who accordingly did,
and slew eighty five priests, and destroyed all in the city of Nob, men,
women, children, and sucklings, oxen, asses, and sheep; only Abiathar,
the son of Ahimelech, escaped, who fled to David, and reported the whole
affair; upon which he penned this psalm: in which he has respect not
only to the then present case, but to future times, Doeg being a type of
antichrist, the man of sin; in his name, which signifies "anxious
\[and\] solicitous" (u), as he was to gain the king's favour, and obtain
wealth and honour; so is antichrist to grasp all power, civil and
ecclesiastical, and to get worldly honour and riches: in the country he
was of, being an Edomite; and it is easy to observe, that Edom is the
name which the Jews commonly give to the Roman empire, in which
antichrist has his seat and power: in his religion, being a proselyte of
the Jews, and was at an act of devotion, detained before the Lord, when
he saw and heard what passed between David and Ahimelech; so antichrist
appeared with the mask of religion, rose up out of the church, and sat
in the temple of God, showing himself as though he was God: in his
office, the chiefest of the herdmen, or mightiest among the shepherds of
Saul; so antichrist calls himself "princeps pastorum", that is, "the
chief of pastors"; assuming to himself the title which belongs to
Christ, the chief Shepherd and Bishop of souls: and, lastly, in his
cruelty in slaying the priests of the Lord. Antichrist is notorious for
shedding and drinking the blood of the saints, the faithful confessors
and witnesses of Jesus Christ. In this psalm David upbraids him with his
glorying in his wickedness, and checks it by observing that the grace
and goodness of God to his people ever endures, [Psa
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004); charges him with devising
mischief, and loving it, [Psa 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002);
and foretells his everlasting ruin and destruction, [Psa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005); which will be seen by the
righteous with pleasure, who will have just reason to insult over him,
[Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006); and the psalm is concluded
with an account of the happy condition and comfortable frame of soul the
psalmist was in, in a view of all his troubles and enemies; he was
flourishing in the church of God, trusted in the mercy of God for ever,
and determined always to praise him and wait upon him, which is good for
the saints to do, [Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008).

\(s\) Sacr. Hist. l. 1. p. 43. (t) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 12. s. 1. 4. (u) A
rad. "solicitus, anxius fuit", Buxtorf.

[Psalms 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 52:1</span></span>

Why boastest thou thyself in mischief?.... Or "in evil" (w); in that
which is sinful; to glory in riches, wisdom, and strength, which are not
in themselves evil, is wrong; and to rejoice in such boastings, all such
rejoicing is evil; to be a doer of mischief, or sin, is bad; to make a
sport of it, worse; but to glory in it, and boast of it when done, is
worse still: to be boasters of evil things, is the character of
antichrist and his followers, [Ti2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002); who not only boast of their
merit, their good works, and works of supererogation, and of their
riches, and honour, and grandeur, saying, "I sit as a queen", [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007); but of their wickedness in
shedding the blood of the saints, thinking thereby they do God good
service, and merit heaven, and eternal happiness; as Doeg boasted of his
slaughter of the priests, and of his gaining the king's favour by it;

O mighty man! referring either to his office, being the chief of Saul's
herdmen, and set over his servants, [Sa1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007); or ironically, to the mighty
deed he had done, in slaying the unarmed priests, and putting to death
the very sucklings at the breast, and even the innocent sheep, oxen, and
asses; or to his great wickedness and power to commit it; though man has
no power and free will to that which is good, yet he has to that which
is evil; so the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and the eastern versions
render it, "O thou! mighty in wickedness"; and to the same purpose the
Targum paraphrases it, "mighty to shed innocent blood"; and the note of
Aben Ezra is, "mighty to do evil". A learned writer (x) thinks this
relates to Saul, and describes him as a man of power and dignity. The
character well agrees with the little horn and Romish beast, [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020);

the goodness of God endureth continually: that is, the love, grace, and
mercy of God; this is observed as what is the matter of the saints'
boasting, in opposition to the wicked boasting of Doeg; they glory in
the love of God, and in that they know him who exerciseth
lovingkindness, which is the source of all the blessings of grace and
goodness; and in Christ, through whom all are communicated to them; and
in him, as made every blessing to them, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption: they ascribe the whole of their
salvation, and all they have, to the grace of God, and glory in nothing
as of themselves, and as though not received of the Lord. Moreover, the
psalmist may take notice of this, as what was his support under all the
persecutions he endured from men; that he had an interest in the grace
and goodness of God, which is immutable and everlasting, invariably the
same in all states and conditions; and that he was encompassed about
with the favour of God as with a shield; and that it was not in the
power of his most implacable enemies to separate him from the love of
God; and therefore it was egregious folly in Doeg to boast himself in
mischief; for, be he as mighty as he might, he could not prevent his
sharing in the divine goodness, which always continues.

\(w\) "in malo", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Gejerus. (x) Delaney's
Life of King David, vol. 1. p. 119.

[Psalms 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 52:2</span></span>

Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs,.... Abundance of mischiefs, in a variety
of ways, against many persons, even all good men. What properly belongs
to the heart is here ascribed to the tongue; because, as Aben Ezra
observes, it is the interpreter and discoverer of the thoughts of the
heart: out of the abundance of that the tongue speaks and declares the
mischief it has devised. Doeg intended mischief to David, when he spoke
to Saul, [Sa1 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009); so antichrist
devises mischiefs against the saints of the most High, to wear them out,
and thinks to change times and laws, [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025);

like a sharp razor, working deceitfully; that is, his tongue was like a
razor; the razor is but a small instrument, and the tongue is but a
little member: the razor is a sharp and cutting one, and so is the
tongue; and therefore compared to a sharp sword, [Psa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004); see [Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018); the razor takes off the beard
cleanly and wholly; Doeg's tongue was the cause of the utter ruin of
Ahimelech's family and the city of Nob; and as a razor may be said to
"work deceitfully", when it turns aside in the hand of him that useth
it, and with the hair takes off more than it should, even skin and
flesh, or cuts the man's throat; so in a deceitful and insidious manner
did Doeg work the destruction of Ahimelech and the priests of the Lord.

[Psalms 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 52:3</span></span>

Thou lovest evil more than good,.... Indeed not good at all; such
comparatives being strong negatives; see [Psa
118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008); a wicked man loves evil, and
nothing else; his carnal mind being enmity to all that is good

and lying rather than to speak righteousness; as appears by his
affirming that Ahimelech inquired of the Lord for David, when he did
not, [Sa1 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#010); and by suffering some
things to pass for truths which were falsehoods, when it lay in his
power to have disproved them: and such a lover of lies is antichrist;
see [Ti1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). The Targum renders the word
"Selah" here "for ever", as in [Psa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005).

[Psalms 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 52:4</span></span>

Thou lovest all devouring words,.... Or "words of swallowing up" (y);
such as lies, calumnies, and detractions are, which devour the
characters and reputations of men, and are the cause sometimes of their
utter ruin and destruction; of the devouring and blasphemous words of
antichrist see [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005);

O thou deceitful tongue; See Gill on [Psa
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002).

\(y\) "verba absorptionis", Vatablus, Gejerus, Schmidt.

[Psalms 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 52:5</span></span>

God shall likewise destroy thee for ever,.... As a just retaliation for
the mischief done to others; or, "therefore God shall destroy" (z), &c.
even body and soul in hell, with an everlasting destruction, which will
be the case of every wicked man, and particularly of the antichristian
party, [Rev 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010); the word is used of
breaking down the house in which the leprosy was, [Lev
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#045); and denotes the utter
extinction of Doeg's family, and the irrecoverable ruin of antichrist,
[Rev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021);

he shall take thee away; as fire from the hearth, [Isa
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#014); or as burning coals from the
altar: a word from the root here used signifies a censer: and the
meaning is, that as his tongue was a fire, and set on fire of hell, and
he was as a burning coal, he was fit for nothing but to be cast into
everlasting burnings;

and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place; "tent", or "tabernacle" (a);
referring to the tents of shepherds, he being the chief of Saul's
shepherds, or to some stately palace he had built for himself to dwell
in, upon his advancement at court; or rather to the tabernacle of the
Lord, where he had been an hypocritical worshipper; but now should be
cut off from the church of God, as a rotten member, and cast out of the
tabernacle of Jacob, [Mal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012); while
David flourished as an olive tree in the house of the Lord, [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008);

and root thee out of the land of the living. In retaliation for his
rooting out Ahimelech's family, and the inhabitants of Nob; so in like
manner he and his should be destroyed root and branch, and not see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, nor enjoy eternal life
in the world to come.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). The Targum renders the word
"Selah" here "for ever", as in [Psa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003).

\(z\) , Sept. "propterea", V. L. "idcirco etiam", Piscator; "ideo
etiam", Michaelis. (a) "de tabernaculo", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus,
Musculus; "e tentorio", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Psalms 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 52:6</span></span>

The righteous also shall see,.... The Targum adds, "the punishment of
the wicked"; particularly what is before predicted of Doeg. The
judgments of God upon the ungodly, as they are certain, so they will be
visible, either in this world, or in that to come, [Rev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004);

and fear; the Targum adds, "from before the Lord"; not with a slavish
fear, with a dread of the same punishment, from which they are free,
through the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, by which they are
denominated righteous ones; though the judgments of God on others strike
them with solemn awe and reverence, [Psa
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120), but with a filial godly fear;
with a fear of God for his goodness to them, in delivering them out of
the hands of wicked men, which engages them more and more to fear the
Lord, and to serve and worship him; see [Rev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004);

and shall laugh at him; at Doeg; and so at any other wicked man, when
they see the vengeance of God upon him, [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010); not that they rejoice at that,
barely considered in itself, or as it is an evil and mischief to wicked
men; for that does not become them, [Pro
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#017); but as it is expressive of the
care of God over them, and love to them, in avenging their enemies; and
more especially as the glory of divine justice is displayed therein; see
[Rev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020); for all this will be
eminently fulfilled in the destruction of antichrist.

[Psalms 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 52:7</span></span>

Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength,.... The Targum
renders it, "that made not the Word of the Lord his strength". These are
the words the righteous would say, when they should see the destruction
of Doeg: see the man, the mighty man, and his end; what all his ill
gotten honour and riches are come to; and what his wickedness, deceit,
and cruelty, have brought upon him. The righteous make the Lord their
strength, put their trust in him, in whom is everlasting strength; do
all they do in his strength; fly to him as their "strong hold", as the
word (b) may be rendered; thither they run, and are safe: but the rich
man's wealth is his strong city, [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010); there he thinks himself safe,
and places his confidence in it, as follows:

but trusted in the abundance of his riches; See Gill on [Psa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006); so the antichristian whore is
represented as boasting of her riches and honour, and trusting in them,
that they would always continue, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007); like the fool in [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019);

and strengthened himself in his wickedness; encouraged and hardened
himself in sin, gave up himself to it; and, by art obstinate continuance
in it, strengthened the vicious habits contracted; stretched out his
hand against God, and strengthened himself against the Almighty; went on
in a daring manner, promising himself impunity; and as if his wickedness
was his strength, his safeguard and protection: or in his mammon, his
wealth and substance; as the Targum interprets it; and so R. Saadiah
Gaon (c), and with which the Syriac version agrees; and then the sense
is the same with the other clause. But, alas! what are all such forces
of strength, when wrath comes forth from the Lord of hosts? [Job
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018).

\(b\) "arcem suam", Cocceius; "presidium, munimemtum", Michaelis. (c)
Apud Kimchi in loc.

[Psalms 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 52:8</span></span>

But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God,.... Or rather it
should be supplied, "I shall be" (d); since David was at this time an
exile from the house of God: and this expresses his faith and
confidence, that, notwithstanding his present troubles, he should be
restored again, and be in a very flourishing condition, in the church of
God; which is here meant by "the house of God": it being of his
building, and where he dwells, and where to have a place is the great
privilege of the saints; they are planted there by the Lord himself, and
shall never be rooted up; they are fixed there, and shall never go out;
which was David's confidence, [Psa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006); and where he believed he should
be as "a green olive tree"; which is a very choice and fruitful tree,
has fatness in it, produces an excellent oil; is beautiful to look at;
delights in hot climates and sunny places; is found on mountains, we
read of the mount of Olives; is ever green and durable, and its leaves
and branches are symbols of peace: all which is applicable to truly
righteous persons and believers in Christ; who are the excellent of the
earth, are filled with the fruits of righteousness; are fat and
flourishing; have the oil of grace, the anointing which teacheth all
things; are a perfection of beauty, made perfectly comely through
Christ's comeliness; thrive under him, the sun of righteousness; grow in
the mountain of the Lord's house, the church: their grace is
incorruptible, their leaf withers not; they are rooted in Christ, and
ever continue; they are the sons of peace, and their last end will be
eternal peace. Now as such David was assured he should be, when his
enemy would be rooted up out of the land of the living, and cast like a
dry and worthless branch into everlasting burnings; the ground of which
confidence follows:

I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever; the mercy of God is not
only an encouragement to trust, but the object of it; not the absolute
mercy of God, but the grace and goodness of God in Christ Jesus, which
endures continually, [Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001); and so
does hope in it, which never makes ashamed, but abides to the end. The
psalmist seems to have respect to the mercy promised him, that he should
sit upon the throne. This he believed, and therefore was assured he
should be in the flourishing circumstances in the house of God before
mentioned.

\(d\) "Ero", Piscator, Cocceius, Gejerus.

[Psalms 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 52:9</span></span>

I will praise thee for ever,.... Both in this world, as long as he
lived, and had a being in it; and in the world to come, to all eternity.
This is a resolution respecting what he would do, when he should be in
the happy condition he was confident of;

because thou hast done it; the Targum interprets it, "the revenge of my
judgment"; meaning the vengeance of God on Doeg; and to the same sense
Aben Ezra and Kimchi: though it may refer to the comfortable and happy
condition he should be in, [Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008);
and which he wholly ascribes to the grace and goodness of God, and not
to any merits of his own, and therefore determines to praise him for it;

and I will wait on thy name; on the Lord himself, in his house and
ordinances, for his presence and fresh supplies of grace and strength,
when he should be restored. Or the sense is, that in the mean while he
would wait patiently on the Lord, until he had accomplished what he had
promised, and David believed;

for it is good before thy saints; the sense is, either that it is good
to wait upon the Lord and for him; which appears to be so to all the
saints, by the comfortable experience they have had of it, [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031); or the name of the Lord is good
unto them, pleasant, delightful, and comfortable, as proclaimed, [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006); see [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003); and also [Rev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 53](psa053)

</div>
