<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa014)  [Next](psa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 15:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 15

A Psalm of David. As in the preceding psalm, according to Theodoret, the
salvation of the inhabitants of Jerusalem is foretold, and the liberty
of the captives; so in this advice is given to them, and the life they
ought to live proposed, who should share in such benefits.

[Psalms 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 15:1</span></span>

Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle?.... This question, with the
following, is put by the psalmist in a view of the sad corruption and
degeneracy of mankind described in the preceding psalm, which renders
the sons of men unfit for the presence of God, and communion with him;
and it is put to the Lord himself, the founder of Zion, who has set his
King over this holy hill of his; who has enacted laws for the good of
it, and brings his people thither, making them meet for it, and so is
most proper to give the qualifications of such as are admitted here; for
by the tabernacle is meant not the human nature of Christ, as in [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002); as some interpret it, and apply
all the characters in the following verses to Christ; nor heaven itself,
of which the holy place made with hands in the tabernacle and temple
were a figure, [Heb 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024); for to
"sojourn" (d) or "lodge", as in an inn, as the word rendered abide
signifies, will not suit with that state and place which is fixed and
immovable; but the church of God on earth, called a "tabernacle", in
allusion to the tabernacle of Moses, where God granted his presence,
sacrifices were offered up with acceptance, and the holy vessels were
put; and which was mean without, but rich and glorious within: so God
affords his gracious presence in his church, accepts the spiritual
sacrifices of prayer and praise offered to him there; and here are the
vessels of mercy placed, which are sanctified and meet for the master's
use; and though it is mean and despicable in its outward appearance, in
the eyes of men, it is all glorious within; see [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006); and this is the tabernacle of
God, being of his building and preserving, and the place of his
residence;

who shall dwell in thy holy hill? the same is here intended as in the
preceding clause; the allusion is to Mount Zion, whither the ark of the
Lord was brought in David's time, and on one part of which the temple
was afterwards built: and the church may be compared to this hill, for
its eminence and visibility in the world; for the holiness which God has
put upon it, and for the immovableness of it; for though like, a
tabernacle it may be carried from place to place, yet it is like an hill
that can never be removed out of the world; it is built on a sure
foundation, the Rock of ages. Now the purport of these questions is, who
is a proper person to be an inhabitant of Zion? or to be a member of the
church of God? the answer is in the following verses.

\(d\) "peregrinabitur", Pagninus, Montanus; "diversabitur", Muis; so
Ainsworth; "vel hospitabitur", Cocceius.

[Psalms 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 15:2</span></span>

He that walketh uprightly,.... Or "perfectly" (e); see [Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001); not so as to be without sin
entirely, but as not to be chargeable with any notorious crime, and
living in it; moreover, perfection and uprightness often signify
sincerity, and the phrase here may design an Israelite indeed, in whom
is no guile; whose faith is unfeigned, whose love is without
dissimulation, whose hope is without hypocrisy, and his whole conduct
without fraud and deceit; likewise such an one may be said to walk
uprightly who walks according to the truth of the Gospel, and by faith
on Christ and in Christ, as he has received him; and such an one is fit
to be a member of a Gospel church;

and worketh righteousness; not in order to his justification before God;
for not such an one, but he that trusts in the Lord for righteousness,
shall inherit his holy mountain, [Isa
57:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#012); but he that works the work of
faith, and believes in the righteousness of Christ; who looks to it and
receives it; that lays hold on it and pleads it as his justifying
righteousness; he that does righteousness in this sense, is righteous as
Christ is righteous, [Jo1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007); and
such an one is a proper person to dwell in his house; and who also by
faith does works of righteousness, and whose life is a series and course
of righteousness, as a fruit of his faith, and in consequence of his
having laid hold on the righteousness of Christ;

and speaketh the truth in his heart; receives Christ who is the truth,
and the Gospel the word of truth into his heart, and makes an hearty
profession of the same before men; and both speaks according to his
light in the Scriptures of truth, whenever he speaks of divine things;
and in common conversation speaks truth from his heart to his neighbour,
and does not speak with a double heart, or say one thing with his mouth,
and intend another in his heart; see [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002); or endeavour to deceive persons,
and impose a falsehood on them, or tell them lies; for as such a person
is not fit to dwell in a private house, or to be in a civil society,
much less is he a proper person to be in the house of God.

\(e\) "perfectus", Montanus, Gejerus,

[Psalms 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 15:3</span></span>

He that backbiteth not with his tongue,.... Is not a slanderer, a
defamer, a tale bearer; a backbiter is one who privately, secretly,
behind a man's back speaks evil of him, devours and destroys his credit
and reputation: the word here used comes from which signifies the
"foot", and denotes such a person who goes about from house to house,
speaking things he should not, [Ti1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013); and a word from this root
signifies spies; and the phrase here may point at such persons who creep
into houses, pry into the secrets of families, and divulge them, and
oftentimes represent them in a false light. Such are ranked amongst the
worst of men, and are very unfit to be in the society of the saints, or
in a church of Christ; see [Rom 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030),
[Co2 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#020);

nor doeth evil to his neighbour: to any man whatever, good or bad,
friend or foe, whether in a natural, civil, or spiritual relation,
either by words or deeds, to his person, property, or good name;

nor taketh up, a reproach against his neighbour; does not raise any
scandalous report on him himself, nor will he bear to hear one from
another, much less will he spread one; nor will he suffer one to lie
upon his neighbour, but will do all he can to vindicate him, and clear
his character.

[Psalms 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 15:4</span></span>

In whose eyes a vile person is contemned,.... A "vile" man is a very
wicked, profligate, and abandoned creature, one that is to every good
work reprobate; and such sometimes are in high places, [Psa
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008); and are greatly caressed and
esteemed by the men of the world; but then, as they are an abomination
to God, they should be despised by his people, let them be what they
will as to their riches, honours, and wisdom among men; as Haman was by
Mordecai, [Est 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002); and Ahab by
Elisha, [Kg2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014); and such who keep
company with, and express a delight and pleasure in such sort of
persons, ought by no means to have a place in the house of God. Some
understand this of a good man being "despised in his own eyes", as it
may be rendered (f); on account of his vileness, and the imperfection of
his obedience, and as expressive of his great humility, esteeming others
better than himself; and who renounces himself, and is rejected by
himself, having a very mean opinion of himself; which is the sense of
the Targum, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi; and which is no bad sense, though the
former is countenanced by what follows;

but he honoureth them that fear the Lord; who have the covenant grace of
fear wrought in their hearts, and serve the Lord with reverence and
godly fear; that is, who are truly religious and godly persons; these
such who are fit members of the church of Christ love heartily, esteem
of highly, and honour them by thinking and speaking well of them, and
behaving with great respect and decency to them; see [Rom
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010);

he that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not; having taken a
solemn oath, so sacred is it with him, and such a regard has he to the
name of God, by whom he swears, that though it is to his civil loss and
detriment, yet he will not break it and depart from it, but punctually
observe it: some render it, "he that swears to his neighbour, and
changeth not" (g); he that is just to his word, faithful to his
promises, that exactly fulfils all the obligations he lays himself under
unto others; he that is honest and upright in all his dealings. The
Jewish writers interpret this clause of a man's vowing and swearing to
afflict himself by fasting, which, though it is to the emaciating of his
body, yet he strictly observes his vow or oath; but this is foreign from
the scope of the place: it might be rendered, "he that swears to do
evil, and does not recompense or perform" (h), it being better to break
through such an oath than to keep it; see [Lev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004).

\(f\) "qui despicit se in oculis suis", so some in Vatablus; "ille est
despectus in propriis oculis, reprobatus", Gussetius, p. 453. (g) ,
Sept. "proximo suo", V. L. Sic. Syr. Ar. Aethiop. (h) So Ainsworth.

[Psalms 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 15:5</span></span>

He that putteth not out his money to usury,.... To the poor, in an
extravagant and exorbitant way, by which he bites, devours, and destroys
his little substance, and sadly afflicts and distresses him; see [Exo
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025); otherwise, to lend money on
moderate interest, and according to the laws, customs, and usages of
nations, and to take interest for it, is no more unlawful than to take
interest for houses and land; yea, it is according to the law of common
justice and equity, that if one man lends money to another to trade
with, and gain by, that he should have a proportionate share in the gain
of such a trade; but the design of this passage, and the law on which it
is founded, is, to forbid all exactions and oppressions of the poor, and
all avaricious practices, and to encourage liberality and beneficence;
and such who are covetous, and bite and oppress the poor, are not fit
for church communion; see [Co1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011);

nor taketh reward against the innocent; either to swear falsely against
him, or to pass a wrong sentence on him; see [Sa1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003);

he that doeth these things shall never be moved; from the tabernacle of
God, and his holy hill; he is fit to be a member of the church of God,
and an inhabitant of Zion; and he shall dwell and abide there, he shall
be a pillar which shall never go out, [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012); he shall finally persevere,
through the grace of God; he shall hold on and out unto the end: and
though he may fall through infirmity and temptation into sin, and that
many times, yet he shall not finally and totally fall, [Pe2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010); but shall be as Mount Zion which
can never be removed, [Psa 125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001); The
words should be rendered, since the accent "athnach" is on "these
things", thus; "he that doeth these things", not only what is mentioned
in this verse, but in the foregoing, "he", I say, "shall never be
moved".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 16](psa016)

</div>
