<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa029)  [Next](psa031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 30

A Psalm \[and\] Song \[at\] the dedication of the house of David. This
is the first time that a psalm is called a song; some psalms are called
by one name, some by another, and some by both, as here; and some are
called hymns: to which distinction of them the apostle refers in [Eph
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019). A psalm was sung upon musical
instruments, a song with the voice; it may be this psalm was sung both
ways: the occasion of it was the dedication of David's house: the Targum
interprets it of the house of the sanctuary, the temple; and so most of
the Jewish commentators (i); which might be called his house, because it
was his intention to build it; his heart was set upon it, he provided
materials for it, and gave his son Solomon the form of it, and a charge
to build it; and, as is thought, composed this psalm to be sung, and
which was sung by the Levites at the dedication of it: others, as Aben
Ezra, are of opinion it was his own dwelling house, made of cedar, which
he dedicated according to the law of Moses, with sacrifices and
offerings, prayer and thanksgiving, [Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011); so Apollinarius calls it a new
house David built; but since there is nothing in the whole psalm that
agrees with the dedication, either of the temple, or of David's own
private house, it seems better, with other interpreters, to understand
it of the purging of David's house from the wickedness and incest of his
son Absalom, upon his return to it, when the rebellion raised by him was
extinguished; which might be reckoned a new dedication of it; see [Sa2
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#003); and to a deliverance from such
troubles this psalm well agrees. Theodoret interprets it of the
restoration of the human nature by Christ, through his resurrection from
the dead.

\(i\) Jarchi, Kimchi, & Abdendana.

[Psalms 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 30:1</span></span>

I will extol thee, O Lord,.... Or "lift thee up on high" (k). The Lord
is high in his name, he is the most High; and in his nature, there is
none besides him, nor like unto him; and in place, he dwells in the high
and holy place; he is above all, angels and men; he is above all gods;
he is the King of kings, and Lord of lords; he cannot be higher than he
is: to extol him, therefore, is to declare him to be what he is; to
exalt him in high praises of him, which the psalmist determined to do,
for the following reasons;

for thou hast lifted me up; or "drawn me up", or "out" (l); from the pit
of nature; the low estate of unregeneracy; the pit wherein is no water:
the horrible pit, the mire and clay of sin and misery, in which all men,
while unconverted, are; and out of which they cannot lift themselves,
being without strength, yea, dead in sin: this is God's work; he takes
out of this pit, he draws out of it by his efficacious grace; he raises
up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill;
and this is an instance of his grace and mercy, and requires a new song
of praise: or this may regard some great fall by sin, from which he was
restored, through the grace and power of God; or deliverance from great
troubles, compared to waters, out of which he was drawn, [Psa
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016); and was lifted up above his
enemies; and agrees very well with his being brought to his palace and
throne again, upon the defeat of Absalom;

and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me; as Satan does over
unregenerate sinners, when he possesses their hearts, and keeps the
house and goods in peace; and as the men of the world do over fallen
saints, when forsaken by the Lord, and afflicted by him, and are under
the frowns of his providence; but the conspirators against David were
not suffered to succeed and rejoice over him, which they otherwise would
have done; and for this he praises the Lord.

\(k\) "superexaltabo te", Cocceius; "elevabo te", Michaelis. (l) "me
sursum extraxisti", Cocceius; so Michaelis; "thou hast drawn me up",
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 30:2</span></span>

O Lord my God, I cried unto thee,.... In the time of his distress and
trouble; and whither should he go but unto his covenant God and Father?

and thou hast healed me: either of some bodily disease that attended
him; for the Lord is the physician of the body, as well as of the soul;
and that either immediately, or by giving a blessing to means used; and
the glory of such a mercy should be given to him: or else of soul
diseases, which are natural and hereditary, epidemical, nauseous,
mortal, and incurable, but by the grace of God and blood of Christ; and
the healing: of them either respects the pardon of them at first
conversion; for healing diseases, and forgiving iniquities, signify one
and the same thing; or else fresh discoveries and applications of
pardoning grace, after falls into sin, which are an healing
backslidings, and restoring comforts; and this is God's work; none can
heal but himself, and he does it effectually, universally, and freely,
and which calls for thankfulness, [Psa
103:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001); or this may be understood in a
civil sense, of restoring him to his house, his throne and kingdom, and
the peace of it.

[Psalms 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 30:3</span></span>

O Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave,.... When his life
being in danger, was near unto it, [Job
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#022); otherwise the soul dies not,
nor does it lie and sleep in the grave; or "thou hast brought up my soul
from hell" (m); that is, delivered him from those horrors of conscience
and terrors of mind, by reason of sin, which were as hell itself unto
him; see [Psa 116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003);

thou hast kept me alive: preserved his corporeal life when in danger,
and maintained his spiritual life; and quickened him by his word, under
all his afflictions, and kept him from utter and black despair;

that I should not go down to the pit; either of the grave or hell. There
is in this clause a "Keri" and a "Cetib"; a marginal reading, and a
textual writing: according to the latter it is, "from them that go down
to the pit"; which some versions (n) follow; that is, thou hast
preserved me from going along with them, and being where and as they
are: our version follows the former; the sense is the same.

\(m\) "ab inferno", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus, Michaelis; so
Ainsworth. (n) So Sept. V. L. Pagninus, Musculus, Gejerus, Michaelis,
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 30:4</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord, O ye saints of his,.... Such to whom he has been
gracious and merciful, and has blessed with pardoning grace, and
justifying righteousness, adoption, and a right to eternal life; and who
are holy godly persons; in whose hearts principles of grace and holiness
are formed; and who are kind and bountiful to others: all which the word
(o) here used signifies: and these are the Lord's; they are set apart
for him, and they are sanctified by him; and therefore should sing his
praises, both vocally, and with melody in their hearts;

and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness; which is essential
to him, and in which he is glorious; and which appears in all his ways
and works of providence and grace, and both in the redemption and
sanctification of his people; and besides this, there is the holiness of
Christ, which is imputed to his saints, and the sanctification of the
Spirit, which is wrought in them; and at the remembrance of each of
these it highly becomes them to give thanks to the Lord, since hereby
they are made meet to be partakers of his kingdom and glory.

\(o\) "quos ipse benignitate prosequitur", Junius & Tremellius; so
Tigurine version.

[Psalms 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 30:5</span></span>

For his anger endureth but a moment,.... Anger is not properly in God,
he being a simple, uncompounded, immovable, and unchangeable being; nor
is it ever towards his people in reality, unless anger is distinguished
from wrath, and is considered as consistent with his everlasting and
invariable love to them; but only in their apprehension, he doing those
things which in some respects are similar to those which men do when
they are angry; he turns away from them and hides his face, he chides,
chastises, and afflicts, and then they conclude he is angry; and when he
returns again and takes off his hand, manifests his pardoning love, and
comforts them, then they understand it that his anger is turned away
from them; for in this improper sense of it, and as his children
conceive of it, it is but for a moment, or a very short time: he
forsakes them but for a moment, and their light afflictions endure no
longer, [Isa 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007);

in his favour is life; by which is meant his free love and favour in
Christ towards his people; and designs either the duration of it, that
it lives and always is, even when he seems to be angry, and that it
lasts as long as life does, yea, to all eternity; neither death nor life
can separate from it; or the object of it, God delighting not in the
death but the life of a sinner; or rather the effects of it, it is what
makes the present life to be properly life, and really comfortable;
without it men may be said rather to be dead than to live,
notwithstanding all enjoyments; and therefore it is better than life,
abstracted from it, [Psa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003); it
quickens the soul in a spiritual sense, and makes grace lively; it
invigorates faith, encourages hope, and makes love to abound, and it
issues in eternal life;

weeping may endure for a night; the allusion is to the time when
afflictions are usually most heavy and pressing upon persons, when they
most feel them, or, however, are free from diversion, and at leisure to
bemoan themselves; and may point at the season of weeping, and cause of
it, the night of affliction, or of darkness and desertion, and denotes
the short continuance of it; weeping is here represented as a person,
and as a lodger, for the word may be rendered "lodge" (p); but then it
is as a wayfaring man, who continues but for a night; see [Isa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#014);

but joy cometh in the morning; alluding to the time when all nature is
fresh and gay, when man rises cheerful from his rest, darkness removes,
light breaks forth, and the sun rises and sheds its beams, and
everything looks pleasant and delightful; moreover, the mercies of God
are new every morning, which cause joy, and call for thankfulness; and
especially it is a time of joy after weeping and darkness, when the sun
of righteousness arises with healing in his wings; as it will be to
perfection in the resurrection morn, when the dead in Christ will rise
first, and be like to him, and reign with him for evermore.

\(p\) "diversetur", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "lodgeth", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 30:6</span></span>

And in my prosperity,.... Either outward prosperity, when he was settled
in his kingdom, and as acknowledged king by all the tribes of Israel,
and had gotten the victory over all his enemies, and was at rest from
them round about; or inward and spiritual prosperity, having a spiritual
appetite for the word, being in the lively exercise of grace, growing in
it, and in the knowledge of Christ; favoured with communion with God,
having flesh discoveries of pardoning grace and mercy, corruptions being
subdued, the inward man renewed with spiritual strength, and more
fruitful in every good word and work. This being the case,

I said, I shall never be moved; so in outward prosperity men are apt to
sing a requiem to themselves, and fancy it will always be thus with
them, be in health of body, and enjoying the affluence of temporal
things, and so put away the evil day in one sense and another from them;
and even good men themselves are subject to this infirmity, [Job
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018); and who also, when in
comfortable frames of soul, and in prosperous circumstances in spiritual
things, are ready to conclude if will always be thus with them, or
better. Indeed they can never be moved as to their state and condition
with respect to God; not from his heart, where they are set as a seal;
nor out of the arms of Christ, and covenant of grace; nor out of the
family of God; nor from a state of justification and grace; but they may
be moved as to the exercise of grace and discharge of duty, in which
they vary; and especially when they are self-confident, and depend upon
their own strength for the performance of these things, and for a
continuance in such frames, which seems to have been David's case; and
therefore he corrects himself, and his sense of things, in [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007).

[Psalms 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 30:7</span></span>

Lord, by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong,.... The
psalmist found himself mistaken, and acknowledges it; that as it was not
owing to his own merit that he enjoyed the prosperity that he did, so
neither was the continuance of it owing to his goodness, power, and
strength, but to the free grace and favour of God; as the church of God
is compared to a mountain, and the several individuals of believers are
like to Mount Zion, so the soul of a child of God may be called his
mountain, which is made strong by the Lord as to its state in Christ,
being set on him, the Rock of ages, and sure foundation, where it is
safe and secure; and as to its grace, whenever it is in any strong
exercise, which is altogether owing to the favour of God, and continues
as long as he pleases;

thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled; the Lord may hide his face
from his people, and yet their state be safe; their mountain stands
strong in that respect; yet this generally produces a change of frames;
it gives trouble, and faith and hope become feeble and languid in their
acts and exercises; this shows the changeableness of frames, that they
are not to be depended upon; that they are entirely owing to the
pleasure of God, and that rejoicing only should be in him: very likely
some regard is had to the affair of Absalom's rebellion, which came
unawares, unthought of, when David was in the greatest prosperity and
security.

[Psalms 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 30:8</span></span>

I cried to thee, O Lord,.... In his trouble, when the Lord had hid his
face from him, and he was sensible that he had departed from him: he was
not stupid and unaffected with it; nor did he turn his back upon God,
and seek to others; but he cried after a departing God, which showed
love to him, and some degree of faith in him, by looking again towards
his holy temple, and waiting upon him until he returned;

and unto the Lord I made supplication; in the most humble manner;
entreating his grace and mercy, and that he would again show him his
face and favour.

[Psalms 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 30:9</span></span>

What profit is there in my blood?.... Should that be shed, and he die by
the hands of his enemies, through divine permission: death is not
profitable to a man's self by way of merit; it does not atone for sin,
satisfy justice, and merit heaven; even the death of martyrs, and of
such who shed their blood, died in the cause of Christ, and for his
sake, is not meritorious; it does not profit in such sense: there is
profit in no blood but in the blood of Christ, by which peace is made,
pardon procured, and redemption obtained. Indeed death is
consequentially profitable to good men; it is an outlet of all sorrows
and afflictions, and the inlet of joy and happiness; it is the saints'
passage to heaven, and upon it they are immediately with Christ, and
rest from their labours: nor is there profit in the blood of the saints
to them that shed it; for when inquisition is made for it, vengeance
will be taken on them who have shed it, and blood will be given them to
drink, as will be particularly to antichrist: nor is there any profit in
it to the Lord himself; which seems to be what is chiefly designed,
since it is used by the psalmist as an argument with him in prayer, that
he might not be left by him, and to his enemies, so as to perish, since
no glory could accrue to God by it from them; they would not give him
thanks for it, but ascribe it to themselves, and say their own hand had
done it; so far, the psalmist suggests, would his death be from being
profitable to God, that it would rather be a loss to the interest of
religion; since he had not as yet fully restored religion, and settled
the pure worship of God in order, and made the preparations for the
building the house of God he intended. God may be glorified in the death
of his people; either by their dying in the faith of interest in him; or
by suffering death for his name's sake; but, in a strict sense, there is
nothing either in life or death in which man can be profitable unto God;
see [Job 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002); some understand this of
life; because the life is in the blood: as if the sense was, of what
advantage is life to me? it would have been better for the if I had
never been born, had had no life and being at all, if I must for ever be
banished from thy presence, and go down to the pit of hell, which they
suppose is designed in the following phrase;

when I go down to the pit; though the grave seems rather to be meant,
and the former sense is best;

shall the dust praise thee? that is, men, whose original is dust, being
reduced to dust again, as the body at death, when laid in the grave, and
corrupted there, is; this lifeless dust cannot praise the Lord: the soul
indeed dies not with the body; nor does it sleep in the grave with it;
nor is it unemployed in heaven; but is continually engaged in the high
praises of God: but the sense of the psalmist is, that should he die,
and be buried, and be reduced to dust, he should no more praise the Lord
in the land of the living, among men, to the glory of divine grace and
goodness; so that this revenue of his glory would be lost. Shall it
declare thy truth? either the truth of the Gospel, which lies in the
word of God; or rather the faithfulness of God in the performance of his
promises; see [Psa 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010).

[Psalms 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 30:10</span></span>

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me,.... By lifting up the light of his
countenance again upon him; by manifesting and applying his pardoning
grace to him, and by delivering him out of all his afflictions;

Lord, be thou my helper; in this time of trouble; for he knew that vain
was the help of man; and he was entirely in the right to betake himself
to the Lord, who was able to help him, when none else could.

[Psalms 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 30:11</span></span>

Those hast turned for me my mourning into dancing,.... This, with what
follows, expresses the success he had in seeking the Lord by prayer and
supplication; there was a sudden change of things, as it often is with
the people of God; sometimes they are mourning by reason of sin, their
own and others; or on account of afflictions; or because of spiritual
decays; or through the temptations of Satan; or, as it was the case of
the psalmist now, because of the hidings of God's face; but this
mourning is exchanged for joy and gladness when the Lord discovers his
pardoning love, revives his work in their souls, takes off his
afflicting hand from them, rebukes the tempter, and delivers out of his
temptations, and shows himself, his grace and favour;

thou hast put off my sackcloth; which was used in mourning for
relations, and in times of calamity and distress, and as a token of
humiliation and repentance, [Gen
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#034);

and girded me with gladness; by these phrases the same thing is
signified as before; see [Isa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003).

[Psalms 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 30:12</span></span>

To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent,....
Meaning either his soul, the more noble and glorious part of him; or the
members of his body, his tongue, which is the glory of it, and with
which he glorified God; see [Psa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009);
compared with [Act 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#026), this was the
end that was to be answered by changing the scene of things; and which
was answered;

O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever; to the end of
life, as long as he had a being, and to all eternity, [Psa
104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033). Jerom interprets the whole
psalm of the resurrection of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 31](psa031)

</div>
