<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa096)  [Next](psa098) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 97](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 97:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 97

This psalm is ascribed to David by the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions. It is of the same argument, and
upon the same subject, as the preceding, the coming and kingdom of
Christ; and that it respects his first coming into the world, when
angels were called upon to worship him, appears from [Psa
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007) compared with [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006) though it is expressed in such
language as seems to agree with his second coming; and, perhaps, both
are included, with various things between the one and the other; or it
respects the kingdom of Christ, from his first to his second coming; to
which agrees the inscription of the Syriac version, which is

"a Psalm of David, in which he prophesies concerning the coming of the
Messiah, and again he intimates in it his last appearance.''.

[Psalms 97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 97:1</span></span>

The Lord reigneth,.... He has reigned, now reigns, will and must reign
until all enemies are made his footstool; See Gill on [Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001); see Gill on [Psa
96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010),

let the earth rejoice: not the land of Judea only, and the inhabitants
of it, to whom the King Messiah came; for there were but few among them
that received him, and rejoiced at his coming; but the whole earth, the
vast continent, as distinguished from the isles after mentioned, and
they that dwell upon it; the Gentiles, who had a concern in his coming,
in whom they were to be blessed, to whom they were to be gathered, and
in whom they should find a glorious rest; and therefore he is called

the desire of all nations: the first preaching of the Gospel was
occasion and matter of great joy to them; not only the blessings
contained in it of peace, pardon, righteousness, and salvation by
Christ; but the effects of it, delivering them from the dominion of
Satan, the god of this world; and from superstition, and idolatry, with
which they were enslaved; and the bringing them into the glorious
liberty of the children of God:

let the multitude of isles be glad thereof; the isles of the sea are
many, even many thousands: Columbus, when he first discovered America,
sailing by Cuba westward, gave names, as he passed along, to seven
hundred islands, leaving three thousand more without names (r): Gejerus
reports, from some writers, that an Indian king, in 1553, was converted
to the Christian faith, that ruled over eleven thousand islands; and
that in Maldivar there are reckoned to be sixteen thousand: well may the
text speak of a multitude of them: or, "let the great islands", &c. such
as ours of Great Britain and Ireland; these isles are said to wait for
Christ and his doctrine, [Isa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004) and
therefore must be glad to hear of his coming and kingdom: the Gospel was
very early sent to the isles, as to Cyprus, Crete, &c. see [Act
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004) and to our northern isles
likewise, who have great reason to be glad at its coming among us,
continuance with us, and the success it has had; and that it is yet in
the midst of us for further usefulness; and that Christ reigns, and will
reign evermore.

\(r\) P. Martyr. Decad. 1. l. 3.

[Psalms 97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 97:2</span></span>

Clouds and darkness are round about him,.... Either as a garment; so
Apollinarius paraphrases it,

"near is the King clothed with a cloud and tempest;''

and it is usual with the Heathens to represent their deities as
surrounded or clothed with a cloud (s): here the allusion is to the
tabernacle and temple, when reared up and dedicated, [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034) [Kg1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010) and to other appearances of God,
or Christ, in a cloud, [Exo 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009), it
may denote the obscurity of his divine nature at his first coming; he
appearing in the form of a servant, and in the likeness of sinful flesh,
so that few discerned his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father; as also the darkness and blindness of the Jews concerning him,
who could not perceive him to be the Messiah; notwithstanding all the
characters of him; clouds and darkness were about him to them; as they
were, in a literal sense, when he hung on the cross; the sun withdrew
and hid itself, and darkness was upon the face of the earth for three
hours; Christ was enveloped in it; and a greater darkness surrounded his
soul when his divine Father hid his face from him: dark providences
attended the first setting up of his kingdom, and the ministration of
his Gospel in the world; the apostles, the first preachers of it, were
persecuted by their own countrymen the Jews; the whole Gentile world was
against them; the Roman empire, emperors, and governors of provinces,
opposed them; wherever there was an open door, there were many
adversaries, so that things looked very unpromising: nevertheless these
clouds were dissipated, and the difficulties got over; though this has
sometimes been the case since, and will be again, ere the kingdom of
Christ is in all its glory; he now sits enthroned in heaven, surrounded
with clouds and darkness, and unseen to us; whose being and perfections
are inscrutable to us, his providences unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out; and when he comes a second time, it will be at midnight,
and in the clouds of heaven:

righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne; the seat,
basis, and support of it; he sits on a throne doing right, and by it his
throne is established; See Gill on [Psa
89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014).

\(s\) "Et Venus aethereos inter dea candida nimbos", Virgil. Aeneid. 8.
"Venus circumdata nimbo", ib. Aeneid. 12. "Nube candentes humeros
amictus augur Apollo", Horat. Carmin. l. 1. Ode 2. so Homer. Il. 5. v.
186.

[Psalms 97:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 97:3</span></span>

A fire goeth before him, Not the fiery law, which went forth from his
right hand on Mount Sinai; but rather his Gospel, which, as it
enlightens, warms, comforts, and refreshes his people, searches,
torments, and destroys his enemies, and is the savour of death unto
death to them; see [Jer 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029). Some
apply this to the gifts of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, signified
by cloven tongues of fire; but then no such effect followed as mentioned
in the next clause: it seems best to interpret it of his wrath, which,
like fire, was poured out to the uttermost on the Jews, for their
disbelief and rejection of him; they would not have him to reign over
them; they despised his Gospel, and slew his servants; wherefore he sent
the Roman armies to them, who destroyed those murderers, and burnt their
city, [Mat 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007), this will be also
verified in the second coming of Christ, who will descend in flaming
fire, and the earth will be burnt up, and all that is therein, [Th2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007), some Jewish writers interpret
this of the war of Gog and Magog, in Ezekiel, which they suppose still
future; as, when it is, fire will be sent and rained upon them, [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022), but may be better applied to
the Gog and Magog in [Rev 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008).

and burneth up his enemies round about; so that none can escape: this
was true of the Jewish nation, who were burnt up; so that there was not
left root nor branch in it, [Mal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001),
and will be true of the wicked, at the general conflagration of the
world, upon Christ's second coming; and of the Gog and Magog army, after
the resurrection.

[Psalms 97:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 97:4</span></span>

His lightnings enlightened the world,.... Either the doctrines of the
Gospel, compared thereunto, because of the swift progress they made, and
the large extent of them in the world, in a very little time; by the
apostles they were published in all nations, and were the means of
enlightening them in the true knowledge of themselves, and of the way of
salvation by Christ: hence they are called the "lights of the world",
[Mat 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014), as the coming of Christ, in
his kingdom and power, by them, is compared to lightning, and so are the
arrows of his word, [Mat 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027), or
else his judgments on the Jewish nation are meant, which were manifest
and clear, and obvious to all the world; see [Psa
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014),

the earth saw, and trembled; the inhabitants of the earth, of the
Gentile world, saw the judgments of God upon the Jews, and were
astonished at them; see [Deu 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#024), it
is usual for lightnings and earthquakes to go together; see [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019).

[Psalms 97:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 97:5</span></span>

The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord,.... Kimchi
interprets the "hills" of the kings of the wicked; and it was verified
in Herod and his nobles, and the citizens of Jerusalem, who, when they
heard of the coming of the Messiah, of the birth of the King of the
Jews, were exceedingly moved and troubled; their hearts melted like wax
within them, [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001), so when he
appeared, in the power of his Gospel, in the Gentile world, and went
forth in the ministration of it, conquering, and to conquer, all fled
before him; every mountain and island were moved out of their places;
and the kings of the earth, and great men, ran to the rocks to hide them
from his face, which they could not bear, [Rev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014), and the like events, and more
terrible, will they be, when he comes to destroy antichrist, and
especially to judge the world, [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019).

at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth; as Christ is; he is Lord
of all, the Prince of the kings of the earth, [Act
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036), [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), and as he will show himself to be
at the great day; and that is the reason why the proud and lofty,
comparable to hills and mountains, shall melt at his presence.

[Psalms 97:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 97:6</span></span>

The heavens declare his righteousness,.... His justice in punishing his
enemies; the lightning and the thunder in the heavens, the tokens of his
wrath, and instruments of it; his wrath itself, which is revealed from
heaven, [Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018), or the inhabitants
of heaven, as Aben Ezra; the angels of heaven; so the Targum, "the
angels on high (or of heaven, as in the king's Bible) declare his
righteousness"; see [Rev 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#005), it is
true of the ministers of the Gospel, who are Christ's angels or
messengers, men of heavenly gifts and grace, whose work it is to declare
the justifying righteousness of Christ, which is revealed in the Gospel
from faith to faith, and which is therefore called the word of
righteousness, and the ministration of it, [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017),

and all the people see his glory; the glory of his justice in the
destruction of his enemies; the glory of his power and grace in the
salvation of his chosen; the glory of God in the face of Christ; the
glory of Christ himself, as the only begotten of the Father; the glory
of his person, office, grace, and righteousness, in the glass of the
Gospel; the glory and honour he is now crowned with in heaven; and all
the people, even all the chosen, redeemed, and called people, shall
behold his glory to all eternity: it seems chiefly to respect the
revelation of his glory, and his people's view of it at his first
coming; see [Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005).

[Psalms 97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 97:7</span></span>

Confounded be all they that serve graven images,.... Images of gold,
silver, and stone, graven by art and man's device; to serve and worship
which must be the grossest ignorance and stupidity, which, when
convinced of, must fill with shame and confusion: this may be considered
either as a prayer, that the idolatrous Gentiles might be enlightened to
see the vanity of their idols, and their worship of them, and turn to
the living God; or as a prophecy that it should be; for it may be
rendered, "they are" or "shall be confounded", or "ashamed" (t), as the
Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi; which had its accomplishment in the first
times of the Gospel; when, being preached in the Gentile world,
multitudes forsook their idols and served the true God; and especially
at the opening of the sixth seal, when Pagan worship was abolished
throughout the Roman empire; and when the kings and great men in it,
through shame, confusion, and dread, fled to the rocks and mountains, to
hide them from the wrath of the Lamb, [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012), and will have a further
accomplishment, when the Papists, the worshippers of the beast, shall be
ashamed of their graven images, of the Virgin Mary, and other saints;
which will be when the Gospel shall be published throughout the world,
[Rev 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006),

that boast themselves of idols; as their saviours and deliverers, which
yet are nothing, as the word (u) signifies; that praise and extol them,
as the givers of good things to them, or the procurers of them for them;
that glory in them, and in their worship of them, than which nothing can
be a greater instance of folly and madness:

worship him, all ye gods; those that are so called, the graven images
and idols before mentioned; let them bow down, and be prostrate before
the Lord, as Dagon before the ark; or they that serve other gods, as
Kimchi; so the Targum,

"and all the nations that serve idols shall worship before him;''

rather kings and princes, civil magistrates, who are sometimes called
gods, are meant, [Psa 95:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#003), and who,
in the latter day especially, shall serve and worship the Messiah, [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010) though it is best of all to
interpret it of angels, as this word Elohim is rendered in [Psa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005), and Aben Ezra says there are some
of their interpreters that understand it of angels: the Septuagint,
Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions, and so Apollinarius,
render it, "worship him, all his angels": Gussetius (w) interprets it,
"all that is God's"; all that belong to him, angels and men, and all
creatures; particularly angels, the most noble of all: and this sense is
confirmed by an inspired writer, who manifestly refers to and quotes
this passage, and applies it to the angels worshipping Christ, the first
begotten Son of God, when he came into the world, [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006), with which compare [Luk
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013), from whence it appears not only
that Christ is superior to angels, for the proof of which it is produced
by the apostle; but that he is truly God, since God only is the object
of religions worship; and that, if he is worshipped by angels, he ought
to be worshipped by men; and that angels are not the proper objects of
worship, since they are worshippers.

\(t\) "pudefiunt", Cocceius; "erubescent", Gejerus. (u) "in diis
nihili"; Tigurine version; so some in Vatablus, Cocceius. (w) Ebr.
Comment. p. 386.

[Psalms 97:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 97:8</span></span>

Zion heard, and was glad,.... Or, the congregation of Zion, as the
Targum; the church of Christ, and the members of it, called Zion, in
allusion to the mountain of that name, in which the temple stood; a type
of the church, [Heb 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022), these heard
the Gospel, the good news and glad tidings of good things; they heard
that Zion's King reigned, and that his kingdom was enlarged, and
interest increased; they heard the heavenly men declare his
righteousness, by which they are justified from all things; they heard
of the conversion of the Gentiles, and the confusion of idolaters; of
the incarnation of Christ, and of his being worshipped by angels; all
which filled them with joy and gladness:

and the daughters of Judah rejoiced; particular congregated churches,
particular believers and professors of Christ and his Gospel; these
rejoiced at the above things, as well as because of what follows:

because of thy judgments, O Lord; either the doctrines of the Gospel,
which come from the God of judgment, and are according to his justice
and holiness; and are matter of joy and gladness when they are spread in
the world, and succeed to the conversion of sinners, the comfort of
saints and the glory of Christ; see [Psa
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009), or his judgments upon his
enemies, and the enemies of his church and people; which also are an
occasion of rejoicing to them, because Christ is thereby glorified in
his power, justice, truth, and faithfulness, [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).

[Psalms 97:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 97:9</span></span>

For thou, Lord, art high above all the earth,.... Above all the
inhabitants of the earth, as the Targum; he is highly exalted above
every name, men of the greatest name that is named in the world; he is
made higher than the heavens, and the inhabitants of it; and has all
power in heaven and earth, as Mediator; and, as a divine Person, he is
the most high God, as the word "Elion", here used, signifies; and all
this lays a foundation for joy and gladness in the saints; even the
dignity of Christ's person, and the exaltation of him in the human
nature:

thou art exalted far above all gods: not only the fictitious deities of
the Gentiles, or the greatest potentates upon earth, being made higher
than the kings of the earth, who are called gods; but also than the
angels in heaven; he is set down at the right hand of God, where they
are not, and never were, nor shall be; angels, authorities, and powers,
being subject to him, [Heb 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013).

[Psalms 97:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 97:10</span></span>

Ye that love the Lord, hate evil,.... The evil of sin, which is to be
hated, because of the evil nature of it, it being exceeding sinful; and
because of its evil consequences, bringing death, ruin, and destruction
with it to the souls of men, unless grace prevents; and disquietude,
distress, and trouble to the saints themselves; and because it is
hateful to God, being contrary to his nature, will, and law, and is
hated by Christ; and therefore those that love him should hate that,
shun it, avoid it, depart from it, and abstain from all appearance of
it; as all such will that love him in sincerity above all persons and
things; and all of him, and that belong to him, his people, ways,
worship, truths, and ordinances: and such are they that have seen the
loveliness of him, and know his love, and have had it shed abroad in
their hearts; and these will not only hate the evil of sin, but evil
men; not their persons, but their actions and conversations; and will
avoid them, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness:

he preserveth the souls of his saints; that are set apart by him, and
chosen in him to be holy; that are sanctified by his blood, and by his
Spirit and grace, and to whom he is made sanctification: the "souls" of
these, their better and more noble part, which are dear to him, and he
has redeemed by his blood, and whose salvation he has obtained, and they
still receive, he "preserves" from the evil of sin, from its governing
and damning power, from a final and total apostasy by it, from ruin and
destruction through it, from being hurt by the second death; and he
preserves them from all their enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, from
being destroyed by them, safe to his kingdom and glory; therefore he is
to be loved, and sin to be hated by them:

he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked; of wicked and
unreasonable men, into whose hands they sometimes fall, cruel and
bloodthirsty persecutors; as he is able to deliver them, so oftentimes
he does; and will, ere long, put them entirely out of their reach.
Kimchi interprets this of the deliverance of the Jews from the captivity
of Babylon, Media, and Persia.

[Psalms 97:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 97:11</span></span>

Light is sown for the righteous,.... Who are made righteous by the
obedience of Christ, and live soberly and righteously; the light of joy
and gladness, as it is explained in the next clause; see [Est
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#016) so, "light", is frequently used
by Homer (x) for joy and gladness: these sometimes are without it,
through the hidings of God's face, the prevalence of corruptions, the
force of Satan's temptations, and the many afflictions they meet with;
but joy and gladness, peace and comfort, are sown for them in the
counsels and purposes of God, in his covenant, in the Scriptures, in the
Gospel, and in the promises of it; and, though at present hidden, will
spring up in God's due time, [Psa
112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004), and which also may be
interpreted of the light of glory, which at present does not appear; but
it is prepared in the purpose of God, and in his promise, and shall be
enjoyed by the heirs of it. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and all the
Oriental versions, render it, "light is risen for the righteous"; and so
the Targum,

"light is risen and prepared for the righteous;''

Christ, the light of the world, the sun of righteousness, is risen for
them, and upon them, with healing in his wings, which bring joy and
comfort to them:

and gladness for the upright in heart; such as have new hearts and right
spirits formed in them, and are Israelites indeed, that have the truth
of grace and the root of the matter in them: gladness is prepared,
provided, and promised to them, and sooner or later they shall have it;
the seed of it is sown, and it will spring up, and a large crop shall be
enjoyed. Kimchi's note is,

"light is sown for the righteous in this world, and they shall reap
light and joy in time to come, in the days of the Messiah.''

\(x\) Iliad 6. v. 6. & 8. v. 282. & 16. v. 39.

[Psalms 97:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 97:12</span></span>

Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous,.... In the word of the Lord, as the
Targum; in Christ, the essential Word, in his person, the greatness,
glory, and fulness of it; in his righteousness, and in salvation by him,
and that always; see [Phi 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004),

and give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness; of his essential
holiness, as a divine Person, in which he is glorious, and which appears
in all that he has done; and of the holiness of his nature and life, as
man and Mediator, which are imputed to his people for their
justification; and at the remembrance of that holiness which they have
from him, and are made partakers of in sanctification: and at the
remembrance of that perfect holiness which they shall have with him in
heaven to all eternity. Holiness may also signify his faithfulness in
the discharge of his work and office as Mediator, and in the fulfilment
of his promises to his people; See Gill on [Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 98](psa098)

</div>
