<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa000)  [Next](psa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 1

This psalm, though without a title, may reasonably be thought to be a
psalm of David; since the next psalm, which is also without a title, is
ascribed to him, [Act 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025); and since
both are joined together as one psalm by the Jews (k); See Gill on [Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033); and since this is the general
preface to the whole book, which is chiefly of David's penning, it is
entitled, in the metaphrase of Apollinarius,

"a Song of David, the Prophet and King.''

\(k\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 9. 2.

[Psalms 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 1:1</span></span>

Blessed is the man,.... This psalm begins in like manner as Christ's
sermon on the mount, [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003); setting
forth the praises and expressing the happiness of the man who is
described in this verse and [Psa 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002).
The words may be rendered, "O, the blessednesses of the man", or "of
this man" (l); he is doubly blessed, a thrice happy and blessed man;
blessed in things temporal and spiritual; happy in this world, and in
that to come. He is to be praised and commended as a good man, so the
Targum:

"the goodness, or, Oh, the goodness of the man;''

or as others,

"Oh, the right goings or happy progress, or prosperous success of the
man (m),''

who answers to the following characters; which right walking of his is
next observed, and his prosperity in [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003). Some have interpreted this psalm
of Christ, and think it is properly spoken of him (n);

that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly: all men are by nature
and practice ungodly, without God, without the true knowledge, fear, and
worship of God and are at enmity against him. It is a character that
belongs to God's elect as well as others, while in a state of nature;
and is sometimes used illustrate the love of Christ in dying for them,
and the grace of God in the justification of them, [Rom
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005). But here it describes not such
who are wicked in heart and life in common only, but the reprobate part
of mankind, profligate and abandoned sinners, such as Jude speaks of,
[Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004); and for whom the law is
made, and against whom it lies, [Ti1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009). The word (o) here used signifies
such who are restless and continually in mischief; who are like the
troubled sea, which cannot rest, ever casting up mire and dirt: they are
always disquieted themselves, and are ever disquieting others; nor do
they cease from being so till they are laid in their graves. And to
these "counsel" is ascribed, which supposes capacity and wisdom; as,
generally speaking, such are wise and prudent in natural and civil
things, and are wise to do evil, though to do good they have no
knowledge: and counsel implies consultation and deliberation; they act
deliberately in sinning, they cast about in their minds, form schemes,
and contrive ways and means how to accomplish their vicious purposes;
and sometimes they enter into a confederacy, and consult together with
one consent, and their counsel is generally against the Lord, though it
does not prosper and prevail; and against his Christ, his people, truths
and ordinances: it takes in both their principles and practices; and the
sum of their counsel is to indulge themselves in sin, to throw off all
religion, and to cast off the fear and worship of God, [Job
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014). Now "not to walk" herein is not
to hearken to their counsel, to give into it, agree with it, pursue it,
and act according to it; and happy is the man, who, though he may fall
in the way of it, and may have bad counsel given him by ungodly men, yet
does not consent to it, take it, and act upon it. This may be applied to
the times of the Messiah, and the men of the age in which he lived; and
the rather, since the next psalm, in which mention is made of the
counsel of the ungodly, manifestly belongs unto them. The men of that
generation were a set of ungodly men, who consulted against Christ to
take away his life; and blessed is the man, as Joseph of Arimathea, who,
though he was in that assembly which conspired against the life of
Christ, did not walk in, nor consent unto, their counsel and their
deeds, [Luk 23:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#051);

nor standeth in the way of sinners; all men are sinners through Adam's
disobedience, and their own actual transgressions, and such were the
elect of God, when Christ died for them; and indeed are so after
conversion, for no man lives without sin. But here it intends notorious
sinners, who are open, bold, and daring in iniquity; the word (p)
signifies such, who in shooting miss the mark, and go aside from it, as
such sinners do from the law of God; proceed from evil to evil, choose
their own ways, and delight in their abominations. Now their "way" is
not only their "opinion", as the Syriac version renders it, their
corrupt sentiments, but their sinful course of life; which is a way of
darkness, a crooked path, and a road that leads to destruction and
death: and happy is the man that does "not stand" in this way, which
denotes openness, impudence, and continuance; who, though he may fall
into this way, does not abide in it; see [Rom
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001). The Pharisees in the time of
Christ, though they were not openly and outwardly sinners, yet they were
secretly and inwardly such, [Mat
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#028); and the way they stood in was
that of justification by the works of the law, [Rom
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031), but happy is the man, as the
Apostle Paul and others, who stands not in that way, but in the way
Christ Jesus, and in the way of life and righteousness by him;

nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful; by whom may be meant proud and
haughty persons, in opposition to the humble and lowly, as in [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034); such who are proud of their
natural abilities, knowledge, and wisdom, of their honours and riches,
or of their own righteousness, and despise others; or such who are
desperate in wickedness, of whom there is no hope; see [Pro
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#007); and Deists and atheists, who
scoff at divine revelation, and mock at a future state, at death, hell,
and judgment, as in [Isa 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#014). Now
happy is the man that does not sit or keep company with such persons;
who comes not into their secret and into their assembly; does not
associate himself with them, nor approve of their dispositions, words,
principles, and actions; see [Psa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004). Such were the Scribes and
Pharisees in Christ's time; they derided him and his doctrines, scoffed
at him when he hung upon the cross, and despised him and his apostles,
and his Gospel; but there were some that did not join with them, to whom
he, his ministers, and truths, were precious and in high esteem, and to
whom he was the power and wisdom of God.

\(l\) "beatitudines illius viri", Montanus, Vatablus, Gejerus. (m)
"Recti incessus, felices progressus, ac prosperi successus", Michaelis;
so Piscator. (n) Justinian. in Octapl. Psalt, in loc. Romualdus apud
Mabillon. Itinerar. Ital. p. 181. (o) "significat eos qui sine quiete et
indesinenter impie degunt", Vatablus. (p) "qui longissime aberrant a
scopo legis"; Gerjerus.

[Psalms 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 1:2</span></span>

But his delight is in the law of the Lord,.... Not the law of nature,
which was inscribed on Adam's heart in innocence, but now greatly
impaired by sin, and become very imperfect and very insufficient to make
men happy, or to lead them to true felicity; nor the law of Moses, which
is a fiery law, and works wrath, accuses of sin, pronounces guilty,
curses and condemns to death; and therefore cannot be delighted in by a
sensible sinner, unless as it is in the hands of Christ, and as
fulfilled by him, who is the end of it; and as it is written on the
heart of a regenerate man, who, so far as it is, delights in it after
the inward man, and serves it with his spirit: but rather the
Scriptures, as much and as many parts of them as were written in David's
time; particularly the five books of Moses, which are called the Law and
the Testimony of the Lord; which being inspired by God, were profitable
and delightful to read, and to hear explained; and as they were David's
delight, and the men of his council, [Psa
119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024); so they were the delight of
every good man, there being many things in them concerning the Messiah,
his grace and kingdom; see [Luk 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044).
Moreover the word here used, signifies "doctrine", and may intend the
evangelic doctrine, as it does in [Psa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007); which is a psalm concerning the
doctrine of the apostles that went into all the world; and in like sense
is the word used in [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); of the
doctrine of the Messiah, that is, the Gospel; and is the same with the
law, or doctrine of faith, in [Rom
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027). And this may be called the
doctrine of the Lord, because he is the author of it; it came by him, he
revealed it; and because he is the subject of it; it is concerning him,
his person, office, grace, and righteousness; and so far as it was
published in the times of David, it was a joyful sound, good news and
glad tidings, and the delight of good men;

and in his law doth he meditate day and night; as Joshua was directed to
do, and David did, [Jos 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008). This is
to be understood of a diligent reading and serious consideration of it;
and of the employment of the thoughts, and of deep study upon it, in
order to find out the sense and meaning of it; and which is to be done
constantly, every day, as often as there is leisure and opportunity for
it; or, as Kimchi on the place observes, whenever a man is free from the
business of life; unless this should be taken figuratively, of the day
of prosperity and night of adversity, whether in things temporal or
spiritual, which are each of them proper seasons to meditate in, upon
the word of God and Gospel of Christ.

[Psalms 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 1:3</span></span>

And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water,.... Or, "for
then shall he be", &c. as Alshech renders the words; and the Hebrew
"vau" is often used for "then" (q). As [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) describe the man who is blessed,
this points at his blessedness, and shows and proves him to be an happy
man; for he is comparable to a "tree": not to a dry tree, or a tree
without fruit, or whose fruit is withered, but to a fruitful tree, a
green and flourishing one; green olive tree, or a palm tree, or a cedar
in Lebanon; to which David compares himself and the righteous, [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008); and here such an one is compared
to a tree "planted"; not to one that grows of itself, a wild tree, a
tree of the wood; but to one that is removed from its native place and
soil, and planted elsewhere; and so designs such who are broken off of
the wild olive tree, and are grafted into the good olive tree; who are
planted in Christ Jesus, and in the church, the house of the Lord; of
which transplantation the removal of Israel into Canaan's land was an
emblem, [Psa 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008); and such a
spiritual plantation is of God the husbandman; whose planting the saints
are efficiently, [Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021). And it is
owing to the word, the ingrafted word, [Jam
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021), which is the means of this
ingrafture, and to the ministers of it instrumentally; some of whom
plant, and others water, [Co1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006).
Moreover, the happy man before described is like a tree that is situated
"by the rivers of water", or "divisions" (r) and rivulets of water;
which running about the plants, make them very fruitful and flourishing;
see [Eze 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#004); and which may intend
the river of the love of God, and the streams of it, the discoveries and
applications of it to regenerate persons; and also the fulness of grace
in Christ, who is the fountain of gardens, the well of living waters and
streams from Lebanon, to revive, refresh, supply, and comfort his
people, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015); as well as the
graces of the Spirit of God, which are near the saints, and like rivers
of water flow out of them that believe in Christ, [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038); to which may be added the word
and ordinances of the Gospel, which are the still waters, to which they
are invited and led, and by which and with which they are greatly
refreshed, and made fruitful. Arama interprets it of the waters of the
law; it is best to understand it of the Gospel; see [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001); it follows,

that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; and so appears to be a tree
of righteousness, filled with the fruits of righteousness, the graces of
the Spirit, and good works; which are brought forth by him under the
influence of grace, as he has opportunity, and according to the measure
of grace bestowed. His leaf also shall not wither; neither tree, nor
fruit, nor leaf shall wither, but shall be always green; which is
expressive of the saints' perseverance: the reasons of which are, they
are ingrafted in Christ the true vine, and abide in him, from whom they
have their sap, nourishment, and fruit, [Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001); they are rooted and built up in
him, and established in the faith of him; and so they hold fast the
profession of it without wavering;

and whatsoever he doth shall prosper; meaning not so much in things
temporal, of which Arama interprets it, for in these the good man does
not always succeed, but in things spiritual: whatever he does in faith,
from love, to the glory of God, and in the name of Christ, prospers;
yea, those things in which he is concerned, that are adverse, and seem
for the present to be against him, in the issue work for good to him: in
short, such a man is blessed with grace here, and glory hereafter; and
therefore must needs be an happy man.

\(q\) Vid. Noldii Concord. Part. Ebr. p. 308. (r) "juxta divisiones";
Musculus, Hammond; so Ben Melech.

[Psalms 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 1:4</span></span>

The ungodly are not so,.... They are not as the good man is; their
manner and course of life are different; they walk in the counsel of
ungodly men, like themselves, and take counsel against the Lord, his
Anointed, and his people: they stand in the way of sinners, and steer
their conversation according to the course of the world, and sit in the
seat of the scornful; laugh at divine revelation, lampoon the
Scriptures, deride good men, make a jest of religion and a future state:
they have no delight in the law of the Lord, they cast it away from
them, and despise it; and are so far from a constant meditation on it,
that they never read it, nor so much as look into it, nor is it ever in
their thoughts. They are not like to a tree, as described in [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003), if they are like to trees, it is
to dry trees, and not green ones, to trees without any sap, moisture,
and verdure, and which are only fit fuel for the fire; to the trees of
the wood, to wild olive trees; to trees on an heath, in a desert, in
parched land, and not to trees by rivers of water, but to trees that
have no root, and are without fruit, [Jde
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012). And though they may be in a
seeming prosperous condition for a time, may be in great power, riches,
and honour, and spread themselves like a green bay tree; yet suddenly
they are cut down as the grass, and wither as the green herb; and even
their outward prosperity destroys them; so that not anything they have
or do in the issue prospers: and therefore they are not blessed or happy
as the good man is; yea, they are wretched and miserable, nay, cursed;
they are cursed now, and will be hereafter; they are cursed in their
basket and store, their blessings are curses to them; the law pronounces
them cursed; and they will hear, "go ye cursed", at the day of judgment,
see [Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041). The Vulgate Latin,
Septuagint, and Arabic versions, repeat the words "not so", and read
"not so the ungodly, not so:" which seems to be done for the
confirmation of the truth of it:

but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away; they are like chaff,
which has no root, moisture, greenness, nor fruitfulness; they have
nothing in them solid and substantial; they are destitute of all that is
good; are vain and empty; without the knowledge of God and Christ;
without faith in Christ and love to him; and are sensual, not having the
Spirit, his graces and fruits: they are like chaff for lightness, vain
in their imaginations, light in their principles, frothy in their words,
and unstable in all their ways: they are never long in any position,
unsettled, disquieted, and tossed to and fro; and there is no peace unto
them: they are like chaff, useless and unprofitable, nothing worth, fit
only for everlasting burnings, which will be their case. For when Christ
will gather his wheat, the righteous, which are of value, into his
garner, the heavenly glory, he will burn the chaff, the wicked, with
unquenchable fire. They are now like chaff, driven and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, with divers and strange doctrines, and
entertain every light and airy notion; and are easily drawn aside and
carried away by the force of their own lusts, and with every temptation
of Satan, who works effectually in then: and particularly they are like
chaff before the wind of terrible judgments and calamities in this life,
and of the awful judgment hereafter, when they will be driven away from
the presence of the Lord into everlasting destruction. The metaphor is
often used in this sense; see [Job
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#017); and denotes the secret, sudden,
sure, and easy ruin of the ungodly, which comes upon them like a
whirlwind, in an instant, which they cannot avoid; and they can no more
stand before God and against him, than chaff before the wind. It
follows,

[Psalms 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 1:5</span></span>

Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment,.... Neither in
temporal judgment, when God comes forth in a way of wrath and sore
displeasure; for who can stand before him when he is angry? what are
chaff and stubble, thorns and briers, to consuming fire? nor in the last
and great day of judgment, so the Targum and Kimchi interpret the words;
for that day will burn like an oven the wicked, who will be as stubble,
and leave neither root nor branch, [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001), when the great day of the Lamb's
wrath is come, who will be able to stand? [Rom
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016); there will be no standing for
the wicked when he appears; they will all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ, to take their trial and hear their sentence, [Co2
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010); but they shall not stand in the
same place with the righteous, not at Christ's right hand, but at his
left; they shall not stand with an holy confidence, with intrepidity,
and without shame, as the blessed man will; they will not stand, but
fall in judgment; they will not be acquitted and discharged, but be
condemned to everlasting punishment, [Mat
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030); and this sense the Targum on
the place expresses, "the ungodly shall not be justified in the great
day"; the Vulgate Latin and Septuagint versions render the words, "the
ungodly shall not rise again in judgment"; from whence some have
concluded there will be no resurrection of the wicked: which seems, to
be the sense of Kimchi and other Jewish writers; who assert that the
souls of the wicked perish with their bodies at death, and that the
latter rise not, contrary to [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007); but that the wicked will, rise
may be concluded from the justice of God, which requires that the bodies
which have sinned should be punished; and from the general judgment of
good and bad, and from the account of the punishment of hell, which will
be inflicted on the body as well as on the soul: besides, the contrary
doctrine is a licentious one, and is calculated to harden wicked men in
their sins, and is directly repugnant to the assertions of Christ, and
the Apostle Paul, [Joh 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028); nor has
it any foundation in this text, even admitting such a version; which
does not absolutely affirm that the wicked shall not rise again, but
that they shall not rise again in, judgment, in the first resurrection,
the resurrection of the just, and so as to be acquitted and discharged,
but they shall rise to the resurrection of damnation;

nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous; who are made righteous
by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and have a work of grace
and holiness wrought in them; and who, under the influence of grace,
live soberly, righteously, and godly; these are the same with the
blessed man, [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); and who at the
day of judgment will be perfectly holy, and free from all sin; and they
will be all gathered together by the holy angels; the dead saints will
be raised, the living ones will be changed, and both will be caught up
together to meet the Lord in the air, and will make up one general
assembly and church of the firstborn; and among these, and in this
assembly, there will not be a single sinner; there are now sinners in
Zion, foolish virgins with the wise, chaff and tares among Christ's
wheat, and wolves and goats among his sheep; but then there will be an
eternal separation, and no mixing together any more.

[Psalms 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 1:6</span></span>

For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous,.... The way in which he
walks by faith, which is in Jesus Christ; the way in which he goes to
the Father, and carries to him his sacrifices of prayer and praise,
which meet with acceptance through him; the way in which he seeks for
and expects justification, pardon, and salvation, namely, through the
blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of Christ: and also it may denote
his course, his walk and conversation; for the righteous man is a
follower of God, he takes up the cross and follows after Christ: he
walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, according to the rule
of the word, and as becomes the Gospel of Christ: and this way of his in
every sense the Lord "knows"; not merely as he is omniscient, for by his
omniscience his eyes are upon the ways of all men; he knows the way of
the wicked as well as the way of the righteous; but the sense is, that
the Lord approves of and is well pleased with his way of faith and
holiness; he knows this person, so as to love him and take delight and
pleasure in him; his countenance beholds him with a smile; he is well
pleased with him in Christ and for his sake, on whose account he has
respect to him and to his offerings, to his service and duty, to his
ways and works; and hence he is a blessed man, is in a happy situation,
and all he does prospers, for he and his ways please the Lord: and hence
also it is that neither he nor his way shall perish; the way he is in
leads to everlasting life, and he being a follower of the Lord in a way
pleasing to him, he shall never perish, but have eternal life;

but the way of the ungodly shall perish; for his way is a wicked way,
the way of sinners, [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); it leads
to destruction and death, and all that walk in it shall perish; for if
is a way the Lord knows not, does not approve of, he abhors it;
wherefore the man that continues in it will be unhappy, wretched, and
miserable to all eternity. These last words therefore show the reason of
the happiness of one sort of men, and the unhappiness of the other; and
prove and confirm the same: the Lord knows, approves of, loves, and
delights in the one; he does not approve of and delight in the other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 2](psa002)

</div>
