<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa108)  [Next](psa110) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 109](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 109:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 109

To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David. This psalm was written by
David, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, concerning Judas the
betrayer of Christ, as is certain from [Act
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#016) hence it is used to be called by
the ancients the Iscariotic psalm. Whether the occasion of it was the
rebellion of Absalom, as some, or the persecution of Saul, as Kimchi;
and whoever David might have in view particularly, whether Ahithophel,
or Doeg the Edomite, as is most likely; yet it is evident that the Holy
Ghost foresaw the sin of Judas, and prophesies of that, and of the ruin
and misery that should come upon him; for the imprecations in this psalm
are no other than predictions of future events, and so are not to be
drawn into an example by men; nor do they breathe out anything contrary
to the spirit of Christianity, but are proofs of it, since what is here
predicted has been exactly accomplished. The title in the Syriac version
is,

"a psalm of David when they created Absalom king without his knowledge,
and for this cause he was slain; but to us it expounds the sufferings of
the Christ of God;''

and indeed he is the person that is all along speaking in this psalm.

[Psalms 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 109:1</span></span>

Hold not thy peace,.... Or be not as a deaf or dumb man, or like one
that turns a deaf ear and will give no answer; so the Lord seems to his
people when he does not give an immediate answer to their prayers, and
does not arise to help them; he seems to have forsaken them, and to
stand at a distance from them; nor does he avenge them of their enemies;
it is the Messiah, as man, that puts up this petition, and it agrees
with [Psa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002).

O God of my praise; worthy of all praise, because of the perfections of
his nature, and for the mercies he bestows; and is and ought to be the
constant object of the praise of his people, and was the object of the
praise of Christ; see [Psa 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022), who
praised him for his wonderful formation as man, having such a holy human
nature, so suitable to his divine Person, and so fit for the service of
his people; for his preservation from his enemies, and the deliverance
of him from death and the grave, by his resurrection; for hearing his
petitions, and for the special grace bestowed on his people; see [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014). Or, "O God of my glorying
(w)"; in whom he gloried, of whom he boasted; as he often with
exultation spoke of him as his God and Father: or, "the God that praises
me"; for his praise was not of men, but of God, who by a voice from
heaven declared him his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased, [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).

\(w\) "gloriationis meae", Cocceius; "de quo glorior", so some in
Vatablus.

[Psalms 109:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 109:2</span></span>

For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me,.... Or "of deceit" (x) itself; most wicked and very
deceitful men, who sometimes flattered and pretended friendship, as the
Jews did to Christ, when they designed ill against him; though at other
times their mouths were opened, and they poured out their calumnies and
reproaches very freely and largely; traducing his person, and aspersing
his character as a wicked man; blaspheming his miracles, as if done by
the help of the devil; charging his doctrine with novelty, falsehood,
and blasphemy; loading him with invidious names, as Samaritan, madman,
&c; representing him as an enemy to the state, as a seditious person,
and a disturber of the nation's peace; particularly their mouths were
opened against him when they called for his crucifixion, and would have
no denial; and especially when he was on the cross, where they gaped
upon him with their mouths, and poured out their scoffs and jeers at
him; see [Psa 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014).

They have spoken against me with a lying tongue, false witnesses rose up
against him, and laid things to his charge he knew nothing of, and which
they could not prove, [Mat 26:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059).

\(x\) "os doli", Vatablus, Cocceius; "os fraudis", Gejerus, Michaelis;
so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 109:3</span></span>

They compassed me about also with words of hatred,.... They surrounded
him as he hung on the cross, and expressed their malice and hatred
against him; then was he enclosed with these spiteful snarling dogs, and
encompassed by them as with so many bees, who everyone left their sting
in him, [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016).

And fought against me without a cause: they were of an hostile spirit,
enemies and enmity itself against him; fought against him both with
words and blows, with their tongues and with their fists; sought his
life, and at length took it away; he was attacked by the body of the
Jewish nation, and by the whole posse of devils; and all this without
any cause or just reason: he gave them no occasion for this enmity and
malice, and opposition to him; and it was in the issue without effect,
it was in vain and to no purpose; for though they gained their point in
putting him to death, yet he rose again a triumphant Conqueror over them
all.

[Psalms 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 109:4</span></span>

For my love they are my adversaries,.... For the love that Christ showed
to the Jews; to their bodies, in going about and healing all manner of
diseases among them; to their souls, in preaching, the Gospel to them in
each of their cities; and for the love he showed to mankind in coming
into the world to save them, which should have commanded love again; but
instead of this they became his implacable adversaries: they acted the
part of Satan; they were as so many Satans to him, as the word
signifies.

But I give myself unto prayer; or "I am a man of prayer" (y); as Aben
Ezra and Kimchi supply it; so he was in the days of his flesh, [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007), he was constant at it, and
fervent in it; sometimes a whole night together at it: his usual method
was, when at Jerusalem, to teach in the temple in the daytime, and at
night to go to the mount of Olives, and there abide and pray, [Luk
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012). This was the armour he alone
made use of against his enemies, when they fought against him, and acted
the part of an adversary to him; he betook himself to nothing else but
prayer; he did not return railing for railing, but committed himself in
prayer to God, who judgeth righteously, [Pe1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023), yea, he prayed for those his
adversaries: and so Aben Ezra and Kimchi interpret it, that he was a man
of prayer for them, and prayed for them; as it is certain Christ did,
when he was encompassed by his enemies, and they were venting all their
spite and malice against him, [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034).

\(y\) "et ego vir orationis", Pagninus, Gejerus.

[Psalms 109:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 109:5</span></span>

And they have rewarded me evil for good,.... For the good words and
sound doctrine he delivered to them; for the good works and miracles he
wrought among them, to the healing of them; see [Joh
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032).

And hatred for my love; he came to seek and save that which was lost,
and yet they hated him, and would not have him to rule over them, [Luk
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010).

[Psalms 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 109:6</span></span>

Set thou a wicked man over him,.... Or "them", as the Syriac version;
over everyone of his adversaries, and all of them: and which may be
interpreted, as it is by Cocceius, of tyrannical princes and governors,
set over the Jews, as Tiberius, Caius, Claudius, Nero, &c. and their
deputies, Pilate, Felix, Festus, Florus; all wicked men, and which were
a judgment on them for their usage of Christ. Though here some single
person is designed, even Judas, notorious for his enmity and ingratitude
to Christ; and by the wicked one set over him may be meant Satan, as in
the next clause, as he is sometimes called, [Mat
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038), into whose hands and power
Judas was put, under whose influence he was; who entered into him, took
possession of him, and put it into his heart to betray his Master, [Joh
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002).

And let Satan stand at his right hand; to direct and influence him, to
solicit and tempt him to do the evil he did, and to accuse him for it
when done; see [Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001).

[Psalms 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 109:7</span></span>

When he shall be judged, let him be condemned,.... When he shall be
arraigned at the bar of his own conscience, and be charged with the sin
of which he is guilty, let conscience, which is as a thousand witnesses,
rise up against him, and condemn him; so it did Judas, [Mat
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001), or when he shall stand before
the judgment seat of Christ at the last day,

let him go out a wicked, or a guilty or condemned man (z); let him hear
the awful sentence, "go, thou cursed, into everlasting fire": and let
him go out immediately from the presence of the Judge into eternal
punishment, the condemnation of the devil: so Judas is said to go to his
own place, [Act 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#025).

And let his prayer become sin, let it be fruitless and in vain; and so
far from being heard, let it he treated as an abomination; let it be
considered as an aggravation of his crime, as Haman's was, [Est
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007), let his prayer being without
faith in the blood of Christ, be reckoned sinful, as it was; let his
cries, and tears, and repentance issue in desperation, and that in sin,
as it did in destroying himself, [Mat
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005).

\(z\) "exeat impius", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, De Dieu, Gejerus;
"damnatus", Junius & Tremellius; "condemnatus", Cocceius.

[Psalms 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 109:8</span></span>

Let his days be few,.... The days of men in common are but few at most:
length of days, either beyond or according to the usual term of life, is
reckoned a blessing; and to be cut off in the midst of a man's days a
curse; when this is by the immediate hand of God, as a visible token of
his displeasure; or by the hand of the civil magistrate, for some
capital offence; or by a man's own hands, which was the case of Judas;
whose days were but few, in comparison of the other apostles, who
outlived him many years; especially the Apostle John, who lived sixty
years after, at least. The Syriac version renders it, "let their days be
few"; and so it reads the whole context in the plural number, both in
the verses preceding and following; and the whole may be interpreted of
the Jews, as it is by Theodoret, as well as of Judas; since they were
concerned in the same sin, and are equally charged as the betrayers and
murderers of Christ, [Act 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052), and
their days as a nation and church after the death of Christ were very
few; within forty years, or thereabout, their city and temple were
destroyed.

And let another take his office; or bishopric, as the Septuagint version
and the Apostle Peter call it; who cites this passage, and applies it to
Judas, in [Act 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020). His office was
the office of an apostle, an high and honourable one, the chief office
in the church: it was a charge, as the word signifies; a charge of
souls, an oversight of the flock; which is to be taken not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre's sake, but of a ready
mind. Judas took it for filthy lucre's sake, and it was taken away from
him, and given to another; to Matthias, on whom the lot fell, and who
was numbered with the apostles in his room, [Act
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#021). This is true also of the
priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, who were divested of their offices in a
very little time; three shepherds were cut off in one month, [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008). There being a change of the
priesthood, law, and ordinances, there was a change of offices and
officers; new ordinances were appointed by Christ, and new officers
created, on whom gifts were bestowed suitable to their work.

[Psalms 109:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 109:9</span></span>

Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow. This sometimes is
the case of good men, who leave widows and fatherless children, whom the
Lord shows mercy to; being the Father of the fatherless, and the Judge
of the widow, [Psa 68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005), but sometimes
it is threatened and comes as a judgment, when the Lord shows no mercy
and favour to them, [Exo 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#024). And
this is the case here, which very probably was literally fulfilled in
Judas, who might have a wife and children; since it looks as if the
other apostles had, and certain it is that one of them had a wife, even
Peter, in the times of Christ; see [Co1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005). And this was verified in the
people of the Jews; whom the Lord divorced from himself, and wrote a
"loammi" upon them, and left them as orphans and fatherless, [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009). This will never be the case of
Christ's people, or the Christian church, [Joh
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018), though it will be of the
antichristian one, [Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007).

[Psalms 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 109:10</span></span>

Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg,.... Wander from
place to place, begging their bread: this is denied of the children of
good men in David's time, [Psa 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#025)
yet was threatened to the children of Eli, [Sa1
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#036) and was very likely literally
true of the children of Judas; and was certainly the case of multitudes
of the children of the Jews, the posterity of them that crucified
Christ, at the time of their destruction by the Romans; when great
numbers were dispersed, and wandered about in various countries, as
vagabonds, begging their bread from door to door; which is reckoned (a)
by them a great affliction, and very distressing.

Let them seek their bread also out of their desolate places; either
describing, as Kimchi thinks, the miserable cottages, forlorn and
desolate houses, in which they lived, and from whence they went out to
everyone that passed by, to ask relief of them; or it may be rendered,

because of their desolate places (b); or, "after them"; so the Targum,
"after their desolation was made"; when their grand house was left
desolate, their temple, as our Lord said it should, and was, [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038), and all their other houses in
Jerusalem and in Judea; then were they obliged to seek their bread of
others elsewhere, and by begging. The Syriac version wants this verse.

\(a\) Mifchar Hapeninim apud Buxtorf. Florileg. Heb. p. 262, 263. (b) So
De Dieu, Gejerus, and some in Michaelis.

[Psalms 109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 109:11</span></span>

Let the extortioner catch all that he hath,.... Or, "lay a snare for
all" (c); as the Romans did, by bringing in their army, invading the
land of Judea, and besieging the city of Jerusalem; who are "the
extortioner or exacter that demanded tribute of them"; which they
refused to pay, and therefore they seized on all they had for it. The
Syriac and Arabic versions render it, "the creditor"; who sometimes for
a debt would take wife and children, and all that a man had; see [Kg2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001). It might be literally true of
Judas; who dying in debt, his wife and children, and all he had, might
be laid hold on for payment.

And let the stranger spoil his labour; plunder his house of all his
goods and substance he had been labouring for: which was true of the
Romans, who were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel; who came into
the land, and spoiled their houses, fields, and vineyards, they had been
labouring in; they took away their place and nation, and all they had,
[Joh 11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048).

\(c\) "illaqueet", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Piscator, Gejerus;
"iretiat", Vatablus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 109:12</span></span>

Let there be none to extend mercy unto him,.... No pity is ever
expressed at hearing or reading the sad case of Judas; and though the
Jews were pitied of those that carried them captive to Babylon, [Psa
106:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#046), yet, in their last destruction
by the Romans, no mercy was shown them; the wrath of God and man came
upon them to the uttermost, [Th1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#016).

Neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children: to bestow
any benefit upon them; to relieve their wants, nor to protect their
persons; no more respect shown them than to their father, being shunned
and hated for their father's sake.

[Psalms 109:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 109:13</span></span>

Let his posterity be cut off,.... As the seed of the wicked are said to
be, [Psa 37:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#028), or cut down, as a tree
to the very root; as the Jewish nation was by the axe of God's judgment,
which, John says, was laid to the root of the tree, and the blow just
going to be given, as it was in a few years after, [Mat
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010) or, as the Targum,

"let his end be for destruction;''

and so the Syriac version, "let their end be for destruction"; their
last end, which it is said shall be cut off, and issue in death, eternal
death; when the end of a good man is peace and eternal life, see [Psa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037).

And in the generation following let their name be blotted out: or, in
another age (d); the next age, the third generation; meaning the name of
the posterity of Judas, and the name of the people of the Jews, so as to
be spoken of with honour and reputation; but, instead of that, they are
for a taunt, a proverb, and a curse, in all places.

\(d\) "in generatione altera", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Psalms 109:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 109:14</span></span>

Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord,.... Not of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; who, though they had their failings, they
were not remembered, and much less punished in their posterity, but were
forgiven: rather of the Amorites and Hittites; the one being said to be
the father, and the other the mother, of the Jews, [Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003), they succeeding them in their
land, and imitating their example, and committing the same sins they
did: or rather of their wicked ancestors, who killed the prophets; and
the measure of whose sins Judas and the Jews filled up in crucifying
Christ, see [Mat 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#031). The iniquity
of these may be said to be remembered, it not being forgiven, when it
was brought to account, and punished in their posterity, doing the same
wicked actions; compare with this [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019).

And let not the sin of his mother be blotted out: or forgiven; but stand
as a debt to be accounted for: meaning not the sin of his mother Eve,
nor of his immediate parent; but either of the Hittite as before, or of
the synagogue of the Jews, or Jerusalem, which killed the prophets of
the Lord.

[Psalms 109:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 109:15</span></span>

Let them be before the Lord continually,.... And not cast behind his
back, or into the depths of the sea, never to be seen more, as sins are
when forgiven; but be always in sight, as loathsome and abominable, and
causing those that committed them to be abhorred for them; and be before
him, as a Judge, to examine them, the nature and kind of them, and to
condemn and punish for them; see [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005). The Targum is,

"let them be before the Word of the Lord always;''

see [Heb 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013).

That he may cut off the memory of them from the earth; so that they may
not be remembered with any applause, or their name spoken of with any
commendation; see [Job 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017).

[Psalms 109:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 109:16</span></span>

Because that he remembered not to show mercy,.... As Judas did not;
neither to the poor, whom he cared not for, [Joh
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006) nor to Christ, whom he betrayed
with a kiss to his enemies: nor had these words of Christ any effect
upon him, to move his pity and compassion, "Friend, wherefore art thou
come?" [Mat 26:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#049) nor did the Jews
show mercy to him: they were a merciless and hardhearted people; though
mercy was one of the weightier matters of the law, this they omitted,
[Mat 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023), their want of compassion
may be observed in the priest and Levite passing by the man wounded by
thieves, [Luk 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030). Nor did they show
any mercy to Christ, when they smote and buffeted him; nor did it move
their pity when Pilate brought him forth with a crown of thorns on his
head, and in a miserable condition, saying, "Behold the man"; but they
cried out, "Crucify him, crucify him"; and gave him gall for his meat,
and vinegar to drink; and mocked him when in all his miseries and
agonies.

But persecuted the poor and needy man; Christ, who became poor for our
sakes, and stood in need of the ministration of others to him, [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009) and was poor in spirit, a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; him Judas and the Jews persecuted
to death, as follows:

that he might even slay the broken in heart; Christ, whose heart was
broken with the reproach and cruel usage of men, [Psa
69:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020), whose life the Jews sought to
take away, and by means of Judas did.

[Psalms 109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 109:17</span></span>

As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him,.... Judas loved that which
brought a curse upon him, sin; and so he may be said to love the curse;
just as sinners are said to love death, [Pro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036). He was desirous of and sought
after it, to bring Christ to an accursed death; and which he
accomplished and pleased himself with; and therefore it was a just
retaliation upon him that the curse should light on him, and he himself
come to a shameful and ignominious death. The Jews loved the cursing
law, the flying roll, called the curse in [Zac
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#002), which curses every transgressor
of it: they boasted of it, rested in it, and sought for righteousness by
it; and submitted not unto, but despised, the righteousness of Christ;
and therefore it was but just they should come under the curse of the
law: they imprecated the curse on them and their children, saying, "His
blood be upon us and them", [Mat 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)
and which accordingly came upon them, and remains to this day.

As he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him; Judas
delighted not in the good will and good wishes of any to Christ, as
appears from his dislike of the ointment being poured on his head by the
poor woman, in [Joh 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004), and so the
Jews were displeased at the children, and at the disciples in the
temple, blessing Christ, pronouncing him blessed, and wishing blessings
to him, [Mat 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015), yea, they
delighted not in their own blessedness, or in that which only could give
it to them; they delighted not in Christ, who was sent to bless them,
but despised and rejected him; nor in the Gospel, which is full of
blessings; and particularly not in the doctrine of justification by
Christ's righteousness, which commonly makes a man blessed: yea, in a
sense, they judged themselves unworthy of everlasting life; and
therefore it was but a righteous thing that blessing should be far from
Judas and the Jews, as it was; even temporal, spiritual, and eternal
blessings: yet there have been a sort of heretics (e), that have highly
praised and commended Judas, as doing a brave and noble action in
betraying Christ, whereby the work of salvation was hastened.

\(e\) Epiphan. contra Haeres. l. 1. Haer. 38.

[Psalms 109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 109:18</span></span>

As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment,.... He was
full of it; his mouth was full of cursing and bitterness; it was visible
in him, easy to be discerned; he took pride as well as pleasure in it,
it was in his esteem an ornament to him, as his clothes were. The Syriac
version renders it, "as armour"; as if it was a protection to him, or he
thought it to be so.

So let it come into his bowels like water; the meaning is, let the wrath
of God and the curse of the law come into his conscience, and make sad
work there, and fill him with dread and terror, and that in great
abundance, and with great force; like a flood of waters that carry all
before it; or like the waters of jealousy which made the belly to swell
and the thigh to rot; or the flying roll of the curse, which entering
into the house of the sinner destroyed it, and all in it, [Num
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#022).

And like oil into his bones; which is more piercing and penetrating than
water; and signifies the inward and quick sense he should have of his
sins, and of the wrath of God for them; see [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011).

[Psalms 109:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 109:19</span></span>

Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him,.... Let him be
surrounded on all sides with the wrath of God; and let it be visible to
all, as a man's garment on him is: see [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024).

And for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually; let him be in the
utmost straits and distress, being encompassed about with the curse and
wrath of God; and let that stick close unto him as a man's belt does;
and let him not be able to get clear of it, or extricate himself out of
it, as no man can on whom it is.

[Psalms 109:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 109:20</span></span>

Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord,.... Who were
so many Satans, as the word used signifies; and Judas particularly is
called a devil; and of the same malevolent and diabolical disposition
were the Jews in general, [Joh 6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)
and what is before imprecated upon them is the just recompence of reward
for their hatred to Christ and ill usage of him.

And of them that speak evil against my soul; or "life" (f); in order to
take it away, as did the false witnesses that rose up against him, and
the Jews who charged him with sedition and blasphemy.

\(f\) "contra vitam meam", Gejerus.

[Psalms 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 109:21</span></span>

But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy name's sake,.... The sense
of the petition is, and which is a prayer of Christ as man, that the
Lord God would take his part, be on his side, be present with him, work
with him, help and assist him, and that for his own honour and glory,
for his truth and faithfulness sake, who had promised him help and
assistance, [Psa 89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021).

Because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me; or "thy kindness" (g);
meaning the lovingkindness of God to Christ, which he always bore to
him, and was eminently and superlatively good; which he makes use of as
an argument for his deliverance out of all his troubles, and from death
itself; see [Psa 69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014).

\(g\) "benignitas tua", Musculus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 109:22</span></span>

For I am poor and needy,.... As he was in human nature, being born of
poor parents, brought up in a mean manner, had not where to lay his
head, and was ministered to by others; though he was Lord of all, and
immensely rich in the perfections of his nature, and in his vast empire
and dominion, and the revenues arising from thence; see [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009). It may here chiefly respect his
helpless and forlorn estate as man, at the time of his sufferings and
death; see [Psa 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017).

And my heart is wounded within me; with the sins of his people on him,
with a sense of divine wrath, and when under divine desertions,
especially when his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, [Mat
26:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038).

[Psalms 109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 109:23</span></span>

I am gone like the shadow when it declineth,.... When the sun is
setting, and the shadow is going off; man's life is often compared to a
shadow, because fleeting, momentary, and soon gone, [Ch1
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015) and death is expressed by going
the way of all flesh; and by going to the grave, the house for all
living, a man's long home, [Jos 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014)
and so is the death of Christ, [Luk
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#022), it may be rendered, "I am made
to go" (h), denoting the violent death of Christ, who was cut off out of
the land of the living, and whose life was taken away from the earth,
[Isa 53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008).

I am tossed up and down as the locust; or "shaken out" (i) by the wind,
as the locust is by the east wind, and carried from place to place, [Exo
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013), or when a swarm of them by a
strong wind are crowded together and thrown upon one another; or like
the grasshopper, which leaps from hedge to hedge, and has no certain
abode: and such was the case of Christ here on earth; and especially it
may have respect not only to his being sometimes in Judea and sometimes
in Galilee, sometimes in the temple and sometimes in the mount of
Olives; but to his being tossed about after his apprehension, when he
was led to Annas, and then to Caiaphas, then to Pilate, then to Herod,
then delivered to the soldiers, and by them led to Calvary, and
crucified.

\(h\) "cogor abire", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius; "abire
factus sum", Gejerus, Michaelis. (i) "excussus sum", Montanus, Vatablus
Gejerus, Michaelis; "excutior", Tigurine version, Musculus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 109:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 109:24</span></span>

My knees are weak through fasting,..... Either voluntary or forced,
through want of food or refreshment; this was verified in Christ, when
he kneeled and prayed, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood
falling to the ground; see [Psa 69:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#010).

And my flesh faileth of fatness; or "for want of oil" (k); the radical
moisture of his flesh being dried up like a potsherd, [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015).

\(k\) , Sept. "propter oleum", V. L. "propter defectum olei", Eth. Arab.

[Psalms 109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 109:25</span></span>

I became also a reproach unto them,.... Or they reproached him; not only
in life, traducing his conversation, blaspheming his miracles, calling
him a Samaritan, saying he had a devil, and charging him with sedition;
but at the time of his death they reviled him, and treated him in the
most opprobrious manner.

When they looked upon me, they shaked their heads; which was verified in
the Jews as they passed by the cross of Christ, whither they came to
stare upon him and scoff at him, [Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039).

[Psalms 109:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 109:26</span></span>

Help me, O Lord my God,.... Jehovah the Father is here addressed, who is
the God of Christ, as Christ is man; who formed him, supported him, and
glorified him; and whom Christ loved, believed in, obeyed and prayed
unto; nor did he pray to a God that could not hear, but to one that was
able to save him from death: as a divine Person he needed no help, being
the mighty God, the most Mighty, the Almighty: but as man he did, being
encompassed about with infirmities; and as Mediator help was promised
him, he expected it, and he had it, [Psa
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021).

O save me according to thy mercy; or "kindness"; as before in [Psa
109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021) from sufferings, and out of
them; from death and the grave, as he was; or his people by him, who are
saved not by works of righteousness, but according to the mercy of God,
[Tit 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005).

[Psalms 109:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 109:27</span></span>

That they may know that this is thy hand,.... Which inflicted vengeance,
and executed judgments on Judas and the Jews, as before imprecated: so
the Targum,

"that they may know that this is thy stroke;''

or which was concerned in all the sorrows and sufferings of the Messiah,
which could never have come upon him had it not been the will of God; it
was his hand and council that determined it, or men could never have
effected it; see [Act 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028), or which
wrought deliverance and salvation as before prayed for; see [Psa
118:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#021).

That thou, Lord, hast done it: one or other, or all the above things;
the finger of God was to be seen in them; particularly in the sufferings
of Christ, and in his exaltation; see [Act
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

[Psalms 109:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 109:28</span></span>

Let them curse, but bless thou,.... Let them curse me, as Shimei did
David, the type of Christ; let them curse themselves, as they did; or my
people: or "let them be cursed", as the Syriac version; cursed in life
and at death, and to all eternity: but "bless thou me", the Messiah; as
he did, when he raised him front the dead, set him at his right hand,
and gave him a name above everyone, and made him most blessed for
evermore; and bless my people with all spiritual blessings of grace, and
with eternal glory and happiness. Or "be thou blessed"; let honour,
blessing, and praise, be continually ascribed to thee; if God does but
bless, it is no matter if wicked men curse, so Aben Ezra and Kimchi
interpret it; see [Sa2 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011).

When they arise, let them be ashamed; be suffered to do those things
which may bring shame and disgrace upon them; or let them be
disappointed and so confounded, as the Jews were; who though they so far
gained their point as to bring Christ to the dust of death and the
grave, yet to their great confusion he arose again from the dead; or let
them be ashamed at the last day, as they will be when Christ shall come
in the clouds of heaven and be their Judge, who will then be glad to
shelter themselves in rocks and caves. This is imprecated to be done

when they shall arise: rise up against Christ to take away his life;
rise up against his disciples to persecute them, against his Gospel to
contradict and blaspheme it, and against his cause and interest to crush
it; or against the Romans, to shake off their yoke, when they were
brought to great shame and confusion; or when they shall arise at the
resurrection of the dead, which will be to shame and everlasting
contempt, [Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002).

But let thy servant rejoice; the Messiah, who appeared in the form of a
servant; came not as a temporal lord and prince, to be ministered unto,
but as a servant, to minister to others; and who is a servant of God's
choosing, calling, and sending, and whom he faithfully served; and who,
as prayed for, did rejoice in the strength of the Lord, given him as
man; and in the salvation wrought for and by him, [Psa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001), in the work of the Lord
prospering in his hand; in his victory over sin, Satan, the world, and
death; in the presence of God he was made glad with, and in the glory
promised him, which he had with his Father before the world was, [Psa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011).

[Psalms 109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 109:29</span></span>

Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame,.... This is only explanative
of what is said before,

And let them cover themselves with their own confusion as with a mantle:
the Arabic version is, "as with a breastplate." Some understand it as a
petition of Christ, that they might be brought to repentance for their
sins, and so to shame for them; which is an instance of his wondrous
grace and goodness; and it is certain he prayed for the forgiveness of
his enemies when on the cross, [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034).

[Psalms 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 109:30</span></span>

I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth,.... Vocally, and in the
highest strains.

Yea, I will praise him among the multitude: of converted persons, both
Jews and Gentiles, and by them: or, "among the mighty" (l); or great
ones; the great congregation, as in [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025) among the innumerable and mighty
angels in heaven; or, as the Targum,

"among the wise men;''

his own disciples, made wise unto salvation, and to win souls; being
filled with the gifts of wisdom and knowledge; among and with whom
Christ sung an hymn of praise after the celebration of the supper, [Mat
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030).

\(l\) "in magno coetu", Tigurine version.

[Psalms 109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 109:31</span></span>

For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor,.... Of the Messiah, as
in [Psa 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022) at whose right hand the
Lord was, to guide and direct, help and assist, protect and defend, [Psa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008), or of his people, who are poor
in every sense; but the Lord is on their side, and is a present help in
time of trouble, [Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001).

To save him from those that condemn his soul: the Messiah: from his
judges, the high priest and Jewish sanhedrim, and Pilate the Roman
governor, who condemned him to death; but he committed his spirit, or
soul, to God, who received it, and raised his body from the dead; and
would not suffer it to see corruption, as a testimony of his innocence:
or the soul of the poor saints, which the Lord saves from the
condemnation of sin, Satan, the law, and their own consciences, [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 110](psa110)

</div>
