<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa121)  [Next](psa123) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 122](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 122:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 122

A Song of degrees of David. This is the first of the songs of degrees
that bears the name of David: and Kimchi thinks they only were written
by him which have his name to them; though he, Abendana, and others, are
of opinion that this psalm was composed with a view to the captives in
Babylon; who are here represented, and are represented as rejoicing at
their going up to Jerusalem, to the solemn feasts there. The inscription
in the Syriac version is,

"a "psalm" of David, one of the psalms of ascent, when Cyrus commanded
the captivity to go up; spiritually, a promise of good things.''

It seems to be designed for the use of the Israelites, and to be sung by
them when they went up to the feasts, three times a year. Some say (a)
they sung this by the way, when they carried the firstfruits to
Jerusalem.

\(a\) Weemse's Christ. Synagog. l. 1. c. 6. s. 4. p. 144.

[Psalms 122:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 122:1</span></span>

I was glad when they said unto me,.... Or, "I rejoiced in", or "because
of, those that said unto me" (b); or, "in what was said unto me". For it
may regard not only the time when he had this pleasure of mind, but the
persons who gave it, as well as the ground and reason of the things said
unto him, as follows:

let us go into the house of the Lord; the house of the sanctuary, as the
Targum; the tabernacle, the place of divine worship, typical of the
church of God; which is an house of his building, beautifying, and
repairing, and where he dwells: it has all the essentiality of a house;
its materials are lively stones; its foundation Christ; its pillars
ministers of the word; the beams of it stable believers; its windows the
ordinances; and the door into it faith in Christ, and a profession of
it. Now it is both the duty and privilege of believers to go into it;
here they find spiritual pleasure, enjoy abundance of peace and comfort,
and have their spiritual strength renewed, as well as it is to their
honour and glory: and it becomes them to stir up one another to go
thither; some are slothful and backward; some are lukewarm and
indifferent; some are worldly and carnally minded; and others are
conceited of their knowledge, and think themselves wiser than their
teachers, and therefore need to be excited to their duty; and truly
gracious souls are glad when they are stirred up to it, both on their
own account, and on the account of others, and because of the glory of
God.

\(b\) "in dicentibus mihi", Montanus; so Ainsworth, Vatablus, Cocceius;
"in his quae dicta sunt mihi", V. L. so Junius & Tremellius.

[Psalms 122:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 122:2</span></span>

Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Which is to be
understood not merely literally of the city of Jerusalem, and of
continuance in the possession of it, it being lately taken out of the
hands of the Jebusites; but spiritually of the church of God, which is
often called by this name; the gates of which are the same as the gates
of Zion, and the gates of wisdom, the word and ordinances; attendance on
which is signified by "standing": and which also denotes continuance
therein: and happy are those that are within these gates, and have a
comfortable assurance of their abiding there; and still more happy will
they be who will be admitted within the gates of the New Jerusalem,
which are said to be twelve, and every, one of them of one pearl; and
through which none shall enter into the city but pure and holy persons,
[Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

[Psalms 122:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 122:3</span></span>

Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together. In David's time
the upper and lower city were joined together, the streets regularly
built, the houses contiguous, not straggling about, here and there one
(c). So the church of God, like that, is built in a good situation, on a
rock and hill, where it is firm and visible; like a city full of
inhabitants, governed by wholesome laws, under proper officers; a free
city, which enjoys many privileges and immunities; a well fortified one,
having salvation for walls and bulwarks about it; a royal city, the city
of the great King, the city of our God, the name of which is
"Jehovahshammah", the Lord is there: and this is "compact together" when
its citizens are united in affection to one another; agree in their
religious sentiments; join in social worships, and live in subjection to
one Head and King, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Jews often speak, and so
some of their commentators on this passage, of a Jerusalem above and
below, and of the one being made like unto the other: so the Targum,

"Jerusalem is built in the firmament as a city, as Jerusalem on earth;''

see [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026).

\(c\) Hecataeus, an Heathen writer, describes Jerusalem as a strong
fortified city, fifty furlongs in circumference; and inhabited by twelve
myriads, or a hundred and twenty thousand men. Vid. Euseb. Praepar.
Evangel. l. 9. c. 4.

[Psalms 122:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 122:4</span></span>

Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord,.... The twelve tribes
of Israel; the males of them went up three times a year to Jerusalem to
worship, at the feasts of passover, pentecost, and tabernacles; and was
typical of the church of Christ, where the worship of God is carried on,
his word preached, and ordinances administered; and whither saints go
and attend for their own profit and the glory of God; this is the city
of our solemnities, [Isa 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020);

unto the testimony of Israel; the ark of the testimony a symbol of the
divine Presence. The law is called a testimony, because it testified the
will of God to be done; this was put into an ark, which had its name
from thence, and was typical of Christ, the end of the law for
righteousness; and over the ark was the divine Presence: hither the
tribes came to worship God, and to consult him;

"who (the Targum here says) testifies to Israel, that his divine Majesty
dwells among them, when they go to confess unto the name of the Lord.''

The Gospel is called the testimony of Christ; and it is what testifies
concerning his person, office, and grace, unto the Israel of God; and
who go up to the house of God in order to hear it;

to give thanks unto the name of the Lord; for all his mercies and
blessings, both temporal and spiritual; and which should be
acknowledged, not only in a private manner, but publicly in the house of
God; see [Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004).

[Psalms 122:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 122:5</span></span>

For there are set thrones of judgment,.... In Jerusalem as the Targum;
here were courts of judicature, and thrones for the judges to sit upon,
to execute judgment and justice to the people;

the thrones of the house of David; the Targum is,

"thrones in the house of the sanctuary, for the kings of the house of
David;''

who might sit there, as the Jews say, when others might not. In the
church of Christ, the heavenly Jerusalem, every saint is a king, as well
as a priest, and all have thrones and seats there; have a power of
judging, not only lesser matters pertaining to this life, but such as
regard the spiritual peace and welfare of the church and interest of
Christ; having laws and rules given them to go by, in the admission and
exclusion of members, and respecting their conduct to each other, and to
their Lord and head: and in the New Jerusalem there will be thrones set,
not only for the twelve apostles of Christ, and for the martyrs of
Jesus, but for all the saints; there will be the thrones of God and of
the Lamb, and every overcomer shall sit down on the same; this honour
will have all the saints, [Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028).

[Psalms 122:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 122:6</span></span>

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem,.... This is said to the persons that
solicited the psalmist to go into the house of the Lord; to the truly
godly among the tribes that went thither to worship; to his brethren and
companions, for whose sake he wished well to Zion; to praying souls, who
should not be singular and selfish; not only pray for themselves, but
for others; for all saints, and for the church of God in general; for
Jerusalem, not merely literally considered; though as that was the
metropolis of the nation, and many of them the psalmist addresses were
inhabitants of it, it became them to seek and pray for the peace of it,
their own peace being concerned in it; see [Jer
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007); but for the spiritual and
heavenly Jerusalem, the church of God, and for the peace of it; that
Christ, the Man, the Peace, the Peacemaker, who then was not come, might
come; that the members of it might enjoy spiritual peace in their son
is, and might have peace one with another, and be at peace with their
enemies; and enjoy the abundance of peace and prosperity, which will be
in the latter day; and will lie in freedom from persecution, in a
destruction of antichrist and all the the enemies of the church; in the
purity of Gospel truths and ordinances, and the spread of them; in
numerous conversions of Jews and Gentiles; in the unity of the Lord's
people in sentiment, worship, and affection; and in a large increase of
spiritual light and holiness: all which should be earnestly prayed for
by the well-wishers of the cause of Christ; see [Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006). There may be an allusion to the
name of Jerusalem, which signifies "they shall see peace"; and it should
be prayed for that they might. The argument enforcing this duty exhorted
to follows:

they shall prosper that love thee; that love Jerusalem, the church of
God; that love Christ, her King; the saints, her citizens; her laws and
ordinances; and the word of the Lord that goes out of her, and is
ministered in her: which is shown by an attendance with her on them, and
by their prayers for her prosperity and welfare: and such prosper in
their outward affairs, as Obededom and his family were blessed for the
sake of the ark he took in and took care of; and in their spiritual
affairs their souls prosper, as Gaius's did, and as such do who are
favoured with the discoveries of the love of God, with an application of
pardoning grace and mercy; have a spiritual appetite for the word; when
their graces are in lively exercise, their corruptions are subdued,
spiritual light and zeal for truth are increased, inward strength is
renewed, communion with God is enjoyed, and they are fruitful in every
good work.

[Psalms 122:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 122:7</span></span>

Peace be within thy walls,.... The word say might be supplied; for this,
with the following, seem to be petitions the psalmist puts into the
mouths of those he desires to pray for Jerusalem's peace; and he directs
them to pray in this manner, to take with them such words as these, and
pray to the Lord. Jerusalem was a walled city, and so is the church of
God; God himself is a wall of fire around her; salvation by Christ is as
walls and bulwarks to her; the power and providence of God protect her:
within these walls the people of God have a place and a name; all the
inhabitants of Zion in common are included in this petition, and peace
is wished for them all; let their condition and circumstances be what
they may, be they high or low, rich or poor, stronger or weaker
believers, children, young men, or fathers. Some render it, "in thine
army", as the Targum, and other Jewish writers; in the church's militia,
all saints being soldiers and in a warfare state; and here success to
their arms against sin, Satan, and the world, is wished for;

and prosperity within thy palaces: as there were palaces in Jerusalem
for the king, the nobles, and great men in the land; so there are in the
church of God, where he is known, for a refuge; even the meanest places
in it are preferable to the palaces of the greatest monarchs see [Psa
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003), And here indeed all the saints
are kings, and have their palaces; but particularly there are some who
are set in the first place in the church, and over others in the Lord;
who are their guides and governors, and are in office relation to the
church as pastors and deacons now, as there were priests and Levites
before: and the prosperity of these is to be prayed for, the good of the
whole church being involved therein.

[Psalms 122:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 122:8</span></span>

For my brethren and companions' sakes,.... Who were regenerated by the
spirit of God; adopted into his family, and children of the same father;
stood in the same relation to Christ the firstborn, and members of the
same church; and so brethren: partners in the same blessings and
promises of the covenant; partakers of the same grace; joined together
in religious worship; shared in the same joys and griefs; travellers
together to the same heavenly country, and entitled to the same glory
and happiness. So David, though a king, reckoned his meanest subjects as
such, who were spiritual men; and for their sakes, through the goodwill,
love, and affection he bore to them, he would set praying souls an
example, and by it enforce his own exhortation, as follows:

I will now say, peace be within thee; now and always put up this
petition, and not put it off to longer time; that peace and prosperity
may always attend the church of God, as well as the city of Jerusalem,
literally considered, and the inhabitants of it.

[Psalms 122:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 122:9</span></span>

Because of the house of the Lord our God,.... Not because of his own
palace, nor because of his own house and family; nor because of his own
personal interest; though all were concerned in the peace of Jerusalem:
but chiefly because of the sanctuary of the Lord, as the Targum; because
of the worship and service of God in it; because of his great love and
zeal for the house and church of the living God, which ate him up, [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009);

I will seek thy good; the good of Jerusalem, the good of the church of
God; do all the good he could to it both with his purse and prayers, and
by stirring up others to do the same; see [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 123](psa123)

</div>
