<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa143)  [Next](psa145) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 144](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 144:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 144

A Psalm of David. This psalm was written by David; not on account of the
return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, by a spirit of
prophecy, as Theodoret; but on his own account, after he was come to the
throne, and was king over all Israel; and was delivered from the was
between him and Israel, and from the war of the Philistines, as Kimchi
observes, having gained two victories over them: or it was written
between the two victories, and before he had conquered all his enemies;
since he prays to be delivered from the hand of strange children, [Psa
144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007). R. Obadiah thinks it was
written on the account of his deliverance from Absalom and Sheba; but
the former is best. Some copies of the Septuagint, and also the Vulgate
Latin, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions, have in their titles these words,

"against Goliath;''

and so Apollinarius; as if it was written on account of his combat with
him, and victory over him; but this clause is not in the Hebrew Bibles;
nor could Theodoret find it in the Septuagint in the Hexapla in his
time. The Syriac inscription is still more foreign to the purpose,

"a psalm of David, when he slew Asaph the brother of Goliath.''

R. Saadiah Gaon interprets this psalm of the times of the Messiah; and
there are several things in it which are applicable to him.

[Psalms 144:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 144:1</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord my strength,.... The author and giver of his natural
strength of body, and of the fortitude of his mind, and of all the
spiritual strength he had, to exercise grace, to bear up under
afflictions and trials, to perform duty, and withstand enemies. It may
be applied to Christ, the antitype of David, the man of God's right
hand, he has made strong for himself. It may be rendered, "my rock" (c);
to whom the psalmist fled for shelter, when in distress and overwhelmed;
and on whom he built his faith, and hope of eternal salvation, as well
as depended on him for all supplies of grace and strength, and for help
and succour in all times of need. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin,
Ethiopic, and Arabic versions, render it, "my God": and so the word
"rock" is used for God, [Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030);

which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight; he took him
from being a shepherd, and made him a soldier; and from being the leader
of a flock of sheep, to be a general of armies; and all his military
skill in marshalling of troops, in leading them on to battle, and
bringing them off as well as all his courage and success, were from the
Lord: he whose hands and fingers had been used to the shepherd's crook,
and to the handling of the harp and lyre, were taught how to handle the
sword, the bow, the shield, and spear. God is a man of war himself; and
he teaches the art of war, as he does husbandry and other things; see
[Exo 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003); and so the Lord furnishes
his people, who are here in a militant state, with spiritual armour, to
fight against their spiritual enemies; he teaches them how to put it on,
and directs them how to make use of every piece of it; as well as gives
them boldness to face their enemies, and victory over them.

\(c\) "rupes mea", Montanus, Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, &c. so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 144:2</span></span>

My goodness,.... Not only good, but goodness itself; the donor of all
the blessings of goodness to him; the author of all goodness in him; the
provider of all goodness for him, laid up to be used hereafter. The
Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions render it my mercy, properly
enough; that is, the God of "my mercy", as in [Psa
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010); who is all mercy, full of
mercy, rich and plenteous in it; which is abundant, and from everlasting
to everlasting. Or, "my grace" (d); the God of all grace, the giver of
every grace, and who is able to make all grace to abound; and from whom
every blessing of grace, and every particular grace, as faith, hope, and
love, and all the supplies of grace, as well as every good and perfect
gift, come: Christ is prevented with all the blessings of goodness; in
him all fulness of grace dwells, and with him God keeps his mercy for
evermore;

and my fortress; garrison or strong hold: what fortresses or
fortifications are to cities, whether natural or artificial, that is God
to his people; all his perfections are on their side; and particularly
they are kept by his power, as in a garrison, through faith unto
salvation, [Pe1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005);

my high tower: the name of the Lord, which is himself, is a strong
tower, where his righteous ones that flee to him are safe; and is an
"high" one, where they are out of the reach of all their enemies, [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010);

and my deliverer; that delivered him from his temporal enemies; and from
his spiritual ones, from sin, Satan, and the world; from all afflictions
and temptations, from wrath and ruin, death and hell;

my shield; that protected him from all evil and danger; whose favour
encompassed him as a shield; whose salvation was a shield to him; and
more particularly the person, blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of his
Son, called the shield of faith, [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016);

and he in whom I trust; not in men, no, not in princes; but in the Lord
only; in his Word, as the Targum; for things temporal and spiritual; for
the blessings of grace here, and glory hereafter; of these several
titles, see more on [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002);

who subdueth my people under me; the people of Israel, all the tribes;
whose hearts the Lord inclined to make him king over them all, [Sa2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001). Or, "the people" (f); so the
Targum, Syriac, and Arabic versions; the Heathen people, the
Philistines, Ammonites, Edomites, Moabites, and Syrians; see [Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001). The former reading seems best,
and is followed by the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and other versions:
and this may be typical of the subduing of Christ's people under him;
who are made willing, in the day of his power, to receive and own him as
their King; profess subjection to his Gospel, and submit to his
ordinances.

\(d\) "gratia mea", Cocceius, Gejerus. (f) "pro" "populos", Piscator.

[Psalms 144:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 144:3</span></span>

Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him?.... Man, that is
at most and best but a creature, made of the dust of the earth, is but
dust and ashes; yea, a sinful creature, that drinks up iniquity like
water: and yet the Lord not only knows him, as he is the omniscient God,
but takes notice of him in a way of providence, and in a way of grace.
His chosen people are no other nor better than others, of the same
original, and of the same character; and yet he owns and acknowledges
them as his peculiar people, and makes himself known unto them: and so
it is rendered by the Septuagint version, "that thou shouldest be known
unto him?" or, "appear to him?" as the Arabic; reveal thyself to him,
not only by the light of nature and works of creation, but in Christ,
and by the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;

or the son of man, that thou makest account of him? as the Lord does,
especially of some of the sons of men; whom he reckons as his portion
and inheritance, his jewels and peculiar treasure, and who are as dear
to him as the apple of his eye; whom he "magnifies", as in [Job
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#017); makes them kings and priests;
raises them from the dunghill, and sets them among princes, to inherit
the throne of glory; on whom he sets his heart, and loves them with an
everlasting love: or, "that thou shouldest think of him?" (g) thoughts
of peace, and not of evil; so as to provide a Saviour for men, and send
down the Spirit of his Son into their hearts to quicken them; so as to
bless them with all spiritual blessings, and at last to glorify them.
David no doubt had a special respect to himself; and wondered at the
goodness of God to him, in taking him from a family of little or no
account, from a mean employ, from a shepherd's cottage, and raising him
to the throne of Israel; and especially in making him a partaker of
grace, and an heir of glory; see [Psa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004); which is applied to Christ, [Heb
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#006).

\(g\) "quod cogites de eo", Tigurine version, Vatablus.

[Psalms 144:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 144:4</span></span>

Man is like to vanity,.... Is vanity itself, in every age, state, and
condition; yea, in his best estate, [Psa
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005); or, "to the breath" (h) of the
mouth, as Kimchi; which is gone as soon as seen almost: or, to a vapour
(i); to which the life of man is compared, [Jam
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014);

his days are as a shadow that passeth away; as the former denotes the
frailty and mortality of man, this the shortness of his duration; his
days fleeing away, and of no more continuance than the shadow cast by
the sun, which presently declines and is gone.

\(h\) "halitui", Muis; so Kimchi. (i) "Vapori", Cocceius; so the Syriac
and Arabic versions.

[Psalms 144:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 144:5</span></span>

Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down,.... The heavens, which the Lord
has made, and where he dwells; and which are under his influence, and he
can cause to incline or bow at his pleasure: and which literally may be
said to bow, particularly the airy heavens, when these are filled with
clouds heavy with rain, and hang low, ready to fall upon the earth, and
being rent, let down showers on it: and mystically may design storms of
wrath gathering over the heads of ungodly men, and revealed from heaven
against them. Or rather, as connected with the phrase, "and come down",
denotes some appearance or manifestation of God; either for the help and
assistance of his people; or in a way of vengeance against their
enemies; or both: and which descent must be understood in consistence
with the omnipresence of God; and supposes his habitation to be on high,
and is expressive of regard to the persons and affairs of men on earth;
and is by some considered as a prayer for the incarnation of Christ,
which is sometimes signified by coming down from heaven; not by change
of place, nor by bringing an human nature, soul or body, down with him
from heaven; but by the assumption of our nature; and which was greatly
wished, prayed, and longed for, by the Old Testament saints The Targum
is,

"O Lord, bow the heavens, and manifest thyself;''

see [Psa 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009);

touch the mountains, and they shall smoke; as Mount Sinai did when the
Lord descended on it, [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018); see
[Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032); These, according to
Kimchi, signify mighty kings, strong as mountains: so kingdoms are
sometimes called; as the Babylonian empire is called a mountain, a
destroying and burnt mountain, [Zac
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007). Such kings and kingdoms rose up
like mountains against Christ, when here incarnate; and against his
Gospel, and the ministry of it by his apostles; as the kingdom and
nation of the Jews, and the whole Pagan empire: but these, by a touch of
his almighty power, have vanished into smoke, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), [Rev
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008).

[Psalms 144:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 144:6</span></span>

Cast forth lightning, and scatter them,.... The mountains, the kings and
kingdoms of the earth; the enemies of David, and of Christ, and of his
people; particularly the Jews, who have been scattered all over the
earth by the judgments of God upon them; cast forth like lightning,
which is swift, piercing, penetrating, and destructive;

shoot out thine arrows, and destroy them; or, "trouble them" (k); as the
Targum, Septuagint, and Arabic versions, nearer to the Hebrew: these
also design the sore judgments of God, the arrows of famine, pestilence,
and sword; which fly swiftly, pierce deeply, cut sharply, and, like
fiery darts, give great pain and trouble. So Kimchi and Ben Melech
interpret them of the decrees which come down from heaven, as Aben Ezra
does [Psa 144:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#005), by "lightning" Arama
understands the flame of fire which comes out with thunder; and by
"arrows" the thunderbolt, which he calls a stone hardened in the air
like iron.

\(k\) "ac turba eos", Tigurine version; "et conturba eos", Cocceius,
Michaelis.

[Psalms 144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 144:7</span></span>

Send thine hand from above,.... From the high heavens, as the Targum;
that is, exert and display thy power in my deliverance, and in the
destruction of my enemies; as follows:

rid me, and deliver me out of great waters; out of great afflictions,
which, for quantity and quality, are like many waters, overflowing and
overwhelming; see [Isa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002); or out of
the hands of enemies, many, mighty, and strong, whom he compares to
waters; as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech observe: and so the Targum,

"deliver me from the multitudes or armies, that are like to many
waters;''

see [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001). It may be applied to
the sorrows and sufferings of Christ, the antitype of David, with which
he was overwhelmed; to the billows of divine wrath which went over him;
to the floods of ungodly men that encompassed him; and to the whole
posse of devils, Satan, and his principalities and powers, that attacked
him; see [Psa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004);

from the hand of strange children; which explains what is meant by
"great waters": wicked men chiefly; either Gentiles, the children of a
people of a strange nation, and of a strange language, and of strange
sentiments of religion, and that worship a strange god: such as the
Edomites, Moabites, Philistines, &c. who were aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise: or
else the Israelites, who were degenerated from their ancestors, such of
David's subjects that rebelled against him; so the Ziphims are called
strangers that rose up against him, [Psa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003); and such were the enemies of
Christ, both the Romans, who were Heathens and aliens; and the people of
the Jews, his own countrymen, who were a generation of vipers; see [Act
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027); such as Juvenal calls (l) "filii
morum", who inherited the vices of their fathers.

\(l\) Satyr. 14. v. 52.

[Psalms 144:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 144:8</span></span>

Whose mouth speaketh vanity,.... Vain words, lies, flatteries, and
deceit, [Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002); when they speak
loftily of themselves, and contemptuously of others; when they deliver
out threatenings against some, and make fair promises to others; it is
all vanity, and comes to nothing;

and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood; their strength and
power to perform what they boast of, threaten, or promise, is
fallacious, is mere weakness, and cannot effect anything; or their
treaties, contracts, and covenants, they enter into and sign with their
right hand, are not kept by them; they act the treacherous and deceitful
part. The Latin interpreter of the Arabic version renders it, "their
oath is an oath of iniquity"; and Ben Balaam in Aben Ezra, and R. Adnim
in Ben Melech, say the word so signifies in the Arabic language; and
Schultens (m) has observed the same: but the word in that language
signifies the right hand as well as an oath, and need not be restrained
to that; it is better to take it in the large sense, as Cocceius (n)
does; whether they lifted up the hand to pray, or to swear; or gave it
to covenant with, to make contracts and agreements; or stretched it out
to work with; it was a right hand of falsehood.

\(m\) Observat. Philolog. p. 195. (n) Lexicon, col. 312.

[Psalms 144:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 144:9</span></span>

I will sing a new song unto thee, O God,.... The author of his being,
the Father of mercies, temporal and spiritual, and therefore to him
praise is always due; a new song of praise is to be sung for new
mercies; and as these are new every morning, and are renewed day by day,
new songs should be sung continually: or this is a song suited to New
Testament times, in which all things are become new; there is a new
covenant of grace; and a new and living way to the throne of grace; a
newly slain sacrifice; redemption newly wrought out, and therefore the
new song of redeeming grace must be sung. Arama suggests that this
refers to the days of the Messiah;

upon a psaltery, and an instrument of ten strings, will I sing praises
unto thee; such instruments of music were used in the Old Testament
dispensation, and were typical of the hearts of God's people; which are
the harps they now strike upon, and where they make melody to the Lord;
see [Psa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002).

[Psalms 144:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 144:10</span></span>

It is he that giveth salvation to kings,.... Which is the reason of
singing the new song to the Lord, or this is the matter of it. The Lord
is the Preserver of men and beasts, the Saviour of all men, and
especially of them that believe; who are in a spiritual sense kings and
priests unto God; and in a temporal sense he saves high and low, rich
and poor: but there is a particular providence respecting kings; who, as
they are the powers ordained of God, and are his vicegerents on earth,
and represent him, so they are preserved by him; were they not, there
would soon be an end to all public order and government: they cannot
save themselves; nor are they saved by their bodyguards about them; nor
is any king saved by the multitude of his host, but by the Lord, [Psa
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#016). Or, "he that giveth victory to
kings"; over their enemies; which is not obtained by the strength and
force of their armies, and by their military skill valour; but by the
right hand and arm of the Lord: and therefore, whenever this is the
case, a new song should be sung to him; see [Psa
98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001). David no doubt has regard to
himself, and to the many salvations God had wrought for him, and the
victories he had given him; as also to the King Messiah, whom God heard
and helped, as man and Mediator, in the day of salvation, and gave it to
him, and in which he rejoiced, [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008);

who delivereth David his servant from the hurtful sword; David
literally, the servant of the Lord by creation, redemption, and grace,
as well as by his office, as king of Israel; him the Lord delivered from
the sword of Goliath, as the Targum; from the sword of Saul, as Jarchi
and Kimchi; and from the sword of strange children, as Arama; of all his
enemies he had been or was engaged with in war: and David mystically,
Christ the son of David, God's righteous servant, he chose, called,
upheld; and in whom he was glorified, by doing his work diligently,
faithfully, and completely; him he delivered from the sword of justice,
when he had satisfied it; and from wicked men, like a sword; and from
all his enemies, and death itself, when he raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory; see [Psa 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020). Aben
Ezra thinks there is a defect of the copulative "and": and that it
should be read, "from the sword and evil"; every evil person or thing;
and observes, that some take it for an adjective, and understand it of
an evil camp or company.

[Psalms 144:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 144:11</span></span>

Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children,.... This is
repeated from [Psa 144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007); and is done
to show the vehemency and importunity of the request, and the danger
David was in, and his sense of it; See Gill on [Psa
144:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#007);

whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood. See Gill on [Psa 144:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#008).

[Psalms 144:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 144:12</span></span>

That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth,.... The
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read,
"whose sons are as plants", &c. as if this and what follows were a
description of the families, estates, substance, and outward happiness
of wicked men, the enemies of David, the strange children he desired to
be delivered from, agreeably to [Job
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007); and if the word "saying", or
"who say", be supplied, as by some (o), and connected with "that our
sons are", &c. they may express the vain boastings of these men, and
explain what is meant by the vanity their mouth spake; as well as
furnish out another reason for the repetition of the above requests,
namely, for the sake of introducing those vain boasts to which the
happiness of good men is opposed, who have an interest in God as their
God, [Psa 144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015); but we with other
versions take them to be a petition of the psalmist; that as he would
deliver him personally out of the hands of his enemies, so he would
bless his subjects with all prosperity and happiness in their families
and estates; like a good prince concerned for the real welfare of his
people, and wishes that their sons might be as plants, young, tender,
well nursed, and taken care of, that were healthful, thriving,
flourishing, and promising much fruit; so they might he of healthful
constitutions, well educated in all useful knowledge, natural and
religious, and grow both in wisdom and stature, and appear to be of
promising parts for usefulness in the church and state; and especially
that they might be the plants of the Lord, pleasant ones to him, and
profitable to others; be planted in Christ, and in his house, and grow
in grace and in the knowledge of him, and grow up to him their bead in
all things. The Targum is,

"that our sons may be as plants of the dactyles (or palm trees, [Psa
92:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)), nourished up in the doctrine
of the law from their youth;''

see [Psa 128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003);

that our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the
similitude of a palace; or "temple"; tall, beautiful, and in good
proportion; children have their name in Hebrew from a word which
signifies to "build" (p), because by them families are built up, [Rut
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011); and by marriage divers families
are connected together, so that they are as corner stones to them; thus
Plautus (q) speaks of children as a building, and parents as the
fabricators of them; laying the foundation of them, raising them up and
polishing them, and sparing no cost to make them useful to the
commonwealth: or "as corner pillars" (r), which support the house and
continue in it; so they guide the house, take care of the affairs of it,
and be keepers at home, [Ti1 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014); and
like such as are in temples or in kings' palaces, finely graved and
beautifully polished, be adorned with grace and good works, particularly
with modesty, meekness, and humility, [Th1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009); and grow up into an holy temple
in the Lord, being parts of the spiritual building, and being laid on
the foundation, of which Jesus Christ is the corner stone. The Targum
is,

"our daughters splendid and fit for the priests that minister in the
midst of the temple.''

The Syriac version,

"their daughters as spouses adorned like temples.''

\(o\) So Schmidt. (p) "aedificavit, unde" & "filii et filiae". (q)
Mostellaria, Act. 1. Sc. 2. (r) "sicut angulares lapides, aut columnae",
Michaelis.

[Psalms 144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 144:13</span></span>

That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store,.... Or "our
corners" (s), the corners of their houses, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi; the
nooks that were in them might be full of provisions for the supply of
the family; or that their barns and granaries might be full of all kind
of corn, as wheat, rye, barley, &c. which might be sufficient from year
to year, as the Targum; plenty of all food is intended, in opposition to
a scarcity, dearth, and famine, [Pro
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009); that so there might be enough for
increasing families. Spiritually it may design that large provision of
grace in the churches of Christ, and the fulness of the blessings of the
Gospel the ministers of it come forth with, bringing out of their
treasure things new and old, in the ministration of the word and
administration of ordinances;

that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our
streets; or millions; in which lay the riches of men formerly, and
indeed in our nation now, where wool is the staple commodity of it; and
these are creatures that breed and increase much; when they stand well,
a few soon become a thousand, and these thousands produce ten thousands
or millions, more. The Hebrew word "sheep", seems to be derived from the
Arabic word "tzana", which signifies to be "fruitful", whether in men or
beasts: "tzana": "foecunda fuit, et multos liberos hubuit
mulier-----idem significat, et multa habuit pecora", Golius, col. 1428;
and though for the most part they bring but one at a time, yet Aristotle
(t) says, sometimes two, three, and four; and in India, Aelianus (u)
says, they bring four, and never less than three. It is a beautiful
sight to see them driven in such numbers through the streets of cities
to markets, or to pasture. Or rather this may design the country towns
and villages, where large flocks of them are kept. The people of God
resemble these in their meekness, harmlessness, innocence, and other
things; and who not only increase in grace and gifts, and spiritual
knowledge, and in all goodness, which is desirable, but also in numbers,
as they did in the first times of the Gospel, and will in the last, when
they shall be increased as a flock; the fulness of the Gentiles, the
other sheep, shall be brought in, and the nation of the Jews called at
once.

\(s\) "anguli nostri", Pagninus, Vatablus, Cocceius, Michaelis. (t)
Hist. Animal. l. 6. c. 19. (u) De Animal. l. 4. c. 32.

[Psalms 144:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 144:14</span></span>

That our oxen may be strong to labour,.... To draw carriages, to plough
with, and to tread out the corn: or "may be burdened" (w); fit to carry
burdens; or burdened with flesh, be plump and fat, and in good condition
to work; or burdened with young, as some (x) understand it, and then it
must be meant of cows, as the word is used, [Deu
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#013); and so here an increase of kine
is wished for, as of sheep before. Ministers of the word are compared to
oxen for their patience in suffering, and their laboriousness in
working, [Co1 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009), [Ti1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017); and happy is it for the churches
of Christ when their ministers are laborious ones; are strong to labour,
and do labour, in the word and doctrine; stand fast in the faith, and
quit themselves like men, and are strong;

that there be no breaking in: of the enemy into the land to invade it,
into cities and houses to plunder and spoil them;

nor going out: of the city to meet the enemy and fight with him, peace
and not war is desirable; or no going out of one's nation into captivity
into a foreign country, as Kimchi; or no breaking in to folds and herds,
and leading out and driving away cattle, to the loss of the owners
thereof. Some (y) understand both these of abortion, of any violent
rupture of the womb, and an immature birth;

that there be no complaining in our streets; on account of famine,
pestilence, the sword, violence, and oppression; or no crying (z), no
mournful cry or howling and shrieking on account of the enemy being at
hand, and just ready to enter in, or being there, killing, plundering,
and spoiling.

\(w\) "onusti", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus; "onerarii", so some in
Vatablus; "onerati", Schmidt; "loden", Ainsworth, (x) So Bochart.
Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 295. (y) lbid. (z) "clamor", Pagninus,
Montanus, Tigurine version, Musculus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 144:15</span></span>

Happy is that people that is in such a case,.... Whose families are in
good order and behave well; who enjoy plenty of all good things; whose
flocks and herds increase, and who live in peace and prosperity; these
are temporal blessings highly valuable, and for which those who have
them should be thankful, as being happy in comparison of others that are
destitute of them, [Deu 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003); and
especially who besides these are blessed with spiritual blessings,
signified by them, and of which these were typical;

yea, happy is that people, whose God is the Lord; whose God the Lord is,
not only by creation, and as he is a common benefactor and preserver,
but as their God in covenant, their covenant God and Father in Christ;
whom he has loved, chosen, redeemed, adopted, justified, pardoned,
regenerated, and sanctified; all which appears to them in effectual
calling, is manifested by the application of covenant grace to them, and
is witnessed to their spirits by the spirit of God, and which their
faith claims an interest in: and these are happy, thrice happy persons;
for all that God has are theirs; all his perfections are on their side
and for their good; he is their portion, shield, reward, and their all
in all; his covenant, its blessings and promises, are all theirs; they
have enough, having all things, and can want no good thing; nor need
they fear any enemy; the Lord takes care of them, sets a guard about
them, resents all injuries done them, prevents the designs of their
enemies, makes all things work together for their good, provides all
things necessary for them for time and eternity, and will be their God
and guide even unto death; covenant interest always continues, and
therefore such must be ever happy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 145](psa145)

</div>
