<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa116)  [Next](psa118) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 117](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 117:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 117

The inscription of this psalm in the Syriac version is,

"it is said concerning those of the house (or the companions) of
Ananias, when they came out of the furnace; likewise it foretells the
calling of the Gentiles by the declaration of the Gospel.''

Which last is right; for the apostle has quoted it, to prove the
Gentiles should glorify God for his mercy, [Rom
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009). Aben Ezra thinks it concerns
only the nations subdued by David; but he quotes R. Moseh, as of opinion
that all nations are comprehended: and Kimchi affirms that the psalm
belongs to the times of the Messiah; and supposes there is a mystery in
its consisting of two verses only; and that it intimates that in those
times there will be two people that will serve the Lord; Israel, with
the law; and the Gentiles, with the seven precepts of Noah. It certainly
refers to Gospel times, and to the conversion of the Gentiles; and when
Jews and Gentiles should make one people, and be partakers of the same
privileges and blessings; receive the same doctrines, submit to the same
ordinances, and be under the same law, to Christ their King.

[Psalms 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 117:1</span></span>

O praise the Lord, all ye nations,.... The Lord having chosen, and
Christ having redeemed, some out of every kindred, tongue, people, and
nation; and the Gospel being sent and preached to all nations, and some
of each being called and converted by the Spirit of God; they are
excited to praise the Lord, Jehovah, Father, Son and Spirit, for their
several acts of divine grace and kindness towards them, in choosing,
redeeming, and sanctifying them; and in favouring them with the Gospel,
and the ordinances of it, and with his gracious presence in them; and in
supplying them with his grace, and giving them a right unto and meetness
for eternal glory; for all which praise should be given to the Lord;

praise him, all ye people; ye people of God in the several nations of
the world; not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also: the same thing is
repeated in different words, for the greater certainty and confirmation
of it; that this should be, the work and exercise of the Gentiles in
Gospel times, and expresses eagerness and vehemence to stir them up to
it. A different word is here used for "praise" than in the former
clause; and which is more frequently used in the Chaldee, Syriac,
Arabic, and Ethiopic languages; and signifies the celebration of the
praises of God with a high voice.

[Psalms 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 117:2</span></span>

For his merciful kindness is great towards us,.... Not us Israelites
only, of whom David was, but Gentiles also; or otherwise there would be
no force in the reason why all people and nations should praise the
Lord: but it respects the time when these should become one people,
partaking of the same grace, blessings, promises, and privileges; in
which the grace, mercy, and lovingkindness of God, greatly appeared; "it
prevailed over us" (p), as it may be rendered: the word is used of the
prevailing of the waters of the flood over the earth, [Gen
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#018); and so may denote the exuberance
of the grace of God, of the abounding and superabounding of it. There is
an abundance of it in the heart of God, in his covenant, and in his Son;
and which is displayed in redemption by him; in the forgiveness of sin;
and in the conversion of sinners, and their everlasting salvation:
particularly there has been an inundation or deluge of it in the Gentile
world, where it has flowed and overflowed; where sin abounded, grace has
much more abounded; and therefore the Lord is to be praised. And another
reason follows,

and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever; the faithfulness of God to
his promises, not only made to the Jewish fathers concerning the
Messiah, and redemption by him; but to the Gentiles, and concerning the
blessing of all nations in the promised seed: and the faithfulness and
truth of God, with respect to any of his promises, never fails; nor will
his word of truth, the Gospel; nor Jesus Christ, who is the truth, and
the truth of God; the truth of types, promises, and prophecies; see [Psa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003); for he is the same today,
yesterday, and for ever.

Praise ye the Lord; for his superabounding grace, and eternal truth;
even all the people of God, of all nations, Jews and Gentiles.

\(p\) "exsuperavit", Vatablus; "invaluit", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Gejerus, Michaelis; "exuberavit", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 118](psa118)

</div>
