<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa136)  [Next](psa138) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 137](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 137:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 137

The occasion of this psalm was the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and
the treatment they met with there; either as foreseen, or as now
endured. Aben Ezra ascribes this psalm to David; and so the Syriac
version, which calls it,

"a psalm of David; the words of the saints, who were carried captive
into Babylon.''

The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic versions, make it to be
David's, and yet add the name of Jeremiah; and the Arabic version calls
it David's, concerning Jeremiah: but, as Theodoret observes, Jeremiah
was not carried into Babylon, but, after some short stay in or near
Jerusalem, was forced away into Egypt; and could neither be the writer
nor subject of this psalm: and though it might be written by David under
a spirit of prophecy; who thereby might foresee and foretell the
Babylonish captivity, and what the Jews would suffer in it; as the
prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah did, many years before it came to pass; yet
it seems rather to have been written by one of the captivity, either
while in it, or immediately after it.

[Psalms 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 137:1</span></span>

By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down,.... If by Babylon is meant
the country, then the rivers of it are Chebar, Ulai, Tigris, Euphrates,
and others; see [Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); but if the
city itself, then only Euphrates, which ran through it; and is expressed
by rivers, because of the largeness of it, and because of the several
canals cut out of it, for the service of the city; hence Babylon is said
to dwell upon many waters, [Jer 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013);
upon the banks whereof the captive Jews were; either through choice,
where they could be alone, and mourn their fate, indulge their sorrows,
and give vent to their grief; or by the order of these who carried them
captive, there to be employed, either in taking goods from ships here
unloaded, or to repair and maintain the banks of the rivers, or to do
some servile work or another; see [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); and where they would sometimes
"sit down" pensive, as mourners used to do, and lament their case, [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008). Or this phrase may express their
residence here, and the continuance and length of their captivity, which
was seventy years: yea, Babylon itself may be meant by the waters of it;
just as Thebes, in Pindar (w) is called the Dircaean waters, near to
which it was;

yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion; they imitated the flowing stream
by which they sat, and swelled it with their tears; they wept for their
sins, which brought them thither; and it increased their sorrow, when
they called to mind what privileges they had enjoyed in Zion, the city
of their solemnities; where they had often seen the tribes of Israel
bowing before and worshipping the God of Israel; the daily sacrifices
and others offered up; the solemn feasts kept; the songs of Zion, sung
by the Levites in delightful harmony; and, above all, the beauty of the
Lord their God, his power and glory, while they were inquiring in his
sanctuary: and also when they reflected upon the sad condition and
melancholy circumstances in which Zion now was; the city, temple, and
altar, lying in heaps of rubbish; no worship and service performed; no
sacrifices offered, nor songs sung; nor any that came to her solemn
feasts; see [Lam 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002).

\(w\) Pythia, Ode 9. d. v. 6.

[Psalms 137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 137:2</span></span>

We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof. These were
musical instruments, used in the temple service by the Levites, who seem
to be the persons here speaking; who took care of them, and preserved
them from the plunder of the enemy; and carried them with them to
Babylon, in hope of returning with them to use them as before, or to
solace themselves and others in captivity; though now they had no heart
to make use of them, their sorrow was so great, and therefore hung them
upon the willows as useless things: these willows grew upon the banks of
the rivers where they were, as such trees usually do; hence called
willows of the brook (x), and willows by water courses, [Lev
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#040); and particularly upon the banks
of the river Euphrates, which ran through the midst of Babylon, with
which the phrase here agrees; and therefore Babylon itself is thought to
be called "the brook", or "valley, of the willows", [Isa
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007). And, according to Ovid (y), not
only reeds and poplars, but willows, grew on the banks of the Euphrates.
Now the state of these people was an emblem of the case of the
backsliding children of God; who, through the prevalence of corruption,
the force of temptation, and the snares of the world, are brought into a
kind of captivity to the law of sin and death, though not willingly; nor
is it pleasing to them when sensible of it, [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023); who, though they are called out
of the world, and are not of it; yet sometimes are so overcome with it,
and immersed in the things of it, that they are as it were in Babylon.
An emblem of this world, of the confusion in it, as its name signifies;
of the fading glories of it, and the wickedness and idolatry it abounds
with: and here they sit by the rivers of carnal pleasures in it for a
while, till brought to themselves; and then they weep over their sins,
and lament them; especially when they remember what opportunities they
have formerly had in Zion, and what a low condition she is now in
through the conduct of themselves and others: these make use of their
harps when Zion is in good and prosperous circumstances, [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001); but when there are corruptions
in doctrine, neglect or abuse of ordinances, animosities and divisions
prevail, declensions in the life and power of religion, and the lives of
professors disagreeable; then they hang their harps on willows, and drop
their notes.

\(x\) "Amnicolae salices", Ovid. Metamorph. l. 10. Fab. 2. v. 96.
"Fluminibus salices", Virgil. Georgic. l. 2. v. 110. (y) "Venit ad
Euphratem----Populus et cannae riparum summa tegebant, spemque dabant
salices----". Ovid. Fasti, l. 2.

[Psalms 137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 137:3</span></span>

For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song,....
Or, "words of a song" (z). To repeat the words of one of the songs of
Zion, as it is afterwards expressed: this the Babylonians did, as the
Targum; who were they that carried the Jews into captivity; and this is
given as a reason why they hung their harps on willows, and were so
sorrowful, because such a request as this was made;

and they that wasted us required of us mirth: the Chaldeans, who
plundered them of their substance, and reduced their city and temple to
heaps of rubbish, as the word (a) used signifies; or who heaped
reproaches upon them, as Jarchi: these insisted not only on having the
words of a song repeated to them, but that they should be set to some
tune and sung in a manner expressing mirth, or would provoke unto it: or
"our lamentations", according to Kimchi; that is, the authors of them
(b), so barbarous were they;

saying, sing us one of the songs of Zion; which used to be sung in Zion
in the temple, called the songs of the temple, [Amo
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003); this demand they made either out
of curiosity, that they might know something of the temple songs and
music they had heard of; or rather as jeering at and insulting the poor
Jews in their miserable and melancholy circumstances; as if they had
said, now sing your songs if you can: or in order to make themselves
sport and diversion with them, as the Philistines with Samson. The
spiritual songs of Zion are the songs of electing, redeeming, calling,
pardoning, and justifying grace; which natural men neither understand,
nor can learn, but scoff at and despise.

\(z\) "verba cantici", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Piscator, Gejerus,
Michaelis; "verba earminis", Cocceius. (a) "qui veluti in acervos nos
redegerunt", Tigurine version, Grotius. (b) Vid. Stockium, p. 447.

[Psalms 137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 137:4</span></span>

How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land? This is the answer
returned by the Jews to the above request or demand; it may be,
particularly, by the Levites, whose business it was to sing these songs:
so the Targum,

"immediately the Levites said, how shall we sing the hymns of the Lord
in a strange land?''

This they said, not merely on account of their unsuitable circumstances,
being in distress and affliction, and so not disposed for such work; nor
as if unlawful to them, being forbidden: for, though sacrifices were not
to be offered but at Jerusalem, yet songs of praise might be sung
elsewhere, on proper occasions, as David did, [Psa
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049); but as wondering at their
insolence, and complaining of their cruelty and inhumanity, thus to
insult them and jeer at them: or rather, because it was "the Lord's
song" they required, and so sacred, and not to be sung in any place, or
at any time, and in any company; which would be but casting pearls
before swine, and giving that which was holy to dogs, [Mat
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006); or it may be they required this
to be done in one of their temples, and to their idols, just as these
songs were sung in the temple at Jerusalem, and to the honour of
Jehovah; and therefore they refused to do it: for it may be rendered, or
however interpreted, "in the land of a strange god" (c); as it is by
Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech: they required them to sing with mirth
and joy, which they could not do in their present case; see [Psa
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002).

\(c\) "in terra peregina, sc. Dei", Muis, Michaelis.

[Psalms 137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 137:5</span></span>

If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,.... This was said by one or everyone of
the Levites; or singers, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi; or by the congregation
of Israel, as Jarchi; by one of them, in the name of the rest; or by the
composer of the psalm. The Targum is,

"the voice of the Spirit of God answered and said, "if I forget", &c.''

that is, to weep over the calamities of Jerusalem; which might be
thought, if the songs of Zion were sung; or to pray for the restoration
of her prosperity and peace; as the church of Christ may be said to be
forgotten, when men forget to mourn over its breaches, and show no
concern for the reparation of them; or at the death of principal
persons, which they lay not to heart; or at the great decay of religion
in those that survive; or at the sins of professors, and their disregard
to the word and ordinances: also when they forget to pray for her
happiness in general; for the good of her members in particular; and
especially for her ministers, that they may have assistance and success;
and for a blessing on the word and ordinances, and for the conversion of
sinners; and when they forget the worship of the Lord in it, and forsake
the assembling of themselves together;

let my right hand forget her cunning; her skill in music, particularly
in playing on the harp; see [Sa1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016); the harp was held in the left
hand, and struck with the right; and that more softly or hardly, as the
note required, in which was the skill or cunning of using it. Or let
this befall me, should I so far forget Jerusalem as to strike the harp
to one of the songs of Zion in a strange land: or let it forget any of
its works; let it be disabled from working at all; let it be dry and
withered, which, Aben Ezra says, is the sense of the word according to
some; and Schultens (d), from the use of it in Arabic, renders it, let
it be "disjointed", or the nerve loosened; see [Job
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022). Or the sense is, let everything
that is as dear as my right hand he taken from me: or, as it may be
rendered, "my right hand is forgotten" (e); that is, should I forget
Jerusalem, it would; for that is as my right hand; so Arama. Some choose
to translate the words thus, "may thou (O God) forget my right hand"
(f); that is, to be at my right hand; to be a present help to me in time
of need; to hold me by it, and to be the shade of it.

\(d\) Animadv. Philol. p. 181. (e) "oblita est nostra dextra", Castalio.
(f) "Oblivisceris (O Domine) dexterae meae", Gejerus; so some in
Michaelis.

[Psalms 137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 137:6</span></span>

If I do not remember thee,.... In prayer, in discourse, in conversation;
this is the same as before, to forget, repeated for the confirmation of
it;

let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; as is the case of a person
in a fever, or in a violent thirst, which is to be in great distress,
[Psa 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006); the sense is, let me have
no use of my tongue; let me be dumb and speechless, and never sing a
song or speak a word more, should I be so forgetful of the deplorable
state of Jerusalem as to sing songs at such a season, and in an enemy's
country;

if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy; meaning not God his
exceeding joy, [Psa 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004); as his
Creator, preserver, and benefactor, and much less as his covenant God
and Father; as having loved him with an everlasting love; as the God of
all grace unto him, and as his portion and exceeding great reward: nor
Christ, the object of joy unspeakable and full of glory; joy in the
greatness, glory, and fulness of his person; in the blessings and
promises of his grace; in what he has done and suffered; as risen,
ascended, exalted, and who will come a second time: nor the joy of the
Holy Ghost in a way of believing, and in hope of the glory of God; but
all worldly joy, or matter of it; and this not in things sinful, nor
merely such as worldlings have in the increase of their substance; but a
lawful joy, such as in the health, happiness, and prosperity of a man's
family, wife, and children, and his own; which is the greatest outward
joy a man can have; and yet the church of God and interest of Christ are
preferred by a good man to these; see [Sa1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019); which appears when all a man has
that is matter of joy is sacrificed for the public good and interest of
religion; when he can take no comfort in any outward enjoyment because
of the sad case of Zion, [Mal 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003);
when joy for its good is uppermost, and is first in his thoughts and
words; when this is the "head" or "beginning" (g) of his joy, as it may
be rendered. So Pindar (h) calls the chief, principal, and greatest part
of joy, , the beginning of joy, the top and perfection of it.

\(g\) "caput laetitiae meae", Musculus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Gejerus. (h) Pythia, Ode 1. v. 4.

[Psalms 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 137:7</span></span>

Remember, O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem,.... Of
her visitation, calamity, and destruction, how they behaved then, and
them for it; who, though the children of Esau and brethren of the Jews,
as well as their neighbours, yet hated them; the old grudge of their
father, because of the birthright and blessing, as well as the old
enmity of the serpent, continuing in them; and who rejoiced at their
ruin, helped forward their affliction, and were assistants to the
Babylonians in the plunder and destruction of them, [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011). The Targum is,

"Michael, the prince of Jerusalem, said, remember, O Lord, the people of
Edom who destroyed Jerusalem.''

Many Jewish writers, as Aben Ezra observes, interpret this of the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans:

who said, rase it, rase it even to the foundation thereof: or "make it
naked" or "bare (i) to the foundation"; pull down its walls, lay them
level with the ground; root up the very foundation of them, and let
nothing be left or seen but the bare naked ground; so spiteful and
malicious were they.

\(i\) "nudate", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius,
Schmidt.

[Psalms 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 137:8</span></span>

O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed,.... By the determinate
counsel and decree of God, and according to divine predictions; see [Jer
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#001); so mystical Babylon, antichrist,
and the man of sin, who therefore is called the son of perdition, [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003); because appointed to destruction,
and shall certainly go into it, [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008); or "O thou destroyer", as the
Targum, which paraphrases it thus,

"Gabriel, the prince of Zion, said to the Babylonish nation that
spoileth or destroyeth;''

which is true of literal Babylon, called the destroying mountain, [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025); and of mystical Babylon, the
destroyer both of the bodies and souls of men, [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018);

happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us; meaning
Darius the Mede, as Kimchi; or rather, or however who must be added,
Cyrus the Persian, as R. Obadiah; who were ordered by the Lord to
retaliate her, and do as she had done to others, [Jer
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#015); and in so doing pronounced
happy, being the Lord's shepherd, raised up in righteousness to perform
his pleasure, [Isa 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028); and here
wished success by the godly Jews. In like manner the Christian princes
will reward mystical Babylon, and be the happy instruments of her ruin,
[Rev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006).

[Psalms 137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 137:9</span></span>

Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the
stones. That takes the infants from their mothers' breasts, or out of
their arms, and dashes out their brains against a "rock", as the word
(k) signifies; which, though it may seem a piece of cruelty, was but a
just retaliation; the Babylonians having done the same to the Jewish
children, and is foretold elsewhere should be done to theirs, [Isa
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#016). Nor is this desired from a
spirit of revenge, but for the glory of divine justice, and that such a
generation of cruel creatures might be rooted out of the earth; see [Rev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002). Some allegorically understand
this of crushing and mortifying the first motions of sin in the heart;
but such a sense seems to have no place here.

\(k\) "ad petram", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c. "ad repem", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 138](psa138)

</div>
