<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa101)  [Next](psa103) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 102](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 102:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 102

A prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his
complaint before the Lord; Whether this psalm was written by David,
under a prophetic spirit, concerning future times; or whether by one of
the Babylonish captivity, as Daniel, Nehemiah, Ezra, or any other;
either just at the close of it, or upon their return from it; since it
is said that "the set time to favour Zion was come", is not certain:
however, since Zion was a type of the Gospel church, it may be very well
applied to Gospel times; and the rather, since some passages in it are
cited by the apostle in [Heb 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010) as
to be understood of Christ: see [Psa
102:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025). The Syriac version calls it,

"a prophecy concerning the new people, namely, the Gentiles in the
faith:''

it is entitled, "a prayer of the afflicted", or "poor" (e); which Austin
understood of Christ, who became poor for our sakes, and was afflicted
of God and men. Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret it of the Jews
suffering affliction in the Babylonish captivity; the former observes,
that it was the opinion of some of their interpreters that this prayer
was composed by some wise and understanding man that fell into the hand
of his enemies. It may very well be applied to any afflicted person; all
the people of God are more or less a poor and afflicted people;
outwardly afflicted in body, in estate, and in their good name and
character; inwardly with the corruptions of their own hearts, the
temptations of Satan, and divine desertions; when it is a very proper
time for prayer, [Jam 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013), and it is
their privilege that they have a God of grace and mercy to pray unto, a
throne of grace to come to at all times, a spirit of grace and
supplication to assist them, and Christ their Advocate and High Priest,
to present their petitions for them: and this everyone may do, "when he
is overwhelmed"; pressed with the burden of sin, without a view of
pardon, covered, as the word (f) signifies, with shame and sorrow for
it; almost overset with, and ready to faint and sink under, afflictions,
which like waves and billows roll over him; and at the same time is
attended with much darkness and unbelieving frames of soul: "and poureth
out his complaint before the Lord"; concerning his trials and
afflictions, especially concerning the badness and haughtiness of his
heart, the hardness of it, being so unaffected with providences, and
under the word, and at the ordinances; concerning his leanness,
barrenness, and unfruitfulness under the means of grace; his
lukewarmness and indifference, his deadness and dulness in duty; his
unbelief, distrust, and dejection of mind; as well as of the low estate
of Zion, the little success of the Gospel, the few instances of
conversion, and the unbecoming walk of many professors. Such a
"complaint" as this, or "meditation" (g), which he has thought of and
digested in his mind; or all that is in his heart, as Aben Ezra
observes, "he pours out" which denotes enlargement in prayer, the
abundance of his heart, out of which his mouth speaketh; the fulness of
his petition, as also freedom of expression it signifies a a telling all
one's mind, speaking out with great liberty; laying it in an humble
manner before the Lord, before whom all things are naked and open, and
leaving it with him, in entire submission and resignation to his will,
to do as seems good in his sight.

[Psalms 102:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 102:1</span></span>

Hear my prayer, O Lord,.... The prayer of a poor, destitute, and
afflicted one; his own, and not another's; not what was composed for
him, but composed by him; which came out of his own heart, and out of
unfeigned lips, and expressed under a feeling sense of his own wants and
troubles; and though dictated and inwrought in his heart by the Spirit
of God, yet, being put up by him in faith and fervency, it is called his
own, and which he desires might be heard:

and let my cry come unto thee; he calls his prayer cry, because it was
uttered in distress, and with great vehemency and importunity; and he
prays that it might come unto God, even into his ears, and be regarded
by him, and not shut out: prayer comes aright to God, when it comes
through Christ, and out of his hands, perfumed with the incense of his
mediation.

\(e\) "pauperis", V. L. Pagninus, Vatablus, Amama; "inopis", Cocceius.
(f) "convolveretur", Munster; "obtegitur", Gejerus, so Michaelis. (g)
"meditationem suam", Junius & Tremellius, Gejerus, so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 102:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 102:2</span></span>

Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble,.... Thy
Shechinah, as the Targum: when God hides his face at any time from his
people, it is a trouble to them, and very grievous; but especially when
they are in any other trouble besides; it is very afflicting, indeed,
when to their outward trouble this is added, which was Job's case, [Job
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#001), incline thine ear unto me;
condescend, in great grace and goodness, to stoop and bow thine ear, and
listen to the voice of my supplication: in the day when I call, answer
me speedily; good men are always for speedy answers of prayer; they
would have them the day, the hour, the moment they are calling upon God:
sometimes answers are returned as soon, [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024), the case of the psalmist was
very distressing, and, as he thought at least, required haste, and
therefore requests a speedy answer.

[Psalms 102:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 102:3</span></span>

For my days are consumed like smoke,.... Which suddenly rises up, is
easily dissipated, and quickly disappears; so sudden, short, and
transient, are the days of man's life; see [Jam
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014) or "in smoke" (c), as the Syriac
version; his days were spent in great obscurity, in the darkness of
affliction, temptation, and desertion; and in so much vexation, trouble,
and uneasiness, as if he had lived in smoke all his time: and

my bones are burnt as an hearth; on which fire is continually made for
the preparation of food, and other uses: or as a "trivet", or
"gridiron": so the Targum: or as a frying pan; so the Arabic version:
the meaning is, that, through trouble and grief, his bones, the
strongest parts of his body, the props and supports of it, were so
weakened and enfeebled, the strength of them so exhausted, that they
were as if they had been parched and burnt up, as the hearth by fire;
see [Pro 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022).

\(c\) "in fumo", Montanus.

[Psalms 102:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 102:4</span></span>

My heart is smitten, and withered like grass,.... Like grass in the
summer solstice (d), which being smitten with the heat of the sun, or by
some blast of thunder and lightning, is dried up, and withers away; so
his heart was smitten with a sense of sin, and of God's wrath and
displeasure at him, and with the heat of affliction and trouble, that it
failed him, and he could not look up with joy and comfort:

so that I forget to eat my bread; sometimes, through grief and trouble,
persons refuse to eat bread, as Jonathan and Ahab, which is a voluntary
act, and purposely done; but here, in the psalmist, there was such a
loss of appetite, through sorrow, that he forgot his stated meals,
having no manner of inclination to food: some understand this of
spiritual food, the bread of life, refusing to be comforted with it; so
the Targum,

"for I forgot the law of my doctrine.''

\(d\) "Quasi solstitialis herba paulisper fui", Plauti Pseudolus, Act.
1. Sc. 1. v. 36.

[Psalms 102:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 102:5</span></span>

By reason of the voice of my groaning,.... Under the burden of sin, and
pressure of afflictions:

my bones cleave to my skin; was quite emaciated, reduced to a skeleton,
became nothing but skin and bone (e); which sometimes is occasioned, as
by outward afflictions, so by soul troubles: or "to my flesh" (f); flesh
is put for skin; see [Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020).

\(e\) "Ossa atque pellis sum", Plauti Capteivei, Act. 1. Sc. 2. v. 26.
Asinaria 3. 6. v. 28. (f) "carni meae", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Psalms 102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 102:6</span></span>

I am like a pelican of the wilderness,.... It may be so called, to
distinguish it from another of the same name that lives upon the waters;
which has the name of "pelican" in the Greek tongue, as is said, from
its smiting and piercing its breast, and letting out blood for the
reviving of its young; and in the Hebrew language, from its vomiting
shell fish it has swallowed down; See Gill on [Lev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018) where the word is rendered a
"pelican" as here, and in [Deu 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#017),
the same we call the "shovelard"; but a "cormorant" in [Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011), however, it seems to be a bird
of solitude, and therefore the psalmist compares himself to it.
According to Isidore (g), it is an Egyptian bird, that inhabits the
desert of the river Nile, from whence it has the name of Canopus
Aegyptus:

I am like an owl of the desert; or "of desert places"; so the Tigurine
version; it is translated "the little owl" in [Lev
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#017). It delights to be on old walls,
and in ruined houses, and cares not to consort with other birds, and it
makes a hideous sorrowful noise (h). Jarchi renders it the hawk, but
that, as Kimchi (i) observes, is found in habitable places. Bochart (k)
thinks the "onocrotalos" is meant, a bird so much of the same kind with
the pelican, that they are promiscuously used by learned men; and which
is a creature, as Jerom (l) says, that is used to dwell in desert
places; and Isidore (m) observes, that there are two sorts of them, one
that lives in the water, and another in the desert; it has its name from
its braying like an ass; and Aelianus (n) speaks of a bird of this sort
in India, which has a large crop like a sack; and the Hebrew word "cos"
here used signifies a cup or vessel, from whence it may have its name;
and which he says makes a very disagreeable noise, to which the psalmist
may compare the voice of his groaning, [Psa
102:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#005).

\(g\) Origin. l. 12. c. 7. (h) "Solaque culminibus ferali carmine Bubo,
saepe queri----", Virgil. Aeneid. 4. (i) Sepher Shorash. rad. (k)
Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2. c. 20. col. 275, 276. (l) Comment. in Esaiam,
c. 34. fol. 64. A. (m) Ut supra. (Origin. l. 12. c. 7.) (n) De Animal.
l. 16. c. 4.

[Psalms 102:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 102:7</span></span>

I watch,.... Night after night, and take no sleep; cannot get any by
reason of thoughtfulness, care, and trouble:

and am as a sparrow alone upon the housetop; or, "as a bird" (o); for
there is no necessity of limiting it to a sparrow, to which the account
does not seem so well to agree; for sparrows will not only perch on
housetops and solitary places, but will make their nests in dwelling
houses, and in places of public resort, as temples; hence David speaks
of the sparrow finding an house near the altars of God, [Psa
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003) and Herodotus (p) makes mention
of sparrows and other birds making their nests in the temple at
Branchides; which may serve to illustrate the text last mentioned:
wherefore this may be understood of any solitary bird, and especially of
the owl (q); the Jews had flat roofs upon their houses, and here birds
of solitude would come and sit alone in the night season, to which the
psalmist likens himself; being either forsaken by his friends and
acquaintance; or, being in melancholy circumstances, he chose to be
alone, mourning over his sorrowful state and condition.

\(o\) "sicut avis", Gejerus, Schmidt. (p) Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 159. (q)
"--------tectoque prophanus Incubuit bubo" Ovid. Metamorph. l. 6. Fab.
8. "E tectis strix", &c. Tibullus, l. 1. Eleg. 5. v. 52.

[Psalms 102:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 102:8</span></span>

Mine enemies reproach me all the day,.... For his principles and
practices, being different from theirs; for his religion, and
preciseness in it; for his faith and profession of it, and for his holy
walk and conversation. Good men have their enemies, and always had; but
then they are such who are also enemies to God and Christ, and true
religion; and these, not content to reproach now and then, continually
throw out their scoffs and jeers; which is not grateful, and is here
mentioned as an article of complaint; though the saints should reckon
reproach for the sake of Christ and religion greater riches than all the
treasures in Egypt:

and they that are mad against me; as the Jews were against Christ,
because of his miracles, doctrine, and success, and therefore sought to
take away his life; and as the Apostle Paul before conversion was, even
exceeding mad against the saints, and persecuted them to strange cities,
[Luk 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#011), so were the psalmist's
enemies quite outrageous and implacable, being his sworn enemies, as
follows:

are sworn against me: laid themselves under a curse, to do him all the
mischief they could, and it may be to take away his life; as those who
sware they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul, [Act
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012) or they sware to lies, false
charges and accusations brought against him, like those that Jezebel
suborned against Naboth: or "they sware by me" (r); as the words may be
rendered; they sware by his calamities and distresses, and wished they
might be as he was, if they did not do so and so; and took his name for
a curse.

\(r\) "per me jurant", Tigurine version, Musculus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 102:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 102:9</span></span>

For I have eaten ashes like bread,.... He sitting in ashes, as Job did,
and rolling himself in them in the manner of mourners; and, having no
other table than the ground to eat his food upon, he might eat ashes
along with it; and by an hypallage of the words, the sense may be, that
he ate bread like ashes, no more savoured and relished it, or was
nourished by it, than if he had eaten ashes; the meaning is, that he was
fed with the bread of adversity, and water of affliction:

and mingled my drink with weeping; that is, with tears; as he drank, the
tears ran down his cheeks, and mixed with the liquor in his cup; he was
fed with the bread of tears, and had them to drink in great measure;
these were his meat and his drink, day and night, while enemies
reproached him, swore at him, against him, and by him; see [Psa
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005).

[Psalms 102:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 102:10</span></span>

Because of thine indignation and thy wrath,.... This was the burden of
his complaint, what gave him the greatest uneasiness; not so much the
reproach of his enemies, and his other outward afflictions, as the sense
he had of God's wrath and indignation. The people of God are as
deserving of his wrath as others; and when they are awakened to a sense
of sin and danger, or the law enters into their consciences, it works
wrath there, and leaves nothing but a fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation, till comfort is given; and under afflictive
providences they are very ready to conclude, that the wrath of God is
upon them; but this is only their apprehension of things; it is not in
reality: for God has not appointed them to wrath, and has swore he will
not be wroth with them; Christ has bore it for them, in their room and
stead; and being justified by his blood and righteousness, they are
saved from it; but then the sense they have of it is very terrible, and
there is no rest, peace, and comfort in their souls, while under the
apprehensions of it:

for thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down; as a man that, in
wrestling, has the advantage of his antagonist, lifts him up as high as
he can, that he may throw him with the greater force upon the ground; in
like manner the psalmist thought the Lord was dealing with him: or this
may express his changeable state and condition, sometimes lifted up, and
sometimes cast down, and which is the case of every believer, more or
less; all have their liftings up, and their castings down: when God
first calls them by his grace, he raises them from a low estate, lifts
them up out of an horrible pit, takes them from the dunghill, sets them
among princes to inherit the throne of glory: when he comforts them with
the consolations of his Spirit, he is the lifter up of their heads; when
he grants his presence, and lifts up the light of his countenance: when
he discovers his love, and makes their mountain to stand strong; when he
shows them their interest in himself, as their covenant God, in Christ,
as their Redeemer and Saviour, and grants them the communion of the Holy
Ghost; and when their graces are in lively exercise, then is it a time
of lifting up: and they are cast down when corruptions prevail, when
grace is weak, when God hides his face, and when afflictions lie heavy
on them: this was now the case of the psalmist, and perhaps the
remembrance of his liftings up in former times was an aggravation of it.

[Psalms 102:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 102:11</span></span>

My days are like a shadow that declineth,.... Or, "that is stretched
out" (s), which, though it may appear long, is soon at an end; as it
does appear longer when the sun sets (t), and departs from the earth: he
reckons his life not by months and years, but by days; and these he
compares to a "shadow", which has no substance in it; his age being as
nothing before the Lord, and has much darkness and obscurity in it; his
days being days of darkness, affliction, and trouble, and quickly gone,
as man's life is; there is no abiding; see [Ch1
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015). Pindar (u) calls man the dream
of a shadow:

and I am withered like grass; which in the morning is flourishing, is
cut down at noon, and withered at evening: this is the case of all
flesh, however beautiful and goodly it may look; it is weak, frail, and
mortal; cannot stand before the force of afflictions, which quickly
consume strength and beauty, and much less before the scythe of death;
see [Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005).

\(s\) "inclinata", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Musculus, Cocceius;
"extensa", Michaelis. (t) "Et sol crescentes decedens duplicat umbras",
Virgil. Bacol. Eclog. 2. (u) Pyth. Ode 8.

[Psalms 102:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 102:12</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for ever,.... This address is made to
Christ, as is clear from [Psa 102:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025),
compared with [Heb 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010), who is a
divine Person, endures for ever, is from everlasting to everlasting,
unchangeably the same in his love, power, wisdom, faithfulness, &c. and
though he died as man, he will die no more; he is alive, and lives for
evermore; and because he lives, his people shall live also; and he will
come again to take them to himself: and, as Mediator, he is King for
ever; always continues, as such, to rule over, protect, and defend his
people; and is a Priest for ever, and ever lives to make intercession
for them; and his blood, righteousness, and sacrifice, have a constant
virtue in them, to take away sin, and secure from it: the consideration
of the perpetuity of Christ, in his person and offices, was a comfort to
the psalmist under his troubles, and in a view of his own declining
state: the Targum is,

"but thou, O Lord, thy habitation continues for ever in heaven:''

and thy remembrance to all generations; the remembrance of his name
Jehovah, or Jesus, or Immanuel, or any other, is sweet and precious to
his saints in all ages; and so the remembrance of his works, of what he
has done and suffered, especially the great work of redemption; for the
remembrance of which the ordinance of the Lord's supper is appointed to
be continued till his second coming; and his Gospel is an everlasting
one, which will transmit the memory of him to men in every age, to the
end of the world; and though all flesh is as grass, and every man dies,
even the ministers of the word, yet that itself lives for ever. Aben
Ezra reads "thy throne", as agreeing with [Lam
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#019), but Kimchi observes that this
reading is owing to a bad copy.

[Psalms 102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 102:13</span></span>

Thou shalt arise, and have mercy on Zion,.... Exert his power, and
display the riches of his grace and mercy; not by delivering the Jews
from the Babylonish captivity, to which some restrain it; but by
redeeming his church and people by power and price; or rather by raising
up and restoring them to great glory and prosperity in the latter day:

for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come; not the seventy
years of the captivity made known to the prophet Jeremiah; rather the
seventy weeks of Daniel fixed for the Messiah's coming; or the fulness
of time agreed upon, between Christ and his Father, for him to come and
redeem his people; but it may best of all design the end of the forty
two months, or the 1260 days, or years, fixed for the treading under
foot the holy city, for the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, and for
the reign of antichrist; which when come will usher in glorious times in
favour of Zion, the church of God, [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002).

[Psalms 102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 102:14</span></span>

For thy servants take pleasure in her stones,.... Meaning not Cyrus and
Darius, who gave leave and orders for the rebuilding of the city and
temple of Jerusalem, as some; nor Nehemiah, and Ezra, and others, who
took more pleasure in the stones and rubbish of the temple, as it lay in
ruins, than in all the stately palaces in Babylon; and who were very
desirous of, and took delight in gathering these stones, and putting
them together again, as others; but, the ministers of the Gospel, and
other Christians, in the latter day, who will take pleasure in the great
number of converts that there will then be, who, as lively stones, will
be built up a spiritual house; and especially when those stones shall be
laid with fair colours, and the headstone shall be brought in with
acclamations, crying, Grace, grace unto it; see [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005).

and favour the dust thereof; which sometimes designs multitudes, [Num
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010), perhaps here it may denote the
meanest of the Lord's people, who will be regarded, and not despised by
his servants; but they will show favour to them, do them all the good
they can, and wish well to them, and pray for their prosperity, and for
the peace of Zion; that God would make it the joy of the whole earth;
and when there shall be such a delight in the stones and dust of Zion,
and a spirit of grace and supplication poured forth upon the servants of
the Lord, to pray for the promised glory and happiness of it, it will be
a token for good, and an intimation that the set time to favour her is
at hand; which seems to be the sense of the psalmist: such great
reverence and respect have the greatest of the wise men among the Jews
for the land of Israel, literally understood, that they kiss the
borders, the stones of it, and roll themselves in its dust (a), having
perhaps in mind this passage of Scripture.

\(a\) Maimon. Hilchot Melachim, c. 5. s. 10.

[Psalms 102:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 102:15</span></span>

So the Heathen shall fear the name of the Lord,.... Whose name is
reverend, and to be feared; especially the glorious and fearful name
"Jehovah", expressive of the divine existence, of his eternity and
immutability; though the name of the Lord frequently signifies himself,
and here particularly the Messiah, the Son of God, in whom the name of
the Lord is; the King of saints, whom all men will fear in the latter
day, when the set time to favour Zion is come; will stand in awe of him,
be careful of offending him, and will serve and worship him; even the
very Heathen, who knew not God, and had no fear of him before their
eyes, or in their hearts; the Pagan nations, whose kingdoms will become
the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; see [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015).

and all the kings of the earth thy glory; which may be supplied thus,
either "all the kings of the earth shall see thy glory", or shall fear
thee because of "thy glory"; the glory of Christ's person, as the Son of
God; the glory of his offices, as Prophet, Priest, and King; especially
the glory of his kingly office, to which that of the kings of the earth
is not to be compared; the glory of his works of creation, providence,
and redemption; and as it will be held forth in the Gospel, with which
the earth will now be full, and so be filled with the glory of the Lord,
[Psa 72:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#019), and will be so remarkable
and conspicuous as to be taken notice of by the kings of the earth, even
by all of them, who, when the glory of the Lord shall be risen in Zion,
will come to the brightness of it, and look upon it, and admire it, and
fear because of it, [Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001).

[Psalms 102:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 102:16</span></span>

When the Lord shall build up Zion,.... The church of God, fallen down,
and in a ruinous condition, as it may be said to be when the doctrines
of the Gospel are departed from; the ordinances of it are corrupted and
altered, or not attended to; the worship and discipline of the Lord's
house are neglected; great declensions in faith, love, and zeal, among
the professors of religion, and but few instances of conversion: and it
may be said to be built up again, as it will be in the latter day, when
the doctrines of grace will be revived; the ordinances will be
administered in their primitive purity; great spirituality, holiness,
and brotherly love, among the saints, and large numbers converted and
brought into it: and this will be the work of Christ, the great master
builder; the materials of this building are the saints, those lively
stones which will now be laid with fair colours; the ministers of the
word will be the instruments that Christ will make use of in rebuilding
his church; it is his Spirit, power, and grace, which will make all
effectual; and he will have the glory, as follows: the Targum is,

"for the city of Zion is built by the Word of the Lord:''

he shall appear in his glory; or "shall be seen in his glory" (b), which
will be upon his church and people, and on which there will be a
defence, so that it shall continue; and this will lie chiefly in the
purity of Gospel truths, ordinances, and worship; in the number of
converts; in the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God upon them; in
their peace, prosperity, unity, and spirituality; and in the presence of
Christ with them, who will be seen in all the glory and majesty of his
kingly office; he will now reign before his ancients gloriously.

\(b\) "videbitur", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Psalms 102:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 102:17</span></span>

He will regard the prayer of the destitute,.... Of the destitute of
human help and support, protection and defence; as the church in the
wilderness; of the "poor", as the Syriac and Arabic versions, both in
spirit and in purse; of the "humble", as the Septuagint and Vulgate
Latin: the word (c) signifies a low shrub or plant; it is rendered, the
heath in the wilderness, [Jer 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006) and
designs the saints in their low and afflicted state, during the reign of
antichrist, and while the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth; these are the
elect that pray day and night, and give the Lord no rest till he
establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the earth; and the prayers of
these are regarded and looked to by the Lord; his eyes are upon and his
ears are open to these praying ones; and all the glorious things which
shall be done for the church of God will be in consequence of their
prayers:

and not despise their prayer; not reject it with contempt and
abhorrence; more is intended than is expressed: the meaning is, that he
will receive it with pleasure, and return an answer to it; the prayer of
these poor destitute ones is delightful to him, [Pro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008).

\(c\) "eorum, qui sunt veluti myricae", Pagninus, Vatablus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 102:18</span></span>

This shall be written for the generation to come,.... This prayer, as
the Targum paraphrases it, is a directory to saints in distressed
circumstances; or that which was just now said, that the Lord will
regard, and not despise the prayer of the destitute; this shall stand on
record, for the encouragement of praying souls in all generations; or
this whole prophecy, concerning the glory of the church in the latter
day; this shall be written for the next generation, and so on until it
is accomplished, to keep up the faith and expectation of the fulfilment
of it:

and the people which shall be created: born at the time when all this
shall be done; or who shall become new creatures; be created in Christ
Jesus, and made new men;

these shall praise the Lord, when he shall arise and have mercy on Zion;
when he shall favour and rebuild her, in answer to the prayers of his
people; then their prayers will be turned into praise; then will those
voices be heard among them, hallelujah, salvation, glory, honour, and
power unto the Lord our God, [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).

[Psalms 102:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 102:19</span></span>

For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary,.... From
heaven, as it is explained in the next clause, which is the Lord's
sanctuary, or holy place, where he dwells, even in the height of it; it
is both high and holy, as he himself is; yet he condescends to look down
from thence on sinful mortals:

from heaven did the Lord behold the earth; the inhabitants of it, good
and bad: it designs the general notice he takes of men and things in a
providential way; he beholds the world, that lies in wickedness, and all
the wickedness committed in it; and will one day call to an account, and
punish for it; he beholds good men, not only with an eye of providence,
to take care of them, protect and defend, but with an eye of love,
grace, and mercy; he has a special and distinct knowledge of them, and
it may here particularly regard the notice he takes of his people, under
antichristian tyranny; he sees all the barbarity and cruelty exercised
upon them, and will requite it, ere long, to their adversaries, and free
them from it, as follows.

[Psalms 102:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 102:20</span></span>

To hear the groanings of the prisoner,.... Not of a single person only,
but of many, who lie in prisons in Popish countries, especially in the
Inquisition; where they lie and groan, in darkness and misery, under
dreadful tortures; their cries and groans the Lord hears; his heart
yearns towards them; he looks with pity on them; and, because of the
sighing of these poor and needy ones, he will arise in due time, and set
them in safety from him that puffs at them: it is true also of such who
are prisoners of sin, Satan, and the law; and, when sensible of it,
groan under their bondage, and cry to the Lord for help, who hears them,
and directs them, as prisoners of hope, to turn to Christ, their strong
hold, [Zac 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011),

to loose those that are appointed to death; delivered to death, as the
Targum; delivered over to the secular power, in order to be put to
death; who are arraigned and condemned as malefactors, and put into the
condemned hole, in order for execution; these the Lord will loose, and
save them from the death they are appointed to by men; for this is not
to be understood of persons appointed by the Lord to death, either
corporeal or eternal, from which none can be loosed, so appointed: in
the original text the phrase is "children of death" (d); the same as
"children of wrath", [Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003), that
is, deserving of death, and under the sentence of it; as all men are in
Adam, even the Lord's own people; and who are, in their own
apprehension, as dead men, when awakened and convinced of their state by
the Spirit of God; these Christ looses from the shackles and fetters of
sin, from the bondage of the law, from the tyranny of Satan, and from
fears of death, and puts them into the glorious liberty of the children
of God.

\(d\) "filios mortis", Montanus, Vatablus, Musculus, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 102:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 102:21</span></span>

To declare the name of the Lord in Zion,.... That is, that the prisoners
and persons appointed to death, being loosed, might declare, in the
church, what great things the Lord has done for them; and so speak well
of his wisdom, power, grace, and goodness, in their deliverance; profess
his name, and confess him before men, and express a value for his name,
and show forth the honour of it, and seek his glory:

and his praise in Jerusalem; the Gospel church state, the same with
Zion; when it shall be the praise of the whole earth; then and there
will those, that are delivered from the antichristian yoke, praise the
Lord, sing the song of Moses and the Lamb, and glorify God for all that
he has done for them.

[Psalms 102:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 102:22</span></span>

When the people are gathered together,.... When the people of the Jews
shall be gathered together, and seek the Lord their God, and David their
King, the Messiah, and appoint them one head, even Christ; and when the
Gentiles shall gather together, in great numbers, to the church of God,
[Hos 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011),

and the kingdoms to serve the Lord; even the kingdoms of this world,
which will become his, and will serve him in righteousness and holiness,
freely and cheerfully, with one shoulder and one content; their kings
will fall down before the Lord, and all nations shall serve him, [Psa
72:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011), and then will be the time when
the prisoners shall be loosed, and the Lord shall be praised in Zion.

[Psalms 102:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 102:23</span></span>

He weakened my strength in the way,.... The psalmist here returns to his
complaint of his afflictions, weakness, and frailty, which ended [Psa
102:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#011), after which some hints are
given of the latter day glory, which though he despaired of seeing, by
reason of his frailty and mortality, yet comforts himself with the
eternity and immutability of Christ, and that there would be a
succession of the church, a seed of true believers, who would see and
enjoy it: as for himself, he says that God (for he is that "He", and not
the enemy, as some) had "weakened" his "strength in the way", by
afflictions, as the word (e) signifies; which weakens the strength and
vigour of the mind, and discourages and dispirits it, and enfeebles the
body: many are the afflictions which the people of God meet with in the
course of their life, in their way to heaven, which have such an effect
upon them; through many tribulations they pass to enter the kingdom, as
the Israelites in their way to Canaan, and Christ to glory: some think
the psalmist represents the Jews in their return from the Babylonish
captivity, meeting with difficulties and discouragements in the way;
rather the church of God, in the expectation of the Messiah, who,
because his coming was delayed, grew feeble in their faith and hope, had
weak hands and feeble knees, which needed strengthening by fresh
promises: though it may be, best of all, the people of God, waiting for
latter day glory, enfeebled by the persecutions of antichrist, or grown
weak in the exercises of their grace, faith, hope, and love; which will
be their case before these glorious times, and now is, see [Rev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002),

he shortened my days; which he thought he should live, and expected he
would; and which, according to the course of nature, and the common term
of man's life, he might, in all human appearance, have lived; otherwise,
with respect to the decree of God, which has fixed the bounds of man's
days, they cannot be shorter or longer than they are, [Job
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005).

\(e\) "afflixit", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Musculus,
Piscator, Gejerus, Schmidt; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 102:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 102:24</span></span>

I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days;.... Which
was always reckoned as a judgment, as a token of God's sore displeasure,
and as what only befell wicked men, [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023), in the Hebrew it is, "cause me
not to ascend" (f); either as smoke, which ascends, and vanishes away;
or rather it designs the separation of the soul from the body at death,
when it ascends upwards to God that gave it; so Aben Ezra compares it
with [Ecc 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007), the Targum is,

"do not take me out of the world in the midst of my days, bring me to
the world to come:''

some, who think that Daniel was the penman of this psalm, or some other,
about the time of the Babylonish captivity, curiously observe, that that
period was much about the middle between the building of Solomon's
temple and the coming of Christ, the antitype of it; which was about a
thousand years, of which four hundred and ninety were to come, according
to Daniel's weeks; so, representing the church, prays they might not be
destroyed, as such; but be continued till the Messiah came:

thy years are throughout all generations; which are not as men's years,
of the same measure or number; but are boundless and infinite: the
phrase is expressive of the eternity of God, or Christ; which the
psalmist opposes to his own frailty, and which he illustrates in the
following verses, by setting it in contrast with the discontinuance and
changeableness of the heavens and the earth; see [Job
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#005).

\(f\) "ne ascendere facias me", Montanus, Gejerus.

[Psalms 102:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 102:25</span></span>

Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth,.... The lower part of
the creation, the Lord's footstool, called the earth beneath: this has
its foundation; though what it is cannot be well said, it cannot be
searched out; it is sometimes said to be founded upon the waters, and
yet so as not to be removed for ever, [Jer
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037), this shows the wisdom of God,
as a wise master builder, and the stability of the earth; and is a proof
of the deity of Christ, to whom these words belong: this is said to be
done "of old", or "at" or "in the beginning", as Jarchi and the Targum;
and so in [Heb 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010), where they are
applied to the Messiah, the Son of God; and this, as it proves the
eternity of Christ, who must be in the beginning, and before all things,
so it confutes the notion of the eternity of the earth, received by some
philosophers: besides, the words may be rendered, "before" (g) "thou
foundest the earth"; and so refers to the preceding, "thy years", &c.
were before the earth was; that is, from eternity, and so fully express
the eternal existence of Christ:

and the heavens are the work of thy hands; these are the airy and starry
heavens, and the heaven of heavens; which are creatures, and not to be
worshipped, made by Christ himself, and are expressive of his power,
wisdom, and glory.

\(g\) "antea", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus.

[Psalms 102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 102:26</span></span>

They shall perish,.... Both the heavens and the earth, though so well
founded, and so firmly made; they shall be dissolved, melt, and pass
away; not as to the substance, but as to the quality of them: or, as R.
Judah Ben David says, whom Aben Ezra on the place cites, and calls the
first grammarian in the west, not as to generals, but as to particulars:

but thou shalt endure; as the eternal God, from everlasting to
everlasting; and, even as man, he will die no more; and, as Mediator,
will ever remain; he will be King for ever; his throne is for ever and
ever; his kingdom is an everlasting one; he is a priest for ever, after
the order of Melchizedek; his sacrifice is of an eternal efficacy, and
he ever lives to make intercession for his people; he will always
continue, as the Prophet, in his church, to teach by his Spirit, word,
and ordinances, in the present state; and hereafter will be the light of
the New Jerusalem, and of his saints, for ever:

yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment: not only the heavens,
which are as a curtain and garment about the earth, but the earth
itself, [Isa 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006), will lose their
beauty and glory, and become useless, as to the present form of them:

as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed; as to
their form, as a garment that is turned or folded up, and laid aside, as
to present use: this seems to favour the above sense given, that the
earth and heavens will not perish, as to the substance of them; but as
to their form, figure, fashion, and scheme; and as to the qualities of
them, all noxious ones being purged away by fire, the curse removed, and
new heavens and new earth arise out of them.

[Psalms 102:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 102:27</span></span>

But thou art the same,.... That hast created them, as the Targum adds;
or "thou art he" (h), the everlasting I AM, the unchangeable Jehovah;
immutable in his nature and perfections; in his love and affections to
his people; in his power to protect and keep them; in his wisdom to
guide and direct them; in his righteousness to clothe them, and render
them acceptable to God; in his blood to cleanse them, and speak peace
and pardon to them; in his fulness to supply them, and in his
intercession for them,

and thy years shall have no end; See Gill on [Psa
102:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024), now he, that made the heavens
and the earth, and will be when they will not be, especially in the
present form they are, must be able to rebuild his Zion, and bring on
the glory he has promised; and from his eternity and immutability may be
concluded the continuance of his church and interest in the world, until
all the glorious things spoken of it shall be fulfilled, as follows.

\(h\) "tu ipse", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Psalms 102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 102:28</span></span>

The children of thy servants shall continue,.... The "servants" of the
Lord are the apostles of Christ, and ministers of the word, in all
successive generations, with whom Christ will be to the end of the
world: their "children" are such whom they have begotten again, through
the Gospel, to whom they are spiritual fathers; regenerated souls are
meant; of these there will be a succession in all ages, until latter day
glory takes place; these are the church's seed, and her seed's seed,
from whom the word of the Lord, the Gospel, will never depart, [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021), or these "shall inhabit" (i),
as the word may be rendered, the earth, as the Targum adds; that is, the
new heavens, and the new earth, when the old ones are passed away; here
they shall dwell with the Lord, who is the same today, yesterday, and
for ever:

and their seed shall be established before thee; the same with the
children, the spiritual seed of the church and of faithful minister;
these, with the church, in which they are born and brought up, shall be
established in Christ; the church will be no more in an unstable and
fluctuating state, but will he as a tabernacle, that shall not be taken
down; yea, shall be established upon the top of the mountains, and
exalted above the hills; see [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).

\(i\) "habitabunt", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Cocceius, Gejerus; so Sept.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 103](psa103)

</div>
