<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa149)  [Next](pro000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 150](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 150:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 150

This psalm is of the same kind and upon the same subject with the two
preceding ones; and very probably was written by the same hand, and
about the same time; and is a very proper psalm to conclude this book
with, being all praise. Some say (q) this psalm was sung by the
Israelites, when they came with their firstfruits into the sanctuary,
with the basket on their shoulders. "Thirteen" times in this short psalm
is the word "praise" used; not on account of thirteen properties or
perfections in God, as Kimchi thinks: but it is so frequently and in
every clause used, to show the vehement desire of the psalmist that the
Lord might be praised; and to express his sense of things, how worthy he
is of praise; and that all ways and means to praise him should be made
use of, all being little enough to set forth his honour and glory. And
not the Levites only, whose business it was in the temple service to
praise the Lord with musical instruments, are here exhorted to it, as R.
Judah the Levite thinks, but all people; not the people of Israel only,
as Kimchi; but the Gentiles also, even all that have breath, [Psa
150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006). For, as R. Obadiah Gaon
observes, this psalm belongs to the times of the Messiah; to the Gospel
dispensation, to the latter part of it, especially when Jews and
Gentiles shall be converted; and when all will praise the Lord, as they
will have reason for it.

\(q\) Weemse's Christ. Synagog. l. 1. c. 6. s. 4. p. 145.

[Psalms 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 150:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord,.... Or, "hallelujah"; which, in the Targum,
Septuagint, and Vulgate Latin versions, is the title of the psalm; and
expresses the subject of it, the praise of the Lord;

praise God in his sanctuary; in the temple, the house of his sanctuary
as the Targum and R Judah; or in heaven, as R. Moses, his holy place,
where he is praised by holy angels and glorified saints; or in the
church below, of which the sanctuary or temple was a type. The
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and the eastern versions, render it, "in his
Holy Ones"; among his saints, in the assembly of them, where he is to be
feared and praised: it may be translated, "in his Holy One" (r); and be
understood of Christ, as it is by Cocceius; who is holy in both his
natures, and is often called God's Holy One, and the Holy One of Israel;
and whose human nature is a tabernacle or temple, wherein the fulness of
the Godhead dwells; and in, and through, and for whom, the Lord is to be
praised. Some render it, "for" or "because of his holiness" (s); the
perfection of holiness in him; in which he is glorious and fearful in
the praises of, and which appears in all his works of providence and
grace;

praise him in the firmament of his power; the heaven above us, so
called, [Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006); which, in the Hebrew
language, has its name from its being spread and expanded over the
earth; and, in the Greek and Latin tongues, from the firmness and
stability of it; and which is a work of mighty power, and therefore so
called; it particularly respects the starry heavens; for the sun, and
moon, and stars, were placed in the firmament, [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014); or the air and atmosphere about
us, that presses upon us, and keeps all firm and stable. And now as this
shows forth the glory of God, and his handiwork, [Psa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001); not only all in it should and do
in their way praise the Lord; but especially men on earth, who enjoy the
benefit of it. R. Judah understands this of the ark in the temple,
called the ark of the Lord's strength.

\(r\) "in sancto habitaculo suo", Vocceius; "in sancto ejus", Gejerus; ,
Symmachus apud Drusium. (s) "Ob sanctitatem ejus", Tirinus, Muis; "ob
insignem sanctitatem ipsius", Campensis apud Gejerum.

[Psalms 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 150:2</span></span>

Praise him for his mighty acts,.... The creation of all things out of
nothing; the sustaining of all beings; the government of the world; the
redemption of man by Christ, and the wonderful works done by him on
earth; the work of grace upon the hearts of his people, and the
preservation of them in grace to glory;

praise him according to his excellent greatness; or, "according to the
multitude of his greatness" (t); which appears in his nature,
perfections, and work, and these both of providence and grace; and in
proportion hereunto, and according to the abilities of creatures,
angels, and men, is he to be praised; which is giving him the honour due
unto his name; see [Psa 96:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#008).

\(t\) "secundum multudinem magnitudinie ejus", V. L. Montanus, Gejerus;
so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 150:3</span></span>

Praise him with the sound of the trumpet,.... Which was used in calling
the assembly together, for worship and on other occasions; and at the
feast of blowing of trumpets, and in the year of jubilee, [Num
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001); and by the priests in temple
service, [Ch1 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#006); and was typical of
the Gospel, which gives a certain and joyful sound, and is the cause and
means of praising God, [Isa 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013);

praise him with the psaltery; to which psalms were sung;

and harp; which were instruments of music, both used in divine worship
under the former dispensation; and in which David was well skilled and
delighted, and appointed proper persons to praise with them, [Ch1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#020). They were typical of the
spiritual melody made in the hearts of God's people, while they are
praising him in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, under the Gospel,
[Eph 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019).

[Psalms 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 150:4</span></span>

Praise him with the timbrel and dance,.... Or "pipe" (u); See Gill on
[Psa 149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003);

praise him with stringed instruments; or divers "kinds" (w) of
instruments not named, as R. Saadiah Gaon; and which, as Aben Ezra says,
had all one sound or note; what they were is not known, as also many of
them that are particularly mentioned;

and organs; which have their name from the loveliness of their sound;
these are of ancient original and use, [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021); but were not of the same kind
with those now in use, which are of much later invention.

\(u\) "et tibia", Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Gejerus. (w) "varia symphonia", Cocceius.

[Psalms 150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 150:5</span></span>

Praise him upon the loud cymbals,.... Or "cymbals of hearing" (x); that
were heard with pleasure and delight, and afar off: the Septuagint and
Vulgate Latin versions render it, "well sounding cymbals", which give a
grateful sound to the ear; these were made of brass, [Ch1
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#019); to which the apostle alludes,
[Co1 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001);

praise him upon the high sounding, cymbals; or "cymbals of shouting"
(y), ovation or triumph; which were used on joyful occasions, as
victories, deliverances, and the like; and were used also in the temple
service, see [Ch1 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#005); according to
the Targum and Septuagint version, these were three stringed
instruments; for so they render the word them in [Sa1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006). Now these several instruments of
music are named, not as to be used in Gospel times; but, being
expressive of the highest praise and joy shown in former times, are
mentioned to set forth the highest strains and notes of praise in New
Testament saints; as well as to denote their heartiness, agreement, and
unanimity in this service, [Rom 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006).

\(x\) "in cymbalis auditus", Montanus, Vatablus. (y) "in cymbalis
jubilationis", V. L. Musculus, Cocceius; "in cymbalis ovationis",
Montanus.

[Psalms 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 150:6</span></span>

Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord,.... Even the brute
creatures, as in a preceding; but more especially man, in whom God has
breathed the breath of life, and is become not only a living but a
rational soul; and more especially spiritual men, converted persons,
whether Jews or Gentiles; on whom the Spirit of the Lord has breathed,
and whom he has quickened; and who breathe in prayer after divine
things; and who also have abundant reason to bless and praise his name
for what he has bestowed upon them, and has in reserve for them; and for
which they should praise him as long as they have breath; see [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013);

praise ye the Lord; all before mentioned, and in the manner as directed,
and that in time and to all eternity. Thus ends the book of Psalms.

There is another psalm added in the Septuagint, Syriac, Arabic, and
Ethiopic versions, and in the metaphrase of Apollinarius; but is owned
to be a supernumerary one, and not to be found in all copies; and is
said to be written by David, when he fought with Goliath, and conquered
him, and is as follows.

1\. I was little among my brethren, and a youth in my father's house; I
fed my father's sheep. 2. My hands made (or used) the organ; and my
fingers fitted (or played on) the psaltery or harp: 3. And who hath
declared to my Lord? he is Lord, he hath heard. 4. He sent his angel,
and took me from my father's sheep; and anointed me with the oil of his
anointing, 5. My brethren were goodly and great; and the Lord delighted
not in them. 6. I went forth to meet the stranger (the Philistine), and
he cursed me by his idols: 7. And I threw at him three stones into his
forehead, by the power of the Lord, and laid him prostrate (z). 8. I
drew out the sword from him; I cut off his head, and took away reproach
from the children of Israel.

\(z\) This verse is only in the Arabic version.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Introduction](pro000)

</div>
