<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa103)  [Next](psa105) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 104](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 104:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 104

This psalm, though without a title, was probably written by David, since
it begins and ends as the former does, as Aben Ezra observes; and to him
the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions, ascribe
it. The inscription of the Syriac version is,

"a psalm of David, when he went to worship before the ark of the Lord
with the priests; and as to us, it teaches us confession and prayer; and
intimates to us the constitution of the beginning of the creatures; and
declares some things concerning the angels.''

Some copies of the Septuagint version have it,

"a psalm of David concerning the constitution of the world;''

which indeed is the subject matter of it; for it treats of the creation
of all things, of the heavens and the earth, and of all creatures in
them; and of the providence of God in taking care of them. Christ is the
divine Person addressed and described throughout the whole, as appears
from the quotation of [Psa 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005) and
the application of it to him in [Heb
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007).

[Psalms 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 104:1</span></span>

Bless the Lord, O my soul,.... As for the blessings of grace and mercy
expressed in the preceding psalm, so on account of the works of creation
and providence, enumerated in this; in which Christ has an equal
concern, as in the former.

O Lord my God, thou art very great; the Messiah, who is Jehovah our
righteousness, Lord of all, truly God, and the God of his people; see
[Joh 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028) and who is great, and very
great, in his divine Person, being the great God, and our Saviour; great
in all his works of creation, providence, and redemption; great in all
his offices of Prophet, Priest, and King; a Saviour, and a great one;
the great Shepherd of the Sheep; the Man, Jehovah's Fellow.

Thou art clothed with honour and majesty; being the brightness of his
Father's glory, and having on him the glory of the only begotten of the
Father, and a natural majesty in him as the Son of God and King of the
whole universe; and, as Mediator, he has honour and majesty laid upon
him by his Father, [Psa 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005), he has
all the regalia and ensigns of royal majesty; he is on a throne, high
and lifted up, even the same with his divine Father; he has a crown of
glory on his head, he is crowned with glory and honour; he has a sceptre
of righteousness in his hand, and is arrayed in robes of majesty; and,
as thus situated, is to look upon like a jasper and sardine stone; or as
if he was covered with sparkling gems and precious stones, [Rev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002) and, having all power in heaven
and earth, over angels and men, honour and glory given him by both.

[Psalms 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 104:2</span></span>

Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment,.... Referring, as
Aben Ezra and Kimchi think, to the light, which was first created; and
indeed this was commanded out of darkness by God the Word, or by the
essential Word of God. Light is expressive of the nature of God himself,
who is light, and in him is no darkness at all, and who dwells in light
(h) inaccessible, and so may be said to be clothed with it; which is
applicable to Christ as a divine Person, [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). and to whom this term "light"
well agrees; Light being one of the names of the Messiah in the Old
Testament, [Psa 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003), and is often
given him in the New Testament, as the author of the light of nature,
grace, and glory, [Joh 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009). He is now
possessed of the light and glory of the heavenly state, of which his
transfiguration on the mount was an emblem, when his face shone like the
sun, and his raiment was as the light, [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002).

Who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain; alluding to the firmament
or expanse, which, being spread out like a curtain, divided between the
waters and the waters, [Gen 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006).
Heaven is represented as a tent stretched out, with curtains drawn
around it, to hide the dazzling and unapproachable light in which the
Lord dwells, [Isa 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022) and it is as a
curtain or canopy stretched out and encompassing this earth; the
stretching of it out belongs to God alone, and is a proof of the deity
of Christ, to whom it is here and elsewhere ascribed, [Job
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008). Here Christ dwells invisible to
us at present; he is received up into heaven, retained there, and from
thence will descend at the last day; and in the mean while is within the
curtains of heaven, unseen by us.

\(h\) "Pura in luce refulsit alma parens", Virgil. Aeneid. 2. "Et paulo
post, pallas insedit, nimbo effulgens".

[Psalms 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 104:3</span></span>

Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters,.... Or "his upper
rooms" (i); one story over another being built by him in the heavens,
[Amo 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006), the chambers where he
resides; his courts, as the Targum; his palace and apartments, his
presence chamber particularly, the floor and beams of them are the
waters bound up in the thick clouds; or the region of the air, from
whence the rain descends to water the hills, as in [Psa
104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013).

Who maketh the clouds his chariot; to ride in; in these sometimes
Jehovah rides to execute judgment on his enemies, [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001) and in these sometimes he appears
in a way of grace and mercy to his people, [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021), in these, as in chariots,
Christ went up to heaven; and in these will he come a second time; and
into these will the saints be caught up to meet the Lord in the air at
his coming, [Act 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009).

Who walketh upon the wings of the wind; see [Psa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010) which is expressive of his
swiftness in coming to help and assist his people in time of need; who
helps, and that right early; and may very well be applied both to the
first and second coming of Christ, who came leaping upon the mountains,
and skipping upon the hills, when he first came; and, when he comes a
second time, will be as a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of
spices, [Sol 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008). The Targum is,

"upon the swift clouds, like the wings of an eagle;''

hence, perhaps, it is, the Heathens have a notion of Jupiter's being
carried in a chariot through the air, when it thunders and lightens (k).

\(i\) Sept. "coenacula sua superiora", Gejerus; so Michaelis. (k) Vid.
Horat. Camin. l. 1. Ode 34. v. 5. "Namque diespiter", &c. Et. Ode 12. v.
58. "Tu gravi curru quaties Olympum".

[Psalms 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 104:4</span></span>

Who maketh his angels spirits,.... The angels are spirits, or spiritual
substances, yet created ones; and so differ from God, who is a spirit,
and from the Holy Spirit of God, who are Creators and not creatures;
angels are spirits without bodies, and so differ from the souls or
spirits of men, and are immaterial, and so die not; these are made by
Christ, by whom all things are made, [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016) and so he must be greater and
more excellent than they; for which purpose the passage is quoted in
[Heb 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007). Some render it, "who maketh
his angels as the winds"; to which they may be compared for their
invisibility, they being not to be seen, no more than the wind, unless
when they assume an external form; and for their penetration through
bodies in a very surprising manner; see [Act
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006), and for their great force and
power, being mighty angels, and said to excel in strength, [Psa
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020), and for their swiftness in
obeying the divine commands; so the Targum,

"he maketh his messengers, or angels, swift as the wind.''

His ministers a flaming fire; angels are ministers to God, stand before
him, behold his face, wait for and listen to his orders, and execute
them; they are ministers to Christ, they were so at his incarnation, in
his infancy, when in the wilderness and in the garden, at his
resurrection and ascension, and will attend him at his second coming;
and these are ministers to his people, take the care of them, encamp
about them, do many good offices to them in life, and at death carry
their souls to Abraham's bosom: these are made a flaming fire, or "as"
flaming fire, for their force and power; so the Targum,

"his ministers strong as flaming fire;''

and for their swiftness as before; and because of their burning love to
God, Christ, and his people, and their flaming zeal for his cause and
interest; hence thought by some to be called "seraphim": and because
they are sometimes the executioners of God's wrath; and have sometimes
appeared in fiery forms, as in forms of horses of fire and chariots of
fire, and will descend with Christ in flaming fire at the last day; see
[Kg2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011). Some invert the words, both
reading and sense, thus, "who maketh the winds his angels, or
messengers, and flaming fire his ministers"; so Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and
Kimchi; we read of stormy wind fulfilling his word, [Psa
148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008), he sends out his winds at his
pleasure to do his errands; as to dry up the waters of the flood, to
drive back the waters of the Red sea, and make dry land, to bring quails
from thence, and scatter them about the camp of Israel, and in many
other instances. So flaming fire was used as his ministers in burning
Sodom and Gomorrah; and multitudes of the murmuring Israelites, and the
captains with their fifties; but this sense is contrary to the order of
the words, and the design of them, and to the apostle's sense of them,
[Heb 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007) which is confirmed by the
Targum, Septuagint, and all the Oriental versions.

[Psalms 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 104:5</span></span>

Who laid the foundations of the earth,.... Or "founded the earth upon
its bases" (l); which some take to be the waters, according to [Psa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002), others the centre of gravity in
it; others the mountains; others the circumambient air, by which it is
poised; rather the almighty power of God, by which it subsists; this is
the work of Christ the Almighty; see [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003).

That it should not be removed for ever: for though it may be shaken by
earthquakes, yet not removed; nor will it be until the dissolution of
all things, when it shall flee away before the face of the Judge, and a
new earth shall succeed, [Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011).

\(l\) "super bases ejus", Montanus, Musculus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; so the Tigurine version, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 104:6</span></span>

Thou coverest it with the deep as with a garment,.... This refers not to
the waters of the flood, when the earth was covered with them, even the
tops of the highest mountains; but to the huge mass of waters, the abyss
and depth of them, which lay upon the earth and covered it as a garment,
at its first creation, as the context and the scope of it show; and
which deep was covered with darkness, at which time the earth was
without form, and void, [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002) an
emblem of the corrupt state of man by nature, destitute of the image of
God, void and empty of all that is good, having an huge mass of sin and
corruption on him, and being darkness itself; though this depth does not
separate the elect of God, in this state, from his love; nor these
aboundings of sin hinder the superaboundings of the grace of God; nor
the operations of his Spirit; nor the communication of light unto them;
nor the forming and renewing them, so as to become a curious piece of
workmanship; even as the state of the original earth did not hinder the
moving of the Spirit upon the waters that covered it, to the bringing of
it into a beautiful form and order.

The waters stood above the mountains; from whence we learn the mountains
were from the beginning of the creation; since they were when the depths
of water covered the unformed chaos; and which depths were so very great
as to reach above the highest mountains; an emblem of the universal
corruption of human nature; the highest, the greatest men that ever
were, comparable to mountains, have been involved in it, as David, Paul,
and others.

[Psalms 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 104:7</span></span>

At thy rebuke they fled,.... The depths of water that covered the earth
fled, went off apace, when Christ, the essential Word, gave the word of
command that they should; saying, "Let the waters under the heaven be
gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear, and it
was so", [Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009) and this being
called a "rebuke", suggests as if there was something amiss, irregular
and disorderly, and to be amended; as if these waters were not in their
proper place.

At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away; ran off with great
precipitancy; just as a servant, when his master puts on a stern
countenance, and speaks to him in a thundering, menacing manner, hastes
away from him to do his will and work. This is an instance of the mighty
power of Christ; and by the same power he removed the waters of the
deluge; when they covered the earth, and the tops of the highest hills;
and rebuked the Red sea, and it became dry land; and drove back the
waters of Jordan for the Israelites to pass through; and who also
rebuked the sea of Galilee when his disciples were in distress: and with
equal ease can he and does he remove the depth of sin and darkness from
his people at conversion; rebukes Satan, and delivers out of his
temptations, when he comes in like a flood; and rebukes the waters of
affliction when they threaten to overwhelm; who are his servants, and
come when he bids them come, and go when he bids them go.

[Psalms 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 104:8</span></span>

They go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys,.... The Targum
is,

"they ascend out of the deep to the mountains;''

that is, the waters, when they went off the earth at the divine orders,
steered their course up the mountains, and then went down by the valleys
to the place appointed for them; they went over hills and dales, nothing
could stop them or retard their course till they came to their proper
place; which is another instance of the almighty power of the Son of
God. Some render the words, "the mountains ascended, the valleys
descended (m)"; and then the meaning is, when the depth of waters were
called off the earth, the mountains and valleys appeared, the one seemed
to rise up and the other to go down; but the former reading seems best,
and emblematically describes the state of God's people in this world, in
their passage to their appointed place; who have sometimes mountains of
difficulties to go over, and which seem insuperable, and yet they
surmount them; sometimes they are upon the mount of heaven by
contemplation, and have their hearts and affections above; they mount up
with wings as eagles; sometimes they are upon the mount of communion
with God, and by his favour their mount stands strong, and they think
they shall never be moved; at other times they are down in the valleys,
in a low estate and condition; in low frames of soul, in a low exercise
of grace, and in the valley of the shadow of death, of afflictive
providences in soul or body: and as the waters, thus steering their
course under a divine direction, and by an almighty power, at length
came unto the place which, the psalmist says, thou hast founded for
them, meaning the seas; which the Lord founded and prepared for the
reception of them; and which collection of waters in one place he called
by that name, [Gen 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010). So the Lord's
people, through a variety of circumstances, trials, and exercises, will
be all brought safe to the place appointed for them, and prepared by
Christ in his Father's house; where they will be swallowed up in the
boundless ocean of everlasting love.

\(m\) So Pagninus, Musculus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 104:9</span></span>

Thou hast set a bound, that they may not pass over,.... The Targum adds,

"to the rolling waves of the sea.''

Set doors with bolts and bars, cliffs, rocks, and shores: and, what is
more surprising, sand, which is penetrable, flexible, and moveable, is
set as a perpetual bound to the raging ocean and its waves, which they
cannot pass over: see [Job 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008). So
the Lord has set a bound to the proud waters of afflictions, and says,
Thus far shall ye go, and no farther; and to the life of man, which he
cannot exceed, [Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005). But he has
given man a law, as a rule to walk by, as the boundary of his
conversation, and this he transgresses; in which he is less tractable
than the raging sea and its waves. That they turn not again to cover the
earth; as they did when it was first made, [Psa
104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006) that is, not without the divine
leave and power; for they did turn again and cover the earth, at the
time of the flood; but never shall more. Some think there is no need to
make this exception; since this was written after the flood, and when
God had swore that the waters should no more go over the earth, [Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009).

[Psalms 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 104:10</span></span>

He sendeth the springs into the valleys,.... The Targum is,

"who sendeth fountains into the rivers.''

Either from the waters of the sea, which being drained through the sand,
become sweet and drinkable; or from the hills and mountains. This is an
instance of divine goodness, that having removed the waters from the
earth, and shut them up in the sea, and which, through the saltness of
them, not being proper drink for men and beasts, he has been pleased to
form and open springs, fountains, wells, and rivers of fresh water in
the valleys, for the supply of both. Though this is not to be compared
with the wells of salvation, and springs and fountains of grace, which
he has opened for his chosen people. God himself is a spring or fountain
of living water; his love is a river, whose streams delight the city of
God; his covenant a source and spring of all blessings and promises.
Christ is the fountain of gardens; his fulness is a supply for all his
people: the Spirit of God and his grace are a well of living water,
springing up unto eternal life. The word and ordinances are the springs
in Zion,

which run among the hills, the several congregated churches, to the
watering and refreshing of them; just as springs and rivers of water run
in the dales and valleys among the hills, by which they are bounded.

[Psalms 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 104:11</span></span>

They give drink to every beast of the field,.... These fountains,
springs, and rivers, afford water for all the beasts of the field; who
are therefore said to honour and praise the Lord on account of it, [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019).

The wild asses quench their thirst; or "break" (n) it. Those creatures
that live in dry and desert places, and are themselves dry and thirsty;
and though so stupid as they be, yet provision of water is made for
them, and they are directed where to seek for it, and find it; see [Job
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005). And if God takes care of the
beasts of the field, even the most wild and stupid, will he not take
care of his own people? He will, and does. He opens rivers in high
places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys; he gives waters in
the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to his people,
his chosen, [Isa 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018).

\(n\) "frangent", Pagninus, Montanus; "frangunt", Vatablus, Cocceius,
Gejerus, Michaelis; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 104:12</span></span>

By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation,.... Another
use of the springs, fountains, and rivers of water; by the sides and on
the shores of these, some birds delight to be, and on trees that grow
here do they build their nests; and here, having wetted their throats,
they sit, and chirp, and sing: to doves, by rivers of water, is the
allusion in [Sol 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#012).

Which sing among the branches; of trees that grow by the sides of
fountains and rivers; see [Eze 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023).
To such birds may saints be compared; being, like them, weak,
defenceless, and timorous; liable to be taken in snares, and sometimes
wonderfully delivered; as well as given to wanderings and strayings: and
to fowls of the heaven, being heaven born souls, and partakers of the
heavenly calling. These have their habitation by the fountain of Jacob,
by the river of divine love, beside the still waters of the sanctuary;
where they sing the songs of Zion, the songs of electing, redeeming, and
calling grace.

[Psalms 104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 104:13</span></span>

He watereth the hills from his chambers,.... The house of his superior
treasures, as the Targum. The airy regions, [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003) with the clouds of heaven, by
the rain which they drop down upon them; the usefulness of which
blessings of nature is largely described in this and some following
verses. "The hills", which are naturally dry and barren, and receive but
little advantage from the springs, fountains, and rivers below, are
supplied with water from above; and become fruitful, bear herbage, and
are clothed with flocks. This seems to refer to the first rain that was
upon the earth, [Gen 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005) and which
favour is continued to all lands, excepting some part of the land of
Egypt, and in all ages since; see [Psa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009). So ministers of the word, who
are set in the first place, and are eminent in the church of God, and
who water others, are watered themselves with the gifts and graces of
the Spirit descending from above, as the apostles were, in an
extraordinary manner, at the day of Pentecost; and as others in a more
ordinary manner daily are. So likewise the churches of Christ,
comparable to hills and mountains for firmness and visibility, and the
several members thereof, are watered with the dews of divine favour,
with the rain of the divine word; which comes down from heaven as the
rain does, and drops and distils like that; and with the grace of the
divine Spirit, whereby their souls become as a watered garden, whose
springs fail not.

The earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works; with the fruits
which grow out of it by means of rain, as are after mentioned; herbs,
grass, and trees, so Aben Ezra: or with the influences of the heavens,
which are the work of God's hands, and by which the earth is made
fruitful; or more particularly with the virtue and efficacy of the rain,
so Kimchi; which is the Lord's peculiar work, [Jer
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022). This the earth drinking in, is
as satisfied with as a thirsty man is with drinking a draught of water;
see [Deu 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011). So the people of God,
comparable to the good earth that drinks in the rain that often comes
upon it, are satisfied with the love of God, with the blessings of his
grace, with the doctrines of his Gospel, and with the ordinances of his
house.

[Psalms 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 104:14</span></span>

He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle,.... By means of rain
falling upon the tender herb, and upon the mown grass, whereby provision
of food is made for those creatures that live upon grass.

And herb for the service of man: some herbs being for physic for him,
and others for food, and all more or less for his use. Herbs were the
original food of man, [Gen 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029) and
still a dinner of herbs, where love is, is better than a stalled ox, and
hatred therewith, [Pro 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#017). Some
render it, "and herb at the tillage of man" (o): grass grows of itself
for the use of the cattle; but the herb, as wheat and the like, which is
for the use of man, is caused to grow when man has taken some pains with
the earth, and has tilled and manured it: but the former sense seems
best.

That he may bring forth food out of the earth; either that man may do it
by his tillage; or rather that the Lord may do it, by sending rain, and
causing the grass and herbs to grow. However, man's food, as well as the
food of beasts, comes out of the earth, as he himself does, and to which
he must return.

\(o\) "ad culturam", Cocceius, some in Vatablus, and Michaelis; so
Gussetius, p. 572.

[Psalms 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 104:15</span></span>

And wine that maketh glad the heart of man,.... That is, by means of
rain watering the earth, vines are caused to grow out of it; which
produce wine, that has such a virtue in it, as to cheer the heart of
man, even of a miserable, distressed, and afflicted man, as the word (p)
is supposed to signify, [Jdg 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013). Of
this nature are (and therefore are compared to wine, or expressed by it)
the love of God and Christ; the blessings of grace, the doctrines of the
Gospel, the ordinances of it; particularly that of the Lord's supper,
and even the joys of heaven.

And oil to make his face to shine: or, "to make his face shine more than
oil" (q); and so it continues the account of the virtue of wine, which
not only cheers the heart, but makes the countenance brisk and lively,
and even shine again: but, according to our version, and others, this is
a distinct effect of the rain, causing olive trees to grow out of the
earth, productive of oil; which being eaten, fattens, and so makes the
face to shine; as it also does by anointing with it, which was much in
use for that purpose in the eastern countries, as well as for cheering
and refreshing; see [Rut 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003). Pliny
(r) says, oil purifies or clears; and particularly of oil of almonds, he
says, that it makes clean, makes bodies soft, smooths the skin, procures
gracefulness; and, with honey, takes spots or specks out of the face.
Kimchi makes mention of another use of oil, in lighting lamps; by which
the face of man is enlightened, or light is given him. So the Targum,

"to enlighten the face with oil.''

To this the grace of the Spirit is often compared in Scripture, with
which both Christ and his members are said to be anointed, [Act
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038). This not only cheers and
refreshes them, and is therefore called the oil of joy and gladness,
[Psa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007), but beautifies and adorns
them, and even makes them fat and flourishing, and so their faces to
shine; as well as causes their lamps of profession to burn clearly, and
the light of their good works to shine before men to the glory of God.

And bread which strengthens man's heart: the earth being watered with
rain, causes the wheat sown in it to grow up; of which bread is made for
the support of man's life, and is the chief sustenance of it; and is
therefore commonly called "the staff of life", and, by the prophet, "the
whole stay of bread", [Isa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), by
which human nature is invigorated, and the strength of man is kept up
and increased; for the phrase, see [Gen
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005). Of this nature are the
provisions of God's house, which go by the same name, the word and
ordinances; and especially Christ Jesus himself, the true and living
bread; by which the Christian's spiritual life is supported and
maintained, and he is comforted and refreshed, and strengthened for
every good work.

\(p\) "mortalis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "sorry man", Ainsworth.
(q) "prae oleo", Vatablus, Gejerus; "magis quam oleum", Piscator. (r)
Nat. Hist. l. 23. c. 4.

[Psalms 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 104:16</span></span>

The trees of the Lord are full of sap,.... Or "satiated" (s); that is,
with rain; and through it are filled with fruits. This is to be
understood not only of the tallest and largest trees; which are
therefore called the trees of the Lord, as high mountains are called the
mountains of the Lord, [Psa 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006) and
so other things excellent in their kind: but of trees of the field and
forest; so the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions; which are
not planted and cultivated by man, as trees in gardens and orchards are;
but are more especially under the care and cultivation of the Lord
himself, and may design such as were produced by him at the creation.

The cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted; a mountain on the borders
of Judea, so called from its whiteness, through the snow on it, as the
Alps are; and where grew great quantities of large and spreading cedars,
which were not of man's, but of the Lord's planting: these were watered
and made to grow with the rain of heaven. Rauwolff (t), who was upon
this mountain in 1574, says,

"though this hill in former ages has been quite covered over with
cedars, yet they are so decreased, that I could tell, says he, no more
but twenty four, that stood round about in a circle; and two others, the
branches whereof are quite decayed with age.''

But Thevenot (u), who has been there since, affirms there are no more
nor less than twenty three, great and small; of the largeness,
thickness, and height of these trees; see Gill on [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024). Saints are often compared to
trees, which are planted by the Lord in Christ, and in his churches; and
particularly to cedars, for their height, strength, and durableness; see
[Psa 92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013), and these, through the
grace of God, are full of sap and spiritual life, and are filled with
the fruits of righteousness, and are often represented as planted and
growing by rivers of water; see [Num
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006).

\(s\) "satiantur", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius; so
Musculus, Gejerus, Michaelis. (t) Travels, par. 2. ch. 13. p. 191. (u)
Travels, par. 1. B. 2. ch. 60. p. 224.

[Psalms 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 104:17</span></span>

Where the birds make their nests,.... As they do in large, tall,
spreading trees: not any particular "birds", as the sparrow, to which
the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions, and Apollinarius, restrain
it: but birds in general are intended; and especially such as build in
large trees, as before and after mentioned. Jarchi applies it to the
Israelites dwelling among the trees in the garden of Eden: and it may be
much better applied to the saints dwelling in the churches, among the
trees of righteousness, under the shadow of Gospel ordinances; see [Eze
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023).

As for the stork, the fir trees are her house; where she makes her nest,
and brings up her young. Kimchi says it is a large bird, and builds its
nest in high trees, as in cedars; but the bird which goes by the name of
"pelargus" with the Greeks, and of "ciconia" with the Latins, and of
"stork" with us, for the most part builds its nest on the tops of towers
and temples (w), and the roofs of high houses, and seldom in trees; and
when it does, it is in such that are not far from the habitations of
men, which it loves to be near: perhaps the reason of its not building
on houses in Palestine might be because their roofs were flat and
frequented, and therefore built on high trees there, as fir trees and
cedars. And Olympiodorus (x) says it does not lay its eggs on the
ground, but on high trees; and Michaelis on the text attests, that he
himself had seen, in many places in Germany, storks nests on very high
and dry oaks. It has its name in Hebrew from a word (y) which signifies
"holy", "merciful", and "beneficent"; because of the great care which it
takes of its dam when grown old (z): and a like behaviour among men is
called piety by the apostle, [Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004).
But in the Chaldee tongue, and so in the Targum, it has its name from
its whiteness; for though its wings are black, the feathers of its body
are white: and so Virgil (a) describes it as a white bird, and as an
enemy to serpents; for which reason the Thessalians forbad the killing
them, on pain of banishment (b). It was an unclean bird, according to
the ceremonial law, [Lev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#019). Good
men are called by the same name, holy and beneficent; and though they
are unclean by nature, yet Christ, the green fir tree, [Hos
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008) is the house of their habitation;
in him they dwell by faith, who receives sinners, and eats with them,
[Luk 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002). It is usual with the Latin
poets to call the nests of birds their houses (c).

\(w\) Vid. Turnebi Adversar. l. 8. c. 18. & Praetorii Disp. Histor.
Physic. de Crotalistria, c. 6. Heldelin. in ibid. c. 11. (x) Apud
Bachart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 2. c. 29. col. 330. (y) a Buxtorf. Lexic.
fol. 247. (z) Solinus, c. 53. Aelian. de Animal. l. 3. c. 23. (a)
"Candida venit avis longis invisa colubris", Georgic. l. 2. (b)
Plutarch. de Iside et Osir. prope finem. (c) "Frondiferasque domos
avium", Lucret. l. 1. v. 19. "Antiquasque domos avium", Virgil. Georgic.
l. 2. v. 209.

[Psalms 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 104:18</span></span>

The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats,.... Who have their name
in Hebrew (d) from their climbing and ascending them. What we commonly
call "a wild goose chase" should be expressed "a wild goat's chase"; for
not geese, but goats, are chased; and when they are, they flee to the
hills for refuge. Hence they are sometimes called the wild goats of the
rocks, [Job 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001), and sometimes the
rocks are called from them the rocks of wild goats, [Sa1
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002). The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin,
and Arabic versions, render it "for the harts", or deer; and so
Apollinarius: but the word is not used of them.

And the rocks for the conies; who being a feeble folk, make their houses
in them, to protect them from creatures of superior power and strength,
[Pro 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026). Some interpret it of the
"hedgehog", as the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions: others of
"hares", as the Syriac and Arabic, and so Apollinarius; and others of
"mountain mice". Now what the hills and rocks are to the above
creatures, a refuge and a habitation for them, that Christ is to those
that fly to him for refuge; though weak and feeble, sinful and unworthy,
he is their rock, the rock of their refuge, their strong tower, and
place of defence.

\(d\) ab Buxtorf. Lexic. fol. 322.

[Psalms 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 104:19</span></span>

He appointeth the moon for seasons,.... Or, "he made" (e); for the moon
is the work of his hands, [Psa 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003) as
is likewise the sun. From the rain the psalmist passes to the
luminaries; for this reason, as Aben Ezra thinks, because they are the
cause of rain: the moon is taken notice of in the first place, because,
as Kimchi observes, the night was before the day; and in the night of
the fourth day were the sun, moon, and stars; but the sun rose in the
morning. The moon was made for seasons as well as the sun, [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016) or that times might be numbered
by it, as the Targum, both months and years; one of its courses and
revolutions making a month, and twelve of these a year; which lunar
years were in use among some nations: as also it is supposed to have an
influence on the ebbing and flowing of the tides; and served to regulate
the festivals of the Jews, their set appointed times, as the word
signifies, and is used of them, and which were governed by it. And this
Jarchi takes to be the sense of the passage; though Aben Ezra more truly
remarks, that it purely belongs to the work of creation, and the
original design and use of this luminary. It was an emblem of the
ceremonial law; which consisted, among other things, in the observation
of new moons; which gave some light in the time of Jewish darkness,
though but a dim one, in comparison of the Gospel; had its
imperfections, was changeable, waxed old, and vanished away; and which
the church is said to have under her feet, being abolished, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001). Though some think the world is
meant, which is changeable and fading. It was also an emblem of the
church, [Sol 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010) which receives her
light from Christ, the sun of righteousness; has its different phases
and appearances; sometimes being in prosperity, and sometimes in
adversity; has its spots and imperfections, and yet beautiful, through
the grace of God and righteousness of Christ.

The sun knoweth his going down; not the going down of the moon, which is
the sense of some, according to Kimchi; but his own going down; and so
he knows his rising, to which this is opposed, [Psa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001) and every revolution, diurnal or
annual, he makes; and which he constantly and punctually observes, as if
he was a creature endued with reason and understanding; see [Psa
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005). He knows the time of his
setting, as the Targum, Syriac, and Arabic versions; and also the place
where he is to set, at the different seasons of the year, and indeed
every day. This luminary is an emblem of Christ, the sun of
righteousness, [Psa 84:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#011) the fountain
of all light; the light of nature, grace, and glory; and of all
spiritual life and heat, as well as fruitfulness. He arose at his
incarnation, and set at his death, the time of both which he full well
knew; and he has his risings and settings, with respect to the
manifestation of himself to his people, or hiding himself from them,
which depend on his pleasure.

\(e\) "fecit", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Psalms 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 104:20</span></span>

Thou makest darkness, and it is night,.... The darkness was before the
light, and the night before the day, [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002) and now the darkness and night are
made by the setting of the sun before mentioned; see [Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007).

Wherein all the beasts of the field do creep forth; out of their dens,
and range about for their prey, as the evening wolves and others: and
these are not the only creatures that choose the night and darkness; all
wicked men do the same; whose deeds are evil, and do not care to come to
the light, lest they should be reproved; particularly drunkards,
adulterers, thieves, and murderers, [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020). So the Scribes and Pharisees,
when they consulted to take away the life of Christ, and agreed with
Judas to betray him, did it in the night: so false teachers, who are
wolves in sheep's clothing, when it is a night of darkness with the
church, take the advantage of it, to creep about and spread their
pernicious doctrines; see [Ti2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006).

[Psalms 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 104:21</span></span>

The young lions roar after their prey,.... Or, "at the prey" (f); for,
according to the Scriptures, it seems as if their time of roaring was
when they have got their prey, and are tearing it and feeding on it, and
not till then, [Amo 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004) though
naturalists tell us, that, when they are pinched with hunger, they make
such a hideous roaring, as quite stupefies, as well as terrifies, other
creatures; that they have no power to stir, till they come up to them,
and become their prey, who otherwise could outrun them; for the lion is
neither a swift creature, nor of good scent: wherefore, according to
credible accounts, a creature called a "jackal", little bigger than a
fox, hunts its prey for it, and secures it till it comes up to it. Young
lions are rather mentioned, because their appetite is keenest, and their
voice loudest and strongest. This creature is an emblem of Satan, who
goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, [Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008).

And seek their meat from God; as all creatures in their way do; as the
ravens by crying, so the young lions by roaring; neither one nor other
can provide for themselves, but God, in his providence, supplies them
all with food; see [Psa 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027). And
should not we seek and ask our meat of God too, even both temporal and
spiritual? And may we not expect it from him? Does he feed the ravens,
and also the young lions, and will he not take care of his own people,
and feed them with food convenient for them, and especially when they
ask it of him? [Psa 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010).

\(f\) "ad praedam", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Psalms 104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 104:22</span></span>

The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together,.... Having gone some
one way, some another, seeking their prey; but upon the sun's rising
gather together in order to return from whence they came, abhorring the
light of the sun, as some creatures do, and fearing being hunted and
taken by men, the fear of whom is still in some measure upon the beasts
of the field, [Gen 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002). So wicked men
do not care for the light of the day, nor do false teachers choose to
come to the light of the word; these owls and bats, these, as Tertullian
calls them; and Satan himself chooses to set upon persons when they are
in darkness, and in melancholy and disconsolate frames; and is afraid of
believers, when they put on the armour of light, especially the shield
of faith, and resist him with it, then he flees from them.

And lay them down in their dens; for rest and safety, and to feed
themselves and young ones with the ravin they bring with them; see [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008).

[Psalms 104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 104:23</span></span>

Man goeth forth to his work,.... Having taken sleep in the night, being
comfortably refreshed, and his strength recruited; he rises with the
rising sun, and goes forth cheerfully and with intrepidity to his work
in the field, or elsewhere, the beasts being fled and gone.

And to his labour until the evening; to till the ground, and do other
services and labour, either of the head or hand; for man is born and
designed for labour, and not for sloth and idleness: in his innocent
state he was set to dress the garden and keep it; and, after the fall,
his doom was to get his bread by the sweat of his brow; and he is to
work while the day lasts, till the evening and night come on, when he
betakes himself to sleep and rest again. So the believer, though the
work of redemption and salvation is wrought for him, and the work of
grace is wrought in him, each by another hand; yet he has work enough to
do, which he is created for, and under obligation to perform; and in
which he is to continue steadfast and immovable, while the day of life
lasts, till the night of death comes, and no man can work; and then he
rests from his labours, and his works follow him.

[Psalms 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 104:24</span></span>

O Lord, how manifold are thy works,.... The psalmist having taken notice
of many of the works of creation, stops and wonders at the number of
them; though he had not gone through them all, and there were even
things innumerable behind; see [Psa
104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025), he admires the sum of them,
how great it was; and not only the quantity but the quality of them; for
so the words may be rendered, "how great are thy works" (g), as for
number, so for nature; in which there is such an amazing display of the
greatness and power of God, and particularly of his wisdom, as is
observed in the next clause.

In wisdom hast thou made them all not only one thing, as the heavens,
[Psa 136:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#005), but everything is wisely
contrived and made; there is a most glorious display of the wisdom of
God in the most minute thing his hands have made; he has made everything
beautiful in its season: a skilful artificer, when he has finished his
work and looks it over again, often finds some fault or another in it:
but when the Lord had finished his works of creation, and looked over
them, he saw that all was good; infinite wisdom itself could find no
blemish in them: what weak, foolish, stupid creatures must they be that
pretend to charge any of the works of God with folly, or want of wisdom?
Some by "wisdom" here understand Christ himself, the wisdom of God; and
not amiss, since without him was not anything made; see [Pro
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019).

The earth is full of thy riches: or possessions (h); for as the Lord is
the maker, he is the proprietor and the possessor of heaven and earth,
and all that is in them, and can and does dispose thereof as seems good
in his sight; and whatever of the riches and good things of the earth
men may have, they are only stewards, the Lord is the rightful owner and
possessor of them; see [Gen 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#019),
with which compare [Psa 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005); see Gill
on [Psa 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005).

\(g\) "quam multa ac magna", Gejerus. (h) "possessione tua", V. L.
Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Gejerus; "tuis possessionibus",
Tigurine version, Vatablus, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Psalms 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 104:25</span></span>

So is this great and wide sea,.... One of the great and manifold works
of God, made in his wisdom, and full of his riches and possessions, as
the earth is; this is that collection of waters which God called seas,
[Gen 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010) and is, as Kimchi observes,
great in length, and wide and spacious in breadth; or "broad of hands"
(i), as in the original; or spacious in borders, as the Targum; it
washing the several parts of the continent, and encompassing and
embracing the whole earth with both arms as it were. Nor is it unusual
with other writers to call the sea the great sea (k), and to speak of an
arm or arms of the sea (l), as we do. Isidore says (m), the great sea is
that which flows out of the ocean from the west, and goes to the south,
and then to the north, called so in comparison of other seas that are
less, and is the Mediterranean sea, This is an emblem of the world,
which may be compared to the sea for the multitude of nations and people
in it, as numerous as the waves of the sea; for the temper of the
inhabitants of it, being like the troubled sea, restless and uneasy,
casting up the mire of dirt and sin; and for the instability of it, and
the fluctuating state and condition of all things in it.

Wherein are things creeping innumerable; so that it seems there are
reptiles in the water as well as on land; and indeed every creature
without feet, and that goes upon its belly, in the element where it is,
whether earth or water, is a creeping thing; of these swimming or
creeping things the number is exceeding great, especially of the latter
sort; fishes increasing much more than the beasts of the earth. Their
species are innumerable; so their kinds or sorts are reckoned up by some
one hundred and forty four (n), by others one hundred and fifty three
(o), and by others one hundred and seventy six (p); the Malabarians
reckon, up 900,000 fishes, and 1,100,000 creeping things (q). These are
an emblem of the common people of the world, which are innumerable; see
[Hab 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014).

Both small and great beasts; for there are creatures in the seas which
answer to those on the dry land, both of the lesser and greater sort, as
sea lions, sea horses, sea cows, sea hogs, &c. these may represent the
rulers and governors of the world, supreme and subordinate; it is no
unusual thing for great monarchies, and persons of great power and
authority, to be signified by beasts rising out of the sea, [Dan
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003).

\(i\) "latum manibus", Montanus; "spatiosum manibus", V. L. "amplum
manibus", Vatablus. (k) Virgil. Aeneid. 5. Lucretius, l. 6. (l) "Veluti
par divexum in mare brachium transitum tentaturus", Liv. Hist. l. 44. c.
35. "Nec brachia longos" &c. Ovid. Metamorph. l. 1. Fab. 1. v. 13, 14.
(m) Origin. l. 13. c. 16. (n) Origin. l. 12. c. 6. (o) Oppianus in
Halienticis. Vid. Hieron. in Ezek. 47. fol. 260. (p) Plin. Nat. Hist. l.
32. c. 11. (q) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 963.

[Psalms 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 104:26</span></span>

There go the ships,.... From place to place, from one end of the world
to the other, for the sake of merchandise (r); this is one of the four
things that were too wonderful for Solomon, "the way of a ship in the
midst of the sea", [Pro 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019) though
navigation was improved in his times indeed not so much as it is now.
The original of ships was doubtless Noah's ark, so that they owe their
first draught to God himself. They seem to be an emblem of the church
and people of God passing through the sea of this world to the haven of
eternal rest. The ship is but a small vessel, and takes up but a small
room in comparison of the vast ocean on which it is; and so the church
of Christ is but small, a little city, and few men in it, a little
flock, a small remnant: a ship is unfixed and unsettled, sometimes here
and sometimes there; so the church of Christ is sometimes in one place,
and sometimes in another; nor is this world the rest of God's people,
nor have they any continuing city here; for, as a ship is tossed with
tempests, so are they with the waves of afflictions, the temptations of
Satan, and the persecutions of men; and sometimes, like Paul, and the
mariners with him, have no sight of sun and stars for many days, of the
sun of righteousness, or of the stars, the ministers of the word; when
sailing is dangerous it bodes perilous times, through the impure lives
of professors, and impious doctrines of false teachers, whereby many
suffer shipwreck; yet all the Lord's people get safe ashore, having a
good pilot, Christ, to conduct them; and the good anchor of hope, sure
and steadfast.

There is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein; the Targum
adds,

"for the righteous at the feast of the house of his habitation.''

Of this creature there is an account in [Job
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001). Some take it to be the
crocodile, which is both a sea and river fish; the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions, and so Apollinarius, call it the
dragon; it is more generally thought to be the whale; Aben Ezra says it
is the name of every great fish; it is a sportive creature, tumbles
about in the great sea, and plays with the waters of it, which it tosses
up in great quantities; and with the fishes of the sea, which it devours
at pleasure; and laughs at the shaking of the spear; and to which
mariners throw out their empty casks to play with, when near them, and
they in danger by it; see [Job 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005).
This creature is generally reckoned by the ancients a figure of Satan,
it being king over all the children of pride, [Job
41:34](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#034) as he is the prince of the power
of the air, and god of this world; who has been playing his tricks in it
from the beginning of it, not only deceiving our first parents, but all
the nations of the world; nor are saints ignorant of his devices. It
sometimes describes a tyrannical prince, as the kings of Babylon and of
Egypt, [Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001) and is a true picture
of antichrist, the beast which rose out of the sea; nor is there any
like him on earth; see [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001).

\(r\) So Homer calls ships , Iliad. 3. v. 46.

[Psalms 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 104:27</span></span>

These wait all upon thee,.... Or "hope in thee" (s); not only the fishes
of the sea, but the beasts of the field; for to them the psalmist
returns, as Aben Ezra observes; to whom hope and expectation of their
food and waiting for it at the hands of God, are ascribed; the allusion
seems to be to tame creatures, who come at their certain times and wait
on them that have been used to give them their food; and it may instruct
us to wait on the Lord, as for our daily bread, so for our spiritual
food, in prayer, and in public ordinances, where and from whom we may
hope and expect to have it.

That thou mayest give them their meat in due season; or "in his time"
(t); everyone in its own time, which is natural to them, and they have
been used to; at which time the Lord gives it to them and they take it;
it would be well if men would do so likewise, eat and drink in proper
and due time, [Ecc 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#017). Christ
speaks a word in season to weary souls; his ministers give to everyone
their portion of meat in due season; and a word spoken in due season,
how good and sweet is it? [Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004).

\(s\) "sperant", Pagninus, Cocceius, Michaelis; "sperabunt", Montanus.
(t) "in tempore suo", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Psalms 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 104:28</span></span>

That thou givest them they gather,.... What God bestows upon them as a
bounty of Providence they take and make use of, and in their way
thankfully, and without repining; some gather it up for immediate use
and service, and not into barns; others gather it up for time to come,
as the ant, [Mat 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026). Kimchi
understands this of a time of scarcity, when they gather here a little
and there a little; as he does the following clause of a time of plenty.

Thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good; God, in whose hand
all things are, and from whence all things come, opens his hand of
providence, and liberally and bountifully gives, as this phrase
signifies, [Deu 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#011) and all his
creatures are filled with his good things to their satisfaction: and
thus the spiritual food which he gives his people, they gather it by the
hand of faith, as the Israelites gathered the manna in the wilderness
every morning, and according to their eating, what was sufficient for
them; and to whom he gives liberally, even all things richly to enjoy;
all things pertaining to life and godliness; Christ, and all things
along with him; abundance of grace here, and glory hereafter; and they
are satisfied with his good things as with marrow and fatness.

[Psalms 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 104:29</span></span>

Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled,.... God may be said to hide his
face from the creatures when he withholds their food from them, when
there is a scarcity of provisions, a famine in the land; when there is
no pasture for them to feed on, nor brooks of water to drink of; then
are they troubled or perplexed, as in [Joe
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#018) and know not what to do, nor
where to go for help, but faint, and sink, and die. So in a spiritual
sense when God hides his face from his people, removes his Shechinah, or
divine Majesty and Presence, as the Targum here; and withdraws the
influences of his grace and Spirit; or when they have no food for their
souls, or what they have is not blessed, then are they troubled, [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007).

Thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust; their
original dust, from whence they sprung, as man himself does; the breath
of all is from the Lord; he gives it to his creatures, and when he
pleases he takes it away; and when he does, they die and become dust
again.

[Psalms 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 104:30</span></span>

Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created,.... Thy Holy Spirit, as
the Targum, who was at first concerned in the creation of all things,
the heavens and the earth, and man upon it, [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), [Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013) which may be alluded to here;
though it seems chiefly to intend the generation and production of
creatures in the room of those that die off; that so their species may
be preserved, and there may be a constant succession of them, as there
is in all ages, [Ecc 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004).

And thou renewest the face of the earth; by a new set of creatures of
all kinds being brought upon it to fill it. As there is also a daily
renewing it every morning by the rising sun, giving fresh life and
vigour to all created beings; and a yearly one every spring, when the
face of all nature is renewed and revived. Jarchi and Arama understand
it of the resurrection of the dead; this sense Kimchi mentions as an
article of their faith, but not as the sense of the text. It may be
applied to the renewing work of the Spirit of God in the souls of men,
by whom they are made new, and by whom they are daily renewed in the
Spirit of their minds. And there are particular seasons in which God
sends forth his Spirit and renews the face of things in the world, and
in his churches; upon the effusion of his Spirit in the first times of
the Gospels, there was a new face of things, not only in the land of
Judea, but throughout the whole Gentile world, where old things passed
away, and all things became new; as in the latter day, when the Spirit
shall be poured forth from on high, there will be a renewing of the face
of the earth again; it will be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as
the waters cover the sea; the kingdoms of it will become Christ's; new
heavens and a new earth will be created, and Jerusalem will be made a
rejoicing, and her people a joy, [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017).

[Psalms 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 104:31</span></span>

The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever,.... The glory which arises
from the works of his hands, which is due unto him, and shall be given
him; this is opposed to the perishing and fading glory of all created
beings: and as Christ is the person spoken of throughout the whole
psalm, this may be understood of his glory as the only begotten of the
Father; and which is equal to his Father's glory, and is the same
yesterday, today, and for ever; and of the glory of his office as
Mediator: and of all his works of nature and grace, of creation and
redemption: nor will there be creatures wanting, angels and men to
glorify his name, to all eternity. The Targum, Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, and all the Oriental versions render it as a prayer, "let the
glory of the Lord be for ever"; or, let him be for ever glorified, on
account of the perfections of his nature, and the works of his hands; as
he will and ought to be.

The Lord shall rejoice in his works; being well pleased with them, as he
was with the works of creation; they appearing, on a survey of them, to
be all very good, [Gen 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031) so he
rejoices in the sustaining and preservation of them; and the rather when
he is glorified in them. And this should be a reason why glory should be
given him, that he may rejoice in his works, and not be grieved, as he
is sometimes said to be and to repent of his making them, [Gen
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006). Christ rejoices in the work of
redemption, which he undertook and performed with pleasure; he rejoiced
at the finishing it, and he rejoices in the application of it to his
people and will rejoice in their complete enjoyment of it; they being
the objects of his love, in whom he has an interest; whom he engaged
for, are the purchase of his blood, and for whom he prays and
intercedes; he rejoices in them as the work of his hands now; in their
persons, who are his "hephzibah", in whom he delights; "his beulah", to
whom he is married: he rejoices in his own grace wrought in them, and in
the exercise of it on him; he rejoices over them to do them good, and
never ceases doing good to them and for them.

[Psalms 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 104:32</span></span>

He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth,.... As Sinai did when he
descended on it, [Psa 68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008), to which
the allusion seems to be; and a look from him, a severe one, a frowning
one, will make the inhabitants of the earth to tremble; a providential
look, sending famine, pestilence or the sword among them. A displeased
look will make the hearts of his own children tremble, as no doubt
Peter's did, when the Lord looked upon him, and he remembered his word;
and if a look, much more a word, an awful word, as his voice in the law,
pronouncing such cursed as keep it not; and especially the tremendous
sentence he will pronounce on the wicked at the last day,

go, ye cursed, &c. and if a look and a word are so terrible, what will
be the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger upon
those who have refused to give him glory? For the words seem to carry in
them a reason why he should be glorified, taken from the consequence of
not glorifying him, who has such a majesty in his looks, such a terror
in his countenance, and such power in his hands.

He toucheth the hills, and they smoke; as Sinai likewise did, when he
was upon it, [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018), and as other
hills do, when touched with lightning; the tops of mountains, the higher
they are, the sooner and the more they smoke (u). God, with a touch of
his hand, can set mountains on fire, open "volcanos", and cause them to
burn for years together; as Etna, Vesuvius, Hecla, and others: and how
easily can he set on fire the course of nature, burn the world, and all
that is in it! It is but touching it, and it takes fire immediately:
this he can as easily do as a man can light a torch or a candle; and as
easily can he destroy sinners with the fire of his wrath, or cast them
into everlasting fire, with the devil and his angels, which will burn to
the lowest hell; and what are hills and mountains, or the greatest
personages on earth, if he does but touch them, or lay his hand upon
them in wrath? They are crushed as the moth; they are nothing before our
great Zerubbabel.

\(u\) "Montis vicina cacumina coelo----Tanto "magis edita fumant",
Lucret. de Rerum Natura, l. 6. v. 458, 459.

[Psalms 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 104:33</span></span>

I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live,.... Or, "in my life or
lives (w)", throughout the whole of it. This was what the psalmist
determined to do, let others do what they would; even sing songs of
praise to the Lord; since he was the God of his life, who had fed him
all his life long; from whom he had all the mercies of life, and by whom
he had been followed with goodness and mercy all his days, and on whom
his life and the comforts of it depended.

I will sing praise unto my God while I have my being: because he lived,
and moved, and had his being in him; and it was continued to him, and he
was upheld in it; and not only for his being, but for his well being; as
for his temporal, so for his spiritual mercies, which he had from him as
his God, as his covenant God; such as peace, pardon, righteousness, and
eternal life: a view of God as our own God, such a view as Thomas had of
Christ, when he said, "my Lord, and my God", is enough to make a man
sing; and when the psalmist says he would do this as long as he lived
and had a being, this is not to be understood as if this work would end
with his life, or that he had no thought of praising him hereafter; but
it signifies his constancy in this employment, while in the land of the
living; knowing that in the grave he could not praise the Lord with his
bodily organs as now; though he knew that this would be his eternal
employ in the world of spirits, in his soul, during its separate state,
and in soul and body after the resurrection.

\(w\) "in vita mea", V. L. Pagninus; "in vitis meis", Montanus.

[Psalms 104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 104:34</span></span>

My meditation of him shall be sweet,.... Of the glories, excellencies,
and perfections of his person; of his offices, as Mediator, King,
Priest, and Prophet, the Saviour and Redeemer; of his works of creation,
providence, and redemption; of his word, the blessed truths and
comfortable doctrines of it; of his providential dispensations, and
gracious dealings with his people in the present state; which to
meditate upon, when grace is in exercise, is very sweet, delightful, and
comfortable. The Targum renders it as a petition,

"let my meditation be sweet before him;''

that is, grateful and acceptable to him: or, as the Septuagint and
Vulgate Latin versions, "let my speech", discourse, colloquy, address in
prayer; see [Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002), or, "let my
praise", so the Arabic and Syriac versions: the spiritual sacrifices
both of prayer and praise are acceptable to God through Christ; and the
speech of the church, and every believer, whether in the one way or the
other, is sweet to Christ, very pleasant and delightful to him, [Sol
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014).

I will be glad in the Lord: the Targum is,

"in the Word of the Lord;''

in the essential Word, the Lord Jesus Christ; in his person, the
greatness, glory, beauty, and fulness of it; in his righteousness, its
purity, perfection, and perpetuity; in his salvation, being so suitable,
complete, and glorious.

[Psalms 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 104:35</span></span>

Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth,.... Not in common, for all
men are sinners, even good men are not without sin; but notorious
sinners, whose lives are one continued series and course of sinning;
such as will not have Christ to reign over them, and do not give him the
glory due unto him; particularly antichrist, the man of sin, and his
followers; they that worship the beast and his image: these will be
consumed with the breath of his mouth, and with the brightness of his
coming, and will perish out of his land, [Th2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003).

And let the wicked be no more; as the wicked one, antichrist, will be no
more when consumed; there will never rise another, when the beast and
false prophet are taken and cast alive into the lake of fire; there will
no more of the antichristian party remain, the remnant of them will be
slain with the sword; after the battle of Armageddon, there will be none
left of the followers of antichrist, nor any ever rise up any more.

Bless thou the Lord, O my soul; as for his mercies, spiritual and
temporal, so for the destruction of all his enemies. The psalm begins
and ends alike as the preceding.

Praise ye the Lord, or hallelujah: this is the first time this word is
used in this book of Psalms, though frequently afterwards: and it is
observable that it is only used, in the New Testament, at the prophecy
of the destruction of antichrist, [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001) which may serve to confirm the
sense before given; and is to be considered as a call upon the saints to
praise the Lord, on account of his righteous judgments on his and his
church's enemies; so Aben Ezra.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 105](psa105)

</div>
