<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa111)  [Next](psa113) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 112](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 112:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 112

This psalm, also, very probably, was written by David, and is composed
as the former, in an alphabetical order. The inscription of it in the
Syriac version is,

"When David in it commanded Solomon his son, saying, Keep the
commandments of, the Lord, and worship him: likewise the calling of the
Gentiles and the righteousness of Christ.''

The subject matter of the psalm are the character, conduct, usefulness,
and happiness of a good man.

[Psalms 112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 112:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord,.... Or, "hallelujah". This is properly the title of
the psalm: Aben Ezra says it is a word of the psalmist; it shows that
all that a good man is, has, or does, is from the Lord; and therefore
his name is to be praised: and he is not only to be praised for his
perfections and works, but for this among others, that there are any
good men on earth that fear and serve him, and are useful in their day
and generation.

Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord; not men, but the Lord; not his
wrath, nor his judgments here or hereafter, but his goodness; not with a
servile, but with a godly fear. This every man does not; there are but
few that truly fear the Lord, only such who have the grace of God; and
these are happy men: they have an interest in the heart of God, in his
pity, love, and delight; great discoveries are made unto them; the
secret of the Lord is with them; he shows them his covenant; and the sun
of righteousness arises upon them: they are guarded and protected by the
Lord; his eye of providence, as well as love, is upon them, and his
angels encamp about them: they are supplied with all needful good
things, temporal and spiritual; and have much goodness laid up for them
hereafter. This psalm begins with what the preceding ends, the fear of
the Lord; and is a further illustration and enlargement of it; See Gill
on [Psa 111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010).

That delighteth greatly in his commandments: in the righteousness,
purity, and holiness of them: in keeping and doing them: they are not
grievous, but pleasant; a good man delights in them, after the inward
man; he observes them from a principle of love, and finds peace and
pleasure in them; he loves them above gold, yea, above fine gold; and
esteems them concerning all things to be right, [Psa
119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097).

[Psalms 112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 112:2</span></span>

His seed shall be mighty upon earth,.... The Targum is,

"mighty in the law;''

as Apollos is said to be "mighty in the Scriptures", [Act
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024). This must be understood of such
of them as fear the Lord also, and love him, and delight in his
commandments, according to [Exo 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006)
and not in a literal sense, for not many mighty are called; but in a
spiritual sense, of their being strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, and in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. Some understand
this of the spiritual seed of Christ; and make him to be the man that
feared the Lord, and greatly delighted in his commandments, as it is
certain he did; he was heard in that he feared; and it was his meat and
drink to do the will of him that sent him. He has a spiritual seed; and
these are mighty in the sense before given; and as they will be in the
latter day, when the feeble among them shall be as David, and the house
of David as God, as the Angel of the Lord; when the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven shall be given to the saints, and, being
kings and priests, they shall reign with Christ on earth. Aben Ezra
thinks the note of similitude "as" is wanting, and supplies it thus,
"his seed shall be as a mighty man on earth"; be known, as he is in his
generation.

The generation of the upright shall be blessed; the seed of them, as
before, who are the upright in heart and conversation: or the age in
which upright men live is happy on their account; or a succession of
upright persons: or rather a company of them dwelling together, at the
same time, and in the same place; the same with the generation of them
that seek the Lord, [Psa 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006), these
are blessed with spiritual and eternal blessings.

[Psalms 112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 112:3</span></span>

Wealth and riches shall be in his house,.... In his family; if not
possessed by him, yet by his posterity: though rather this signifies
spiritual riches, the riches of grace, the unsearchable riches of
Christ, durable riches and righteousness; seeing it is connected with an
everlasting righteousness, as in the next clause.

And his righteousness endureth for ever; he is not hurt by his temporal
riches, as others are, the prodigal, the covetous, and formal professor;
he continues the good and righteous man he was, notwithstanding his
riches. Some understand this of his liberality with his riches, as alms
deeds are sometimes called righteousness; see [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009) though it rather intends either
inherent righteousness, the new man which is created in righteousness,
the inward principle of grace which always continues; or the
righteousness of Christ imputed to him, which is an everlasting one.

[Psalms 112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 112:4</span></span>

Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness,.... Upright ones
are sometimes in the darkness of affliction, under divine desertions,
without spiritual joy, and in an uncomfortable condition; when on a
sudden light arises to them, like break of day, or the morning light:
they have deliverance from affliction, and enjoy prosperity; the light
of God's countenance is lifted up on them; the sun of righteousness
arises upon them with healing in his wings; and spiritual joy and
comfort are communicated unto them. It may denote the comforts the
people of God have amidst their afflictions and troubles, even while
they are in them; and the light they enjoy, while darkness is round
about others, like the children of Israel in Egypt: or the suddenness of
deliverance from adversity, temporal or spiritual; weeping endures for a
night, joy comes in the morning, and at evening time it is light, [Psa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005).

He is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous; that is, the Lord
is so. Thus the Arabic version,

"the Lord God is merciful and bountiful;''

and the Ethiopic version,

"merciful and compassionate is the Lord, and righteous is our King.''

And because God is the God of all grace, and is able to make it abound
to his people, and is compassionate to them in distress, and is just and
faithful to his promises; therefore he causes light to arise to them in
darkness; and which, on such account, they may believe and expect; see
[Mic 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008). Some understand this of the
upright man and of his character; that he is "gracious", kind, and
bountiful; that he is "full of compassion", tenderhearted, and shows
mercy to distressed objects; and is righteous, through Christ, and lives
soberly and righteously. This sense agrees both with what goes before,
and follows after.

[Psalms 112:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 112:5</span></span>

A good man showeth favour, and lendeth,.... Without usury, hoping for
nothing again: he pities those that labour under difficulties, for want
of a little money; and he generously lends it till they are able to pay
him again; which oftentimes is of as much service as if it was given;
see [Psa 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021). A good man is not only
a man that has the good work of grace in him, and is ready to every good
work; but one that is munificent, bountiful, and liberal; in which sense
the word is used in [Rom 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007) and so in
Latin writers (n).

He will guide his affairs with discretion; his civil and domestic
affairs: he will act the part of a good economist; so that he may be
able to support his family with credit and reputation, and have
something to give to the relief of those in want. Some restrain this to
his acts of charity. He lends to some, and gives to others: he takes
care that they to whom he gives are proper objects of charity; he gives
to persons seasonably, and in proportion to his own ability and their
wants. It may be rendered, "he shall guide his words with judgment" (o);
take care of what he says, and before whom; and that it be at a proper
time and place; and especially when speaking of spiritual and religious
things.

\(n\) "Bonus est hic homo", Plauti Poenulus, Act. 5. Sc. 4. v. 42.
"Vellet bonus atque benignus", Horat. Satyr. I. 1. Sat. 2. v. 51. "Piso
bonus", Juvenal. Sat. 5. v. 109. (o) "verba sua in, vel cum, judicio",
Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Cocceius, Gejerus.

[Psalms 112:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 112:6</span></span>

Surely he shall not be moved for ever,.... Out of the heart of God, and
from his love and affections; out of the covenant of grace, and from an
interest in it; out of the hands of Christ, or off of him the
foundation; out of the house and family of God; out of a state of grace
and righteousness, into condemnation: and though he may be distressed by
afflictions, yet not destroyed; and though he may be so shaken, as to
fall from some degree of steadfastness in the faith, and into sin, yet
not so as to perish everlastingly: the saint's perseverance is a sure
and certain truth, and to be depended upon.

The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance; with good men, and
especially such whose names are recorded in Scripture: and even others
are remembered after death; and for a long time after, their pious
characters, sayings, actions, sufferings, works, and writings; and with
God, who remembers his love to them, his covenant with them, his
promises to them; has a book of remembrance for their thoughts, words,
and actions; which will be remembered and spoken of at the last day,
when forgotten by them; see [Pro 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#009)
&c.

[Psalms 112:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 112:7</span></span>

He shall not be afraid of evil tidings,.... Either respecting things
temporal; the death of friends, loss of substance, public calamities,
wars and rumours of wars, commotions, confusions, convulsions, and
revolutions in states, kingdoms, and nations, [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001) or things spiritual; such as are
brought to him by Satan; that he is an hypocrite, and the root of the
matter is not in him; for he knows him to be a liar, and the father of
lies; or by his own unbelieving heart: or what will befall the churches
of Christ, and the interest of religion, in the latter day; as that the
outward court shall be given to the Gentiles; that the witnesses shall
be slain, and an hour of temptation shall come upon all the earth; and
such a time of tribulation as has not yet been; for he knows that the
saints, will be kept in it, and carried through it, and glorious times
will follow. Or, "he shall not be afraid of an evil hearing" (p); of an
ill report raised of himself; for he knows he must go through good
report and bad report; and especially when it is a false one, and for
the sake of truth and righteousness, it gives him no uneasiness: nor is
he afraid of hearing the report of the law, which in some sense may be
called an evil hearing or report, in opposition to the hearing of faith,
or the good report of the Gospel; he is not afraid of it, when it
curses, those that are under it, seeing he is redeemed by Christ from
the curse of it; and therefore is not afraid of its menaces and
threatenings, its curse and condemnation: nor is a good man afraid of or
terrified at the tidings of death; nor will he be dismayed when the last
trumpet sounds, and the dead are raised; when the heavens shall melt
away with a great noise; when all shall be summoned to the judgment
seat, and the wicked will hear, "Go ye cursed", he will be under no
fears of hearing such a sentence.

His heart is fixed; on the love of God, and is rooted and grounded in
it; and is firmly persuaded of his interest in it, and that nothing can
separate him from it: it is fixed on Christ the foundation; his faith is
fixed and settled in him, and so are his affections; and nothing can
separate from his love to him, [Rom
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035). Or his heart is prepared (q); to
meet the Lord in the way of his judgments: he expects tidings of evil
things, and that he shall receive evil things, as well as good, at the
hands of the Lord; and therefore is not afraid of them, or surprised at
them when they come; as well as his heart is prepared by the Lord to
serve him, and is ready to every good work.

Trusting in the Lord; in his covenant God and Father, who will never
leave him nor forsake him; in his grace, which is sufficient for him in
the worst of times; and who will supply all his wants: in his strength,
to enable him to do his duty; to bear up under trials and exercises, and
to do and suffer his will and pleasure; and in his power, to protect and
preserve him, and keep him unto salvation; and in his faithfulness, to
perform his promises, trusting in him for things temporal, spiritual,
and eternal. The Targum is,

"trusting in the Word of the Lord;''

in Christ, the essential Word; looking to him as the author and finisher
of faith; leaning upon him, laying the whole stress of his salvation on
him; trusting in his person for acceptance, in his righteousness for
justification, in his blood for pardon and cleansing, in his sacrifice
for atonement, in his fulness for supply, and in his strength and power
for assistance and protection; all which give him peace, and secure him
from fear of evil tidings; see [Isa
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#003).

\(p\) "ab auditione mala", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus. (q) "paratum cor
ejus", V. L. Gejerus.

[Psalms 112:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 112:8</span></span>

His heart is established,.... With the doctrine of grace; which is food
unto it, and by which it is strengthened and nourished; it is
established in the faith of Christ, both in the grace of faith, and in
the doctrine of faith, even in all the doctrines of the Gospel; so that
he is not as a child, tossed to and fro with every wind; his heart is
established in the exercise of grace, and he is steadfast and immovable
in the discharge of duty. This being the case,

he shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies; until
he looks them in the face boldly and confidently; or until he sees them
all slain and destroyed, as the Israelites saw the Egyptians on the sea
shore. We supply "his desire"; it might be put "vengeance", as in [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010), the punishment of God on wicked
men, who are the enemies of the upright; and which they shall see with
pleasure, because of the glory of divine justice conspicuous therein;
see [Rev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020) and even before this is
brought about, while their enemies are oppressing them, insulting them,
and triumphing over them, they shall not be afraid, as knowing the time
is coming when the scene will be changed, and they shall triumph in
their turn.

[Psalms 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 112:9</span></span>

He hath dispersed,.... His money, as the Targum; scattered it here and
there, as the sower scatters his seed; does not throw it all in one
place, but some here and some there, and all with profusion and plenty.
This denotes the bounty and liberality of the upright; and his wisdom
and discretion in distributing his charity, and the numerous objects of
it; see [Pro 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014).

He hath given to the poor; that stand in need of his charity, freely,
cheerfully, and bountifully.

His righteousness endureth for ever; his liberality continues, he is not
weary of well doing; he gives a portion to seven and to eight, and to as
many and as often as there is a call and need for it; See Gill on [Psa
112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003).

His horn shall be exalted with honour; the reproach cast upon him shall
be wiped off; he shall grow more prosperous, and become more honourable
among men here on earth; and in the resurrection morning shall have the
dominion over the wicked, and shall appear with Christ in glory, and be
with him to all eternity.

[Psalms 112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 112:10</span></span>

The wicked shall see it,.... The glory and happiness of the upright man:
so when the witnesses shall ascend to heaven, a phrase expressive of a
more glorious state of the church, their enemies shall behold them, [Rev
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#012).

And be grieved; at their happiness, and grudge it: the Targum is,

"and shall be angry at him;''

the upright man.

He shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away; like snow water (r); or as
a snail melteth, or as wax before the fire, [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007), shall pine away with grief and
envy at the happiness and prosperity of the righteous; the wicked will
weep and gnash their teeth, when they shall see them in the kingdom of
heaven, and they themselves shut out, [Luk
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#028). The desire of the wicked shall
perish; they shall not have their desire, neither of good things for
themselves here and hereafter, nor of evil things for the righteous.

\(r\) "Mens mea tabida liquescit", &c. "Liquescunt pectora", &c. Ovid.
de Ponto, l. 1. Eleg. 1. v. 68. & Eleg. 2. v. 57.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 113](psa113)

</div>
