<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev020)  [Next](rev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 21

This chapter contains an account of the happy state of the church,
consisting of all the elect, both Jews and Gentiles, which will take
place upon the first resurrection, and will continue during the thousand
years' reign mentioned in the preceding chapter. The seat of the church
in these happy times will be the new heaven and the new earth, [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001) the church that will dwell there
is described by its names, the holy city, and new Jerusalem; by its
descent, from heaven; and by its state and ornament, being prepared and
adorned as a bride for her husband, [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002) and her happiness is expressed by
the presence of God with her, and communion with him enjoyed by her, and
by a freedom from all evils endured in the present state of things, [Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003) after which John hears the voice
of him that sat on the throne, declaring himself to be the author of the
new heaven and earth; ordering him to write, that what had been said was
true and faithful; affirming that things were now done and finished;
calling himself the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end:
promising grace to the thirsty soul, the inheritance of all things to
the overcomer, and also divine sonship; and threatening the second death
to sinners, whose characters are given, [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005) next John has a vision of the
bride before spoken of; the preface to it is in [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009) in which is signified that one of
the seven angels that had the seven vials talked to him in a very free
and familiar manner, and proposed to show him the Lamb's wife; and in
order to it carried him to an exceeding high mountain, and showed him
the city before mentioned, said to be great, holy, and heavenly; and
which is described by the glory of God upon it, and the light that was
in it, comparable to a crystal jasper stone, [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011) by its wall, which is great and
high; and by its, gates and foundations; its gates are in number twelve,
twelve angels at them, and on them written the twelve names of the
children of Israel, and these situated three at each point, east, west,
north, and south; and its foundations are also twelve, having the names
of the twelve apostles on them, [Rev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012) by the measure of it, which the
angel took with his golden read; of the city, which was twelve thousand
furlongs, it being four square, and its length, breadth, and height
equal; and of the wall, which was a hundred forty and four cubits, [Rev
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015) and next the city is described
by the matter of which it was built; the wall of jasper the city of pure
gold, like to clear glass; the foundations of precious stone, each
foundation being of one stone; the gates of pearls, each gate being of
one pearl; the street of the city of pure gold, like transparent glass,
[Rev 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018) and then by the temple in
it, which is no other than the Lord God and the Lamb; and by the light,
which is the same, it having no need of sun or moon, [Rev
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022) and next by its inhabitants, the
nations of the saved ones, who walk in its light, and the kings of the
earth, that bring their honour and glory to it; by its safety and
security, and by the purity of it, none but undefiled persons, and such
who are written in the Lamb's book of life, being admitted into it, [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024).

[Revelation 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 21:1</span></span>

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth,.... This vision relates to a
glorious state of the church, not in the times of the apostles, or first
dispensation of the Gospel; when the old Jewish church state, with its
ordinances, rites, and ceremonies, passed away, and a new church state,
a new dispensation, new ordinances, and a new people, took place; and
when saints came not to Mount Sinai, but to Mount Sion, the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and when God tabernacled and dwelt
with men in particular churches and congregations; and the curse of the
law and the sting of death were taken away by Christ, and there was no
condemnation to them that were in him; which is the sense of some: but
death did not then cease, it has reigned over men in common ever since,
in a natural way, and immediately upon that dispensation arose
persecution unto death, both by Jews and Gentiles; and for the first
three hundred years, instead death being no more, and sorrow and sighing
fleeing away, there was scarce anything else: nor can it be said that
there was no temple, or places of pubic worship, or that the church had
no need of the sun and moon of the Gospel and Gospel ordinances then,
since these have continued ever since, and will to the end of the world;
nor did the kings of the earth bring their honour and glory into that
church state in any sense, but set themselves against it, and
endeavoured to destroy it; nor were the churches even of that age so
pure as here described, [Rev 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027)
many persons both of bad principles and bad practices crept into them;
there were tares among the wheat, goats among the sheep, and foolish
virgins with the wise: nor does this vision refer to the times of
Constantine, when the old Pagan idolatry was removed out of the empire,
and the Christian religion was revived, and came to be in a flourishing
condition, and a new face of things appeared, and Christianity was
embraced and honoured by the emperor, and the great men of the earth;
there was not that purity as in this state; the Christian doctrine and
worship were soon corrupted, being mixed with Judaism and Paganism; a
flood of errors was brought in by Arius, Eutychius, Nestorius,
Macedonius, and Pelagius, and others; yea, doctrines of devils, and
which at length issued in a general apostasy, and in the revelation of
the man of sin; nor was there that peace and comfort, and freedom from
evils, as from death, pain, and sorrow; witness the Arian persecution,
the incursions of the Goths and Vandals into the empire, and the inhuman
butcheries and numerous massacres and murders of the Popish party since.
Nor has this vision anything to do with the conversion and restoration
of the Jews, when they will become a new people, quit their old
principles and modes of worship, and there will be no more among them
the sea of corrupt doctrine, respecting the Messiah, the works of the
law, &c. for this will be over before this vision takes place, as
appears from the 19th chapter: nor does it belong to the spiritual reign
of Christ, which will be in the present earth, whereas this glorious
state of the church will be in the new heavens and new earth; that will
be at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and in the Philadelphian
church state, this will not be till prophetic time and antichristian
times will be no more, when the mystery of God will be finished, and
after the Laodicean state is at an end; in that there will be public
worship, the ministry of the word, and administration of ordinances, but
not in this; and though there will be then great spirituality and
holiness, yet not in perfection, nor will the churches be clear of
hypocrites and nominal professors, and will at last sink into a
Laodicean state. Nor is this vision to be interpreted of the church
triumphant in heaven, or of the ultimate glory of the saints there;
since the new Jerusalem here described descends from heaven, that is, to
earth, where the saints will reign with Christ; and since the church is
represented as a bride, prepared and adorned for her husband, but not as
yet at the entrance of this state, delivered up to him; and since the
tabernacle of God is said to be with men, that is, on earth; and this
dwelling of God with them is as in a tabernacle, which is movable, and
seems to be distinct from the fixed state of the saints in the ultimate
glory; to which may be added, that in this state, Christ, as King of
saints, will be peculiarly and distinctly glorified, whereas in the
ultimate one, when the kingdom is delivered to the Father, God will be
all in all: this therefore is to be understood of the glorious state of
the church during the thousand years of Satan's binding, and the saints'
living and reigning with Christ; the holy city, and new Jerusalem, is
the same with the beloved city in [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009) what is there briefly hinted, is
here largely described and insisted on; this will be the time and state
when the church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven,
will first meet together, and be brought to Christ, and be presented by
him to himself a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, and Christ will reign gloriously among them: the seat of this
church state will be the "new heaven" and "new earth" which John saw,
and which are the same that Peter speaks of, in which dwelleth
righteousness, or in which righteous persons only dwell, [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013) for as the first heaven and earth
both here and there are to be understood literally, so in like manner
the new heaven and new earth; which will be new, not with respect to the
substance, but their qualities; they will be renewed, or purged from
everything that is disagreeable, and is the effect of the sin of man;
the first heaven and earth were made chiefly for men, but, on account of
the sin of man, the earth was cursed, and brought forth thorns and
thistles, and both the earth and air, or the heaven, were attended with
noxious vapours, &c. and the whole creation was made subject to vanity
and corruption; from all which they will be cleared at the general
conflagration, and a new earth and heaven will appear, fit for the
habitation of the second Adam, and his posterity, for the space of a
thousand years. So the Jews speak of new heavens, as "renewed" ones,
which are the secrets of sublime wisdom (o): and they say (p), that the
holy blessed God will renew his world a thousand years, and that in the
seventh millennium there will be new heavens and a new earth (q):

for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; not those in
[Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011) but the heaven and the
earth which were first made, which passed away, as Peter also says,
adding, with a great noise; meaning not as to their substance, but as to
their form, fashion, and qualities:

and there was no more sea; which may be understood either as to the
being of it; it was "exhausted", as the Ethiopic version renders it,
being dried up by the conflagration; see [Amo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#004) and if Mr. Burnet's hypothesis can
be supported, that the paradisiacal earth, or the earth fore the flood,
was without a sea, that being made, with the mountains and hills, by the
falling of the surface of the earth into the waters under it, there is a
surprising agreement between that earth and this new one; but the
Alexandrian copy reads, "and I saw the sea no more"; it might be in
being, though John saw it not and since, at the end of the thousand
years, the sea will give up the dead which are in it, it must be in
being, unless it can be interpreted of the place where the sea was:
wherefore it seems best to understand it with respect to its use and
qualities; and that as the heaven and earth will pass away, not as to
their substance, but quality, so in like manner the sea will be no more
used for navigation, nor may it be a tumultuous and raging one, or have
its flux and reflux, or its waters be salt, as now; the schoolmen say it
will no more be a fluid, but will be consolidated into the globe as the
sphere; and, in a mystical sense, there will be no more wicked men;
tumultuous and turbulent men are like the troubled sea, that cannot
rest, [Isa 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020) for in the new
heavens and earth only righteous persons will dwell, [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013).

\(o\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 5. 2. vid. Kimchi in lsa. lvi. 6. (p) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 92. 2. & Gloss. in ib. Zohar in Gen. fol. 69. 1. Tzeror
Hammor, fol. 150. 2. (q) Zohar in Gen. fol. 35. 3.

[Revelation 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 21:2</span></span>

And I John saw the holy city,.... The same with the beloved city in [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009) the church of God: sometimes the
church militant is called a city, of which the saints are now fellow
citizens, governed by wholesome laws, and enjoying many privileges; but
here the general assembly and church of the firstborn, or all the elect
of God, are intended, the whole body and society of them, being as a
city, compact together; called holy, not only because set apart to
holiness by God the Father, and their sins expiated by the blood of
Christ, or because he is made sanctification to them, or because
internally sanctified by the Spirit of God, which now is but in part;
but because they will be perfectly holy in themselves, without the being
of sin in them, or any spot of it on them: and John, for the more strong
ascertaining the truth of this vision, expresses his name, who saw it,
to whom God sent his angel, and signified to him by these Apocalyptic
visions what should be hereafter; though the name is left out in the
Alexandrian copy, and in the Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions:

new Jerusalem; the church of God, both in the Old and New Testament, is
often called Jerusalem, to which its name, which signifies the vision of
peace, agrees; it was the city of the great King, whither the tribes
went up to worship; it was a free city, and a fortified one: the Gospel
church state in its imperfection is called the heavenly Jerusalem, and
the Jerusalem above, which is free, and the mother of all; and here the
church in its perfect state is called the new Jerusalem, where will be
complete peace and prosperity; and which is called new, because it has
its seat in the new heaven and new earth: the inhabitants of which will
appear in their new and shining robes of immortality and glory; and to
distinguish it from the old Jerusalem, and even from the former state of
the church; for this will be "the third time" that Jerusalem will be
built, as say the Jews, namely, in the time of the King Messiah (r):

coming down from God out of heaven; which designs not the spiritual and
heavenly original of the saints, being born from above, on which account
the church is called the heavenly Jerusalem; but a local descent of all
the saints with Christ from the third heaven into the air, where they
will be met by living saints; and their bodies being raised and united
to their souls, they will reign with Christ in the new earth: and this
is

"the building which the Jews say God will prepare for the Jerusalem
which is above, "to descend into" (s):''

prepared as a bride adorned for her husband; Christ is the husband, or
bridegroom, and the church is his spouse, and bride; and in these
characters they will both appear at this time, when the marriage between
them will be consummated: and the church may be said to be prepared as
such, when all the elect of God are gathered in, the number of the
saints is perfected; when the good work of grace is finished in them
all, and they are all arrayed in the righteousness of Christ: and to be
"adorned", when not only they are clothed with the robe of
righteousness, and garments of salvation, and are beautified with the
graces of the Spirit, but also with the bright robes of immortality and
glory. The phrase is Jewish, and is to be read exactly as here in the
book of Zohar (t).

\(r\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 126. 4. (s) Ib. fol. 103. 4. (t) Zohar in Gen.
fol. 53. 2.

[Revelation 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 21:3</span></span>

And I heard a great voice out of heaven,.... Either of an angel, or
rather of Christ, or God himself; since the Alexandrian copy and Vulgate
Latin version read, "out of the throne",

saying, behold the tabernacle of God is with men; in allusion to the
tabernacle being with the Israelites, and the "Shechinah", or divine
Majesty, being in the midst of them, and as an accomplishment of the
promise in [Eze 37:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#027) in the fullest
sense of it; and designs something distinct from the spiritual presence
of Christ in his church, as his tabernacle and temple, and in the hearts
of his people; and from the heavenly glory, or ultimate state of
happiness, in which they will be "with him", and that not as in a
tabernacle, but as in a city, which has foundations: the phrase seems to
denote the personal presence of Christ with his saints in human nature,
like, though different from, that in the time of his humiliation; then
he dwelt or tabernacled with men on earth, but it was in the form of a
servant; but now he will appear in a glorious body, and indeed in all
his personal glory, and reign among them as their King:

and he will dwell with them; in person and not by his Spirit, or by
faith, as before, nor as a wayfaring man only for a night; but he will
dwell with them for the space of a thousand years, and after that for
ever: Christ and his church will now be come together as husband and
wife:

and they shall be his people; that is, they shall appear to be his
covenant people, that will be out of all doubt; this is made manifest in
some measure in the effectual calling; but it does not yet appear
neither to the saints themselves, nor to others, what they are, and
shall be, but now it will be evident and unquestionable.

And God himself shall be with them; the "Immanuel", God with us; not by
his Spirit, as he was after his ascension to heaven, and since is; but
in person, he himself will descend from heaven, when his church, the new
Jerusalem does; the Lord their God will come in person with all the
saints, and will be King over all the earth.

And be their God, as Thomas styles him, my Lord, and my God, [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028). The covenant of grace, with all
its blessings and promises, are in him, and now will it have its full
accomplishment, and the saints be in a state inexpressibly happy; see
[Psa 144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015).

[Revelation 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 21:4</span></span>

And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,.... Occasioned by
sin, Satan, the hidings of God's face, and afflictive dispensations of
Providence; for these will be no more:

and there shall be no more death; natural or violent; there will be no
more putting of the saints to death, or persecution of them unto death,
as in former times; nor will they die a natural death any more; these
children of the resurrection, and inhabitants of the new heaven and
earth, will be like the angels, who die not; there will be no more
deadness as to spiritual things among the saints; and as for the second
death, that will have no power over them. So the Jews say (u), , "there
is no death in the world to come"; good is laid up for the righteous in
the world to come, and with them is no death (x); and after the
resurrection the body is perfect, and shall never after taste the taste
of death (y).

Neither sorrow, nor crying; on account of sin, or because of oppression
and persecution, or through the loss of near relations and friends;
sorrow and sighing will flee away, all occasions thereof being gone:
neither shall there be any more pain; either of body or mind; there will
be nothing to afflict the mind, and make that uneasy, but all the
reverse; nor will there be any sickness or diseases of body, for the
body will be raised glorious, powerful, incorruptible, and spiritual.

For the former things are passed away; not only the first heaven and
earth, the world, its fashion, and its lusts; but the former grievous
times under Rome Pagan and Papal, and everything which in this present
life gives uneasiness and distress.

\(u\) Echa Rabbati, fol. 48. 2. & Midrash Kohelet, fol. 61. 2. (x)
Maimon. Teshuva, c. 8. sect. 1. (y) Midrash Hanneelam in Zohar in Gen.
fol. 70. 1.

[Revelation 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 21:5</span></span>

And he that sat upon the throne said,.... By whom is meant, either God
the Father, who is often represented in this book as sitting on the
throne, and as distinguished from Christ the Lamb; see [Rev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002) [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013) and who may seem the more to be
intended, since he is by adopting grace the God and Father of his
people, and they are his sons and daughters; or rather Christ, who not
only is set down on the same throne with his Father, but has a throne of
his own, called the throne of the Lamb, and was seen upon one by John in
the preceding vision, [Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011) which
though in order of time will be after this, yet in the order of the
visions was seen before; and especially since the person on the throne
speaking, calls himself the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end,
as Christ does in [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008) and seeing
he it is that gives to thirsty souls of the water of life, [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037) and makes promises to the
overcomer so largely and frequently in [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007). He addresses John, and delivers
the following things to him,

behold, I make all things new; which is to be understood not of the
renovation of persons at conversion, when a new heart and spirit are
given, and men are made wholly new creatures; for this is the work of
the Spirit, and which is done daily, and is not peculiar to any
particular period of time; nor of the renewing of the church state at
the beginning of the Gospel, when the Jewish church state and ordinances
waxed old, and vanished away, and a new covenant took place, a new and
living way was opened, and new ordinances appointed, since all this was
before John had this vision; nor was there any need of it to represent
it to him; but of the making of the new heaven, and the new earth, which
Christ ascribes to himself and of his forming his church anew, making it
a new Jerusalem, bestowing new glories upon his people, both in soul and
body, and so presenting them to himself a glorious church; and of the
new administration of his kingdom in a very singular and glorious
manner; so that it respects a new people, a new habitation, and a new
manner of ruling over them; all which is his own doing, and is
marvellous; and because it is a matter of great importance, and is
wonderful and certain, therefore a "behold" is prefixed to it; see [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019). The Jews say (z), that the holy
blessed God will make ten things new in the future state, or world to
come; the first is, he will enlighten the world; (See [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011)) the second is, he will bring
living water out of Jerusalem; (see [Rev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006)) the third is, he will make trees
to bring forth their fruit every month; (see [Rev
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)) and the fourth is, all the waste
places shall be built, even Sodom and Gomorrha; the fifth is, Jerusalem
shall be built with sapphire stone; (see [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019)) the sixth is, the cow and the
bear shall feed; the seventh is, a covenant shall be made between
Israel, and the beasts, fowls, and creeping things; the eighth is, there
shall be no more weeping and howling in the world; the ninth is, there
shall be no more death in the world; the tenth is, there shall no more
be sighing, and groaning, and sorrow in the world; see [Rev
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004).

And he said unto me, write; what John had seen, and Christ had said, and
was about to say; and particularly what concerned the renewing of all
things, the whole being a matter of moment, and worth noting and taking
down in writing, that it might be on record for saints to read, and
receive comfort and advantage from; and to denote the certainty of it,
as well as to show that it was a clear point, and to be known, whereas,
when it was otherwise, he was bid not to write; see [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011).

for these words are true and faithful; both what he had said, and was
about to say; they were "true", because they came from God, who cannot
lie, and "faithful", because they would be punctually and exactly
fulfilled; see [Rev 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009). The Syriac
version adds, they are God's, and so the Arabic version.

\(z\) Shemot Rabba, sect. 15. fol. 101. 3.

[Revelation 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 21:6</span></span>

And he said unto me, it is done,.... The end of all things is come; it
is all over with the first heaven and earth; these are no more, and the
new heaven and earth are finished: there seems to be an allusion to the
old creation, he spake, and it was done, [Psa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009). The whole election of grace is
completed; every individual vessel of mercy is called by grace; all the
saints are brought with Christ, and their bodies raised, and living
saints changed, and all together are as a bride prepared for her
husband; and the nuptials are now solemnized; all the promises and
prophecies relating to the glorious state of the church are now
fulfilled; the mystery of God, spoken by his servants, is finished; the
kingdom of Christ is complete, and all other kingdoms are destroyed; the
day of redemption is come; the salvation of the saints is perfect; what
was finished on the cross, by way of impetration, is now done as to
application; all are saved with an everlasting salvation.

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end; which are expressive of
the primacy, perfection, and eternity of Christ; of his being the sum
and substance, the first cause and last end of all things, relating both
to the old and new world, to things temporal and spiritual; See Gill on
[Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008).

I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of
life freely; he that is athirst is one that is so not in a natural, much
less in a sinful, but in a spiritual sense; who as he has thirsted after
Christ, and salvation by him; after pardon of sin, and a justifying
righteousness; after communion with Christ, and conformity to him, and a
greater degree of knowledge of him; so after the glories of his kingdom,
and the happiness of a future state: to such an one Christ promises to
give such large measures of grace and glory, and in such abundance, as
will continue to refresh and delight, and as may be compared to a
fountain of living water, namely, for refreshment, abundance, and
continuance; and all this he will give "freely", without money, and
without price; for as pardon, and righteousness, and the whole of
salvation, are all of free grace, so are all the enjoyments of the
kingdom state, the riches, honours, and glories of it, and eternal life
itself; also plentifully, and in great abundance, and answers to the
Hebrew word see [Num 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005).

[Revelation 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 21:7</span></span>

He that overcometh,.... All spiritual enemies, sin, Satan, and the
world, the antichristian beast, his image, mark, and number of his name;
who is more than a conqueror through Christ; one that perseveres to the
end, notwithstanding all temptations, trials, and difficulties; See Gill
on [Rev 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007),

shall inherit all things; the kingdom of Christ in the new Jerusalem
state, and all things in it; heaven, eternal glory and happiness, and
everlasting salvation; yea, God himself, who is the portion, and
exceeding great reward of his people, and will be all in all. The
Alexandrian copy, and the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions,
read, "these things": the new heaven, and new earth, the presence of God
with men, freedom from all evils, and divine refreshments from the
fountain of living water before mentioned:

and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son; Christ is not only
concerned in predestination to the adoption of children, in making way
by redemption for the enjoyment of this blessing, and in the actual
donation of it; but he himself, who is the mighty God, is the
everlasting Father, and his people are his spiritual seed and offspring,
and in his kingdom he will see his seed, and prolong his days; he will
long enjoy them, and present them to himself, and afterwards to his
Father, saying as in [Heb 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013) and
though they are now, in the present state of things, the sons of God,
yet it does not appear so manifest that they are, or at least what they
shall be; but in this new and glorious state of things, it will be
abundantly manifest that they are the sons of God and seed of Christ;
and it will be known how glorious they are, and shall be, when they
shall see Christ in his glory, and be like him; who will now be , "the
Father of the world to come", as the Septuagint render the phrase in
[Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

[Revelation 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 21:8</span></span>

But the fearful,.... Not the timorous sheep and lambs of Christ, the
dear children of God, who are sometimes of a fearful heart, on account
of sin, temptation, and unbelief; but such who are of cowardly spirits,
and are not valiant for the truth, but who, through fear of men, either
make no profession of Christ and his Gospel, or having made it, drop it,
lest they should be exposed to tribulation and persecution; these are
they that are afraid of the beast, and live in servile bondage to him.

And unbelieving; meaning not merely atheists, who do not believe there
is a God, or deists only, that do not believe in Christ; but such who
profess his name, and are called by it, and yet do not truly believe in
him, nor embrace his Gospel and the truths of it, but believe a lie;
these are condemned already, and on them the wrath of God abides, and
they will be damned at last; though it may have a regard to such also
who are infidels as to the second coming of Christ to judgment, and who
are scoffers and mockers at it:

and the abominable: every sinful man is so in the sight of God; but here
it denotes such who are the worst of sinners, given up to sinning; who
are abominable, and to every good work reprobate; who are addicted to
the worst of crimes, as were the Sodomites and others; the Ethiopic
version renders it, "who pollute themselves" with unnatural lusts. The
Syriac and Arabic versions express it by two words, "sinners and
polluted", filthy sinners; the character well agrees with Babylon, the
mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, and to all that adhere
to her, and join with her in her abominable idolatries.

And murderers; of the saints, and prophets, and martyrs of Jesus, with
whose blood Babylon, or the whore of Rome, has made herself drunk, and
in whom it will be found.

And whoremongers; all unclean persons, that indulge themselves in impure
lusts, in fornication, adultery, and all lewdness; as the clergy of the
church of Rome, who being forbidden to marry, and being under a vow of
celibacy, and making great pretensions to chastity and singular
holiness, give up themselves to all lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness.

And sorcerers; conjurers, dealers with familiar spirits, necromancers,
and such as use the magic art, as many of the popes did to get into the
chair, and poisoners of kings and princes; whoredoms and witchcrafts go
together sometimes, as they did in Jezebel, an emblem of the Romish
antichrist.

And idolaters; that worship devils, idols of gold, silver, brass, stone,
and wood, representing God, and Christ, and the virgin Mary, and saints
departed, [Rev 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020).

And all liars; in common, and particularly such who speak lies in
hypocrisy, as the followers of the man of sin, and who are given up to
believe a lie, that they might be damned; all lies being of the devil,
and abominable to God. All and each of these

shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone.
The Jews (a) speak of several distinct places in hell, for several sorts
of sinners, as particularly for sabbath breakers, adulterers, and liars;
and say of the wicked, that when he is condemned he shall take "his
part" in hell (b); See Gill on [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020).

which is the second death; See Gill on [Rev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011).

\(a\) Raya Mehimna in Zohar in Lev. fol. 7. 2. (b) T. Bab. Chagiga, fol.
15. 1.

[Revelation 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 21:9</span></span>

And there came unto me one of the seven angels,.... Either the first of
them, as one of the four beasts is the first of them, [Rev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001) or it may be the last, and very
likely the same as in [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues; that is, the
wrath of God poured out by them on the antichristian party; see [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001).

And talked with me, saying, come hither; see [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001).

I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. The "Lamb" is Christ, who
is often so called in this book; see [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006) [Rev
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007) and is the Son of God, the heir
of all things, the Maker and Governor of the universe, the King of
kings, and Lord of lords; and who, as Mediator, has all accomplishments
and qualifications to recommend him as a bridegroom, such as beauty,
riches, and wisdom: the bride, his wife, is not any particular believer,
nor any particular church; not the Gentile church, nor the Jewish church
only, but all the elect of God, consisting of the raised and living
saints at the coming of Christ; who will make up one body, one general
assembly, and be as a bride, prepared and adorned for her husband: these
were first betrothed to Christ in eternity, and were openly espoused by
him, one by one, at conversion; and now being all gathered in by the
effectual calling, the dead being raised, and the living changed, and
all glorified, the marriage is consummated, and they are declared
publicly to be the bride, the Lamb's wife; See Gill on [Mat
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002). And now, though John had had a
sight of her before, [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002) yet
that was but a glimmering one, at a distance, he being in the
wilderness, [Rev 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003) wherefore the
angel calls him to him, and proposes to give him a clear, distinct, and
particular view of her, in all her glory; and a glorious sight this
indeed! to see the bride brought to the King in raiment of needlework,
and the queen stand at his right hand in gold of Ophir. This is a sight
of a quite different nature from that of the filthy strumpet, which the
same angel proposed to give to John in [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001).

[Revelation 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 21:10</span></span>

And he carried me away in the Spirit,.... John was in an ecstasy, as in
[Rev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010) and in the thoughts and
apprehensions of his mind and spirit, it seemed to him as if he was
carried away from one place to another; for this was not a corporeal
sight, nor were any of the visions he had, but what was represented to
his mind or spirit; it being with him as it was with the Apostle Paul
when he was caught up to the third heaven, who knew not whether he was
in the body or out of the body. The Ethiopic version renders it, "the
Spirit brought me"; not the evil spirit Satan, who took up our Lord
corporeally, and carried him to an exceeding high mountain, and showed
him all the kingdoms of this world, and their glory, [Mat
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008) but either a good angel, or the
Spirit of God:

to a great and high mountain; to such an one was Ezekiel brought in the
visions of God, when the frame of a city and temple was shown him, with
their dimensions, [Eze 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#002) as here a
city is shown to John, with its wall, gates, foundations, and their
measures: and he was brought to such a place, partly that he might have
the more plain and full view of it; and partly to suggest unto him, that
now the church of Christ was established upon the top of the mountains,
and exalted above the hills, and was a city on a hill, which could not
be hid, [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002).

And showed me that great city; which is no other than the church, the
bride, the Lamb's wife; just as the apostate church, all along in this
book before, is called the great city, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008) but now that being demolished,
there is no other great city in being but the church of Christ, called a
city before; [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002) here a "great
one", not only because of its prodigious large dimensions, [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016) but because of the number of its
inhabitants, being such as no man can number; and because it is the
residence of the great King, the tabernacle of God will be in it; though
this epithet is left out in the Alexandrian copy, and in the Vulgate
Latin and all the Oriental versions: "the holy Jerusalem"; called "the
new Jerusalem", [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002) here "holy",
in allusion to the city of Jerusalem, which was called the holy city,
[Mat 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005) on account of the temple in
it, the place of divine worship; but here this city is so called,
because it is the residence of the holy God, Father, Son, and Spirit,
inhabited only by holy men, made perfectly so, and encompassed by holy
angels.

Descending out of heaven from God; See Gill on [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

[Revelation 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 21:11</span></span>

Having the glory of God,.... Not only upon their souls, which will lie
in the glorious robe of Christ's righteousness, the bride's wedding
garment being on them, in the perfect holiness which will be in them,
and in that complete knowledge of all spiritual and heavenly things they
will be possessed of, they will have a glory revealed in them; but upon
their bodies also, for this city, the church, the bride of Christ, will
consist only of risen and changed saints, whose bodies will be freed
from all dishonour; deformity, diseases, and imperfections, and will be
made like unto Christ's glorious body, and will shine like the sun in
the kingdom of God. Moreover, the presence of God may be intended by his
glory, as the Shechinah, or the divine majesty of God in the tabernacle
and temple was called, [Exo 40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035) [Kg1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011) for the glorious presence of God
will now be in this church state, which will cast a lustre on all that
are in it; for if the face of Moses, and of Stephen, shone so bright and
glorious, through the presence of God with them; see [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007) how much more gloriously will the
saints shine in this state, when they shall enjoy the presence of God in
a far more illustrious manner? to which may be added, that Jesus Christ,
who is the brightness of his Father's glory, will now appear in that,
and in his own, and in the glory of his angels; and all the saints will
appear with him in glory; and to see them in all this glory is a
glorious sight indeed!

And her light was like unto a stone most precious; by her "light" is not
meant the light she will have in her, though that will be exceeding
great, but the fountain of it from whence it comes; that which holds it
forth to her, and supplies her with it: the word signifies an
illuminator, and is used of the ministers of the Gospel, that hold forth
the word of life and light to others, [Phi
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015) but here it intends Christ, who
is the sun of righteousness, the church's light or enlightener, [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023) not with the light of nature, as
he enlightens every man, nor with the light of grace, with which the
saints are enlightened by him in the present state of things, by his
Spirit, through the word and ordinances, but with the light of glory:
and he is comparable to the most precious stone; he is more precious
than rubies; he is so now to them that believe, in his person, offices,
grace, and righteousness, and will be more so in his light and glory in
the new Jerusalem state:

even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal: God the Father, who sits on
the throne, is said to be to look upon like a "jasper"; See Gill on [Rev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002); and here Christ, the illuminator
of his church, is said to be like one, because of the exceeding
brightness of this stone, and the durableness of it, expressive of the
perpetuity of Christ, as the light of his church and people; he is the
everlasting light of it, [Isa 60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)
and he is compared to the crystallising "jasper". There is one sort
which is called "Aerizusa", like to air (c), and another "Crystallizusa"
(d), clear as crystal. So Pliny speaks (e) of a white "jasper" called
"Astrios", and which, he says, is crystallo propinquans, "near to
crystal", found in India, and on the shores of Pallene. To this Christ
is like, because he is light itself, and in him is no darkness at all,
and will cause an everlasting day; and such a clear and bright state of
things, as that there will be no night, nor any more darkness, nothing
but everlasting joy, peace, prosperity, and happiness; there seems to be
some reference to [Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001).

\(c\) Ruaeus de Gemmis, l. 2. c. 1. (d) Dioscorides, l. 5. c. 160. (e)
Nat. Hist. l. 37. c. 9.

[Revelation 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 21:12</span></span>

And had a wall great and high,.... Not the Spirit of God, who separates,
sanctifies, and preserves the saints, as Cocceius thinks, for this
account respects not the church militant; nor the eternal decree of God,
the unpassable gulf between heaven and hell, which everlastingly fixes
the state of men; for this regards not the ultimate state of happiness:
many interpreters understand it of the doctrine of the Gospel, which, as
it secures the church now from heretics, and is like a wall very strong
and well built, is durable and impregnable; and may be called "great",
because of the great Author of it, and the great things contained in it;
and "high", since it is not to be reached by carnal minds; so none but
such who have embraced it shall enter into the new Jerusalem; for all
liars, and forgers of doctrinal lies, and who embrace the antichristian
lies, shall be without. Though rather the almighty power of God, which
guards his church and people now, and will be their defence in this
state, is meant; and which shows the state not to be that of the
ultimate glory, which will need no wall, but this will; since an attempt
will be made upon the saints in it, though it will be a foolish and
fruitless one: and this wall of divine power is very great indeed, and
is insuperable by men; God himself is a wall of fire about his people;
though it may be best to interpret this of salvation itself, which is by
Jesus Christ, if we compare with this text [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001) for those, and those only, who
are interested in it, will dwell in the new Jerusalem; and salvation in
this state will be enjoyed in its fulness; and this is very great in its
author, objects, and matter, being wrought out by the great God, for
great sinners, at a great expense, and including grace and glory, and
not to be got over or enjoyed by those who have no interest in it.

And had twelve gates; though, strictly speaking, there is but one gate,
and that a strait one, which is the Lord Jesus Christ, his person,
blood, righteousness, regenerating and sanctifying grace; for as he is
the only door into the sheepfold, the church, in its present state, or
he only that has faith in him has a right to enter there, and is the
only way to heaven and eternal happiness; so he is the only gate into
the new Jerusalem, or such only will be admitted there, who are
interested in him: but these gates are said to be twelve, in allusion to
the twelve apostles, who pointed out to men the way of salvation by
Christ; and to the twelve tribes of Israel, who represent all the elect
of God, who enter in thereat; and to the twelve gates of Ezekiel's city,
[Eze 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#031).

And at the gates twelve angels; meaning either the ministering spirits,
in allusion to the cherubim in [Gen
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024) who are watchers, and encamp
about the saints now, and will, as it were, stand sentinels in this camp
of the saints, as it is called, [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008) and besides, will be made use of
in gathering the saints from the several parts of the world, and
introducing them into this state; or else the apostles and ministers of
the word, often called angels in this book, who will shine with peculiar
lustre now, and will appear at the head of the several companies they
have been useful to, and bring them as their joy and crown of rejoicing
into this glorious state: this clause is wanting in the Alexandrian
copy, and in the Syriac version. The Jews speak of "princes", being
appointed over the gates of heaven, east, west, north, and south, with
the keys in their hands, whose names they give us (f).

And names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of
the children of Israel; not literal, but mystical Israel, whom God has
chosen to salvation, Christ has redeemed by his blood, and the Spirit
calls by his grace; denoting that all, and each of these, have a right
to enter into the new Jerusalem, and will be admitted there, and none
but they. In like manner the Jews (g) make mention of a court of the
Lord,

"which has twelve gates, according to the computation of the tribes of
Israel; on one gate is written Reuben, on another is written Simeon; and
so all the tribes of Israel are written on those gates; in the time they
go up to appear before the Lord of the world, whoever goes up to this
gate, (on which the tribe of Reuben is written,) if he is of the tribe
of Reuben they open to him, (and receive him,) if not they cast him
without; and so of all whom they do not receive; they open to none but
to him who is of that tribe, or whose name is written on the gate.''

\(f\) Raziel, fol. 35. 2. (g) Zohar in Numb. fol. 70. 4.

[Revelation 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 21:13</span></span>

On the east three gates,.... On which were written the names of Joseph,
Benjamin, and Dan:

on the north three gates; on which were written the names of Reuben,
Judah, and Levi:

on the south three gates; on which were written the names of Simeon,
Issachar, and Zabulon:

and on the west three gates; on which were written the names of Gad,
Asher, and Naphtali; see [Eze 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#031).
This denotes the collection of the saints from all parts of the world,
who shall come from east, west, north, and south, and sit down in the
kingdom of God; and therefore here are gates at every point to enter in
at; see [Isa 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005).

[Revelation 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 21:14</span></span>

And the wall of the city had twelve foundations,.... Christ is the one
and only foundation of his church and people, of the covenant of grace,
and of salvation; and of faith, hope, peace, and joy, and of eternal
happiness, and so of this glorious state of the church; he will be the
light and temple of it, the glory and safety of it; he will be all in
all in it; but because he has been ministerially laid as the foundation,
by the twelve apostles, for men to build their present and future
happiness upon, therefore the foundations of the wall of salvation are
said to be twelve; see [Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020).
Moreover, this may denote the firm and immovable state of the church at
this time, it being a city which has foundations, or is well founded,
[Heb 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#010) with which compare [Isa
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#032). Hence it follows,

and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. The
Alexandrian copy, Vulgate Latin, Syriac and Arabic versions, read, "the
twelve names of the twelve apostles"; the allusion seems to be to the
inscribing of the names of builders on stones laid in the foundation, in
memory of them; and so these wise master builders will be had in
everlasting remembrance.

[Revelation 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 21:15</span></span>

And he that talked with me,.... One of the seven angels, [Rev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009) for not a man is the measurer of
this city, as in [Eze 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003) nor John,
as of the temple, [Rev 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001) but an
angel, the same that showed to John this great sight:

had a golden reed; not a common measuring reed, or rod, as in [Eze
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#004) but one covered with gold,
denoting the present glorious state of the church, being without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing:

to measure the city; the new Jerusalem, its length and breadth; see [Zac
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001) to show how exactly conformable
this church state will be to the rule of God's word, even to perfection:
and the gates thereof; to signify who had a right to enter into it, and
who not:

and the wall thereof; its height, it being exceeding high.

[Revelation 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 21:16</span></span>

And the city lieth four square,.... To the four corners of the world,
from whence its inhabitants come, and denotes the regularity,
uniformity, perfection, and immovableness of it.

And the length is as large as the breadth; this church state will be all
of a piece, perfect, entire, and wanting nothing.

And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs; or
fifteen hundred miles; a monstrously large city indeed! such an one as
never was upon earth; see [Eze 48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035)
and which shows, that this is not to be understood literally, but
mystically; and intends the capaciousness of it, here being room enough
for all the twelve tribes of Israel; that is, for all the elect of God;
for as in Christ's Father's house, so in this kingdom state of his,
there will be many mansions, or dwelling places, enough for all his
people. This city will hold them all. The Jews (h) say of Jerusalem,
that in time to come it shall be so enlarged, as to reach to the gates
of Damascus, yea, to the throne of glory.

The length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal. A perfectly
uniform state! according to the Ethiopic version, it is in length twelve
thousand furlongs, and every measure equal, so that it is so many
furlongs in length, breadth, and height.

\(h\) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 24. 1.

[Revelation 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 21:17</span></span>

And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four
cubits,.... The root of which is twelve, for twelve times twelve is a
hundred and forty four; which number is mystical and apostolical, and
suited to the perfect state of this church: hence twelve gates, and
twelve angels at them, and the names of the twelve tribes on them, and
twelve foundations of the wall, and twelve thousand furlongs, the
measure of the city.

According to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel; who talked
with John, and measured the city, gates, and wall, and who appeared in
the form of a man; and his reed might be, as some have supposed, the
length of a man, six cubits, or six feet, as in [Eze
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005) and may denote that this business
requires the utmost wisdom and understanding of a man, and even of an
angel, to look into, and find out; see [Rev
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018) and also may signify the angelic
state of the saints at this time, when the children of the resurrection
will be like the angels of God, for immortality and glory.

[Revelation 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 21:18</span></span>

And the building of the wall of it was of jasper,.... Which is
expressive of the impregnableness, duration, brightness, and glory of
salvation by Christ, the jasper being a very hard, durable, and bright
stone; and salvation can never be made void, and of none effect; it will
last for ever, and in this state will come forth as light, and as a lamp
that burneth; it is represented by the same precious stone as God and
Christ themselves are; see [Rev 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002).
And the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass; it was made or built
of gold; its parts, buildings, houses, and palaces, were all of gold,
and that the best; and it was like to transparent glass; that is, either
the city, as most copies read, or the gold; for the Alexandrian copy
reads, and so the Vulgate Latin version; the gold of which it was is
different from common gold; and as this city, the new Jerusalem, designs
the saints, the precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, the
inhabitants of the new earth; this denotes the solidity, excellency, and
preciousness of them, the rich and happy state they will be in, as well
as their purity and freedom from all sin and corruption, and the clear
knowledge of things they themselves will have, and others will have of
them; their hearts and actions will be open to all; nor will this gold
have any rust upon it any more, or ever be changed, and become dim.

[Revelation 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 21:19</span></span>

And the foundations of the wall of the city,.... Which were twelve; see
[Rev 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014) were garnished with all
manner of precious stones: see [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011) not that there were all manner
of precious stones in every foundation, but in them all there were, and
each foundation had its stone peculiar to it, as follows; and which are
not applicable to the persons of the apostles, who were not the
foundations, but on them their names only were written: and besides, the
order of them, as given in the Evangelists and Acts of the Apostles, is
not certain, and always the same, to which these several stories may be
adjusted; though they are doubtless comparable to them for their
preciousness in the sight of God, and Christ, and all the saints; and
for the brightness and purity of their doctrine and lives; and for their
zeal in the cause of Christ; and for their solidity, and invincible
courage and constancy: much less are these precious stones applicable to
a set of ministers in the latter day, who are to be useful in the
conversion of the Jews in the several parts of the world, where these
stones are found, as Brightman thinks, but to Jesus Christ, the one and
only foundation: and without entering into the particular virtues and
excellencies of these stones, in general, they set forth the worth and
preciousness of Christ, who is the pearl of great price; the pleasure
and delight had in viewing his excellencies and perfections; his
brightness, purity, and glory, and his firmness and durableness, as a
foundation. There may be some allusion to the twelve stones in the
breastplate of the high priest, on which the names of the tribes of
Israel were written (i).

The first foundation was jasper; it was laid with a jasper stone, of
which see [Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). On this stone, in
the breastplate, Benjamin's name was written.

The second, sapphire; its colour is azure, or sky blue; it is
transparent, and exceeding hard. Schroder says there are very good ones
found in the borders of Bohemia and Silesia; but those which are brought
from Pegu are most valuable: on this stone Issachar's name was engraven.

The third, a chalcedony; it is of a misty grey colour, clouded with
blue, yellow, or purple; the best is that which has a pale cast of blue;
it is very much like the common agate; and the Hebrew word "cadcod", is
rendered agate in [Isa 54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012) though it
is thought to answer to the carbuncle in the breastplate, on which was
written the name of Levi. And Pliny (k) speaks of carbuncles, called
"charcedonies", which R. Leo Mutinensis says (l) had their name in
memory of the city of Carthagena. There is a precious stone mentioned in
the Targum of Jonathan, called "cadcodin", which answers to the diamond
in the breastplate, on which Zabulon's name was written; and in the
Jerusalem Targum it is called "cadcedana", and answers to the emerald,
which had Judah's name on it, and seems to be put for "chalcodin" and
"chalcedana", which agrees with the name of this stone.

The fourth, an emerald; of which see [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003). The best of this sort are the
eastern ones. Schroder says (m) they are found in Cyprus, Britain, and
other places, but not so good as the rest. On this stone Judah's name
was written.

\(i\) Vid. Targum Jon. & Jerus. in Exod. xxviii. 17. Targum in Cant. v.
14. Shemot Rabba, sect. 38. fol. 138. 2. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 2. fol.
178. 3. (k) Nat. Hist. l. 37. c. 7. (l) Shilte Hagibborim, fol. 45. 4.
(m) Pharmacopoeia, l. 3. c. 5. p. 18.

[Revelation 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 21:20</span></span>

The fifth, sardonyx,.... Which is partly of the sardian, and partly of
the onyx stone, which resembles a man's nail, from whence it has its
name; it is reddish, bordering on white; it may be thought to answer to
the onyx in the breastplate, on which was written the name of Joseph.

The sixth, sardius; the same with the sardine stone, [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003) of a blood colour, and what is
commonly called a cornelian: it is found in Sardinia, from whence it has
its name, and in Bohemia and Silesia, though those of Babylon are the
best. This was Reuben's stone.

The seventh, chrysolite; a stone of a dusky green colour, with a cast of
yellow; by its name it should have the colour of gold. Schroder says it
is found in Bohemia, and that it is the same the moderns call the topaz.
Some think it answers to "tarshish" in the breastplate, rendered
"beryl", on which was the name of Asher.

The eighth, beryl; a stone of a pale green colour, thought to be the
diamond of the ancients: it may answer to the "ligure" in the
breastplate, which the Targum on [Sol
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014) calls "birla", and had the name
of Dan on it.

The ninth, a topaz; a stone very hard and transparent, of a beautiful
yellow, or gold colour: the topaz of Ethiopia was counted the best, [Job
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#019). Some say it is so called from
the island "Topazus"; on this stone Simeon's name was engraven.

The tenth, a chrysoprasus; a stone of a green colour, inclining to that
of gold, from whence it has its name; for this is the agate in the
breastplate, which was Napthali's stone.

The eleventh, a jacinth; or "hyacinth": a stone of a purple, or violet
colour, from whence it has its name; though what the moderns so call is
of a deep reddish yellow, pretty near a flame colour. Zabulon's stone
was the diamond.

The twelfth, an amethyst; a stone of a violet colour, bordering on
purple: it has been thought a preservative from drunkenness, from whence
it seems to have its name. On this stone was written the name of Gad.
Agreeably to this account of John's, the Jews speak (n) of the
tabernacle above being built on twelve precious stones; and sometimes
they say (o), that the holy blessed God will found Jerusalem with ten
kind of precious stones, and which they mention, and several of which
are the same with these.

\(n\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 17. 2. & in Exod. fol. 65. 4. (o) Abkath Rocel,
p. 150. Vid. Zohar in Exod. fol. 96. 3.

[Revelation 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 21:21</span></span>

And the twelve gates were twelve pearls,.... Denoting the purity and
preciousness of Christ, by whom the saints enter, and of the saints who
enter in thereat, as well as of the place into which they enter.

Every several gate was of one pearl; the pearl of great price, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the only gate, door, and way into this happy state:
this shows that this account cannot be taken literally, but mystically,
for no such pearl was ever known, large enough to make a gate of.

"A pearl is a hard, white, shining body, usually roundish, found in a
shell fish resembling an oyster, but is three or four times the size of
the common oyster; and which ordinarily yields ten or twelve pearls, and
sometimes more. Those of the largest size that have been known are that
of Cleopatra, valued by Pliny at centies H S, or at 80,000 pound
sterling; and that brought in 1574 to Philip the Second, of the size of
a pigeon's egg, worth 14,400 ducats; and that of the Emperor Rudolph,
mentioned by Boetius, called "la peregrina", or the incomparable, of the
size of a muscade pear, and weighing 30 carats; and that mentioned by
Tavernier, in the hands of the emperor of Persia in 1633, bought of an
Arab for 32,000 tomans, which, at three pounds nine shillings the toman,
amounts to 110,400 pounds sterling (p).''

But what is one of these pearls to make a gate of, for a wall which was
an hundred and forty four cubits high? [Rev
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#017). The Jews say (q), that the holy
blessed God will bring precious stones and "pearls" of thirty cubits by
thirty, &c. and place them "in the gates of Jerusalem", as it is said,
[Isa 54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012) which must be understood
also not in a literal but mystical sense: and L'Empereur (r) makes
mention of an ancient commentary on [Psa
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001) which says, that the holy blessed
God will make a gate at the east (of the temple), and in it two doors,
each of one pearl. So R. Joshua ben Levi says (s), that there are in
paradise two gates of agates or diamonds; some render the word rubies.

And the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass;
denoting the preciousness and delightfulness of the saints' conversation
one with another; and the purity and cleanness of it, there being no
mire and filth of sin in these streets; and the sincerity and openness
of it, each one walking in his uprightness; which will be seen and known
of all, as clearly as anything can be beheld in a transparent glass. So
the Jews say (t) of paradise, that the ground is paved with precious
stones, the lustre of which may be compared to the light of burning
torches.

\(p\) Chambers's Cyclopedia in the word "Pearl". (q) T. Bab. Sanhedrin,
fol. 100. 1. & Bava Bathra, fol. 75. 1. & Yalkut, par. 2. fol. 54. 1.
(r) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 2. Vid. Yalkut Simconi, par. 2. fol. 54.
1. (s) Yalkut Simeoni, par. 1. fol. 7. 1. (t) Sepher. Avodah Hakkodesh,
fol. 46. 1.

[Revelation 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 21:22</span></span>

And I saw no temple therein,.... No material temple, as was in the old
Jerusalem, or such as is described in Ezekiel's vision; nor any place of
public worship, as under the Gospel dispensation; for in this state
there will be no such external form of worship as now, such as preaching
the word and administering ordinances. The Jews expect a third temple,
but in vain.

For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the temple of it; God will
be immediately present with his people, whose face they shall see, and
whom they will serve in the most pure and spiritual manner; and Christ
in his human nature, in the temple of his body, that tabernacle which
God pitched, and not man, which is filled with the train of the divine
perfections, and in which the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily, will
be the only medium of the divine Presence, and of the communications of
glory to men, and of the saints' praise to God, which will be the
service they will be employed in; and the Lamb being joined with the
Lord God Almighty, shows his deity and his equality with his Father.

[Revelation 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 21:23</span></span>

And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon to shine in
it,.... Which may be understood either literally of these two
luminaries, which all earthly cities need; and which, though they may be
in being in the new heavens, yet will not have the use with respect to
this city they now have. The Jews say (u), the orb of the sun is in this
world; and the gloss adds, but not in the future state, for the lights
shall be renewed: and they further say (w), as here, that

"in the world to come, "Israel , will have no need of the light of the
sun, nor of the light of the moon", neither by day nor by night,''

as they say (x), the Israelites had not in the wilderness. So they
represent the Lord speaking to Moses, and saying (y),

"thy days shall cease, but thy light shall not cease; for thou shall
have no need for ever of the light of the sun, nor of the light of the
moon, and of the stars.''

Or else it may be understood mystically, but not of Christ, the sun of
righteousness, whom the saints will always need and enjoy; but of the
governors and discipline of the church in its present state; and of the
written word, which is a light unto them now, and the ministration of
it, and the ordinances of the Gospel, by which light and knowledge are
conveyed; but in this state all will be immediately taught of God; nor
shall everyone teach his neighbour, but all shall know the Lord
perfectly; and also of political governors, who will be no more; see
[Co1 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024).

For the glory of God did lighten it; the Shekinah, or glorious presence
of God, which filled the temple of Solomon, and shone round about the
shepherds at the incarnation of Christ; with the presence of God, who is
light itself, which will be enjoyed in a much more glorious manner, will
the church now be enlightened; and this will be an everlasting light
unto her: and the Lamb is the light thereof; in whose light they will
see the face of God, and see God face to face; they will see Christ as
he is, and behold his glory; and look upon the angels, those glorious
forms of light, and all the glorified saints, and know and converse with
each other; and they will look into, and clearly discern all the
mysteries and doctrines of grace, and all the various scenes of
Providence, which will all be opened and laid before them. And this
light will be always without any change and variation; which is no small
part of the commendation of this city, which is the inheritance of the
saints in light. So the holy blessed God is said by the Jews (z) to be ,
"the light of Jerusalem"; he is the light of the new Jerusalem; see [Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019) and the light of, the world to
come is, by (a) them, called "the great light".

\(u\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 101. 1. (w) Raziel, fol. 17. 2. (x) Yalkut
Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 57. 2. (y) Petirat Moseh, fol. 23. 2. (z) Yalkut
Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 57. 2. & 98. 1. (a) Ben Gorion apud Aben Ezram in
Psal. xlix. 19.

[Revelation 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 21:24</span></span>

And the nations of them which are saved,.... In distinction from them
that will be deceived by Satan, [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008). These are not all the nations of
the world, which will be gathered before Christ, the Judge, for all will
not be saved, there is a world that will be condemned; nor the Gentiles
only, which shall come into the church state of the Jews when called,
for that state is not here designed; and besides, all Israel shall be
saved then; nor the living saints at Christ's coming, who shall have
escaped, and are saved from the general conflagration; for these, with
the raised ones, will be caught up together to Christ, and descend and
dwell together on earth, and make one church state; but all the elect of
God, both Jews and Gentiles, whom God has chosen, Christ has redeemed,
and the Spirit has called out of all the nations of the earth: these are
only saved ones; such are already saved, not only are determined to be
saved, and for whom salvation is wrought out by Christ, and to whom it
is applied at conversion, and who are representatively set down in
heavenly places in Christ, and are already saved by hope and faith, and
with respect to the certainty of salvation; all which may be said of
saints in the present state; but these will be such, who will be
actually and personally saved, will be in the full possession of
salvation, enjoying all the blessings of it: they will be partakers of
the first resurrection, and the glories of it: the tabernacle of God
will be with them, they will be free from all sorrows and death, and
will inherit all things: the Syriac version reads, "the nations that are
saved"; who are redeemed and saved by Christ: this may teach us how to
understand those phrases, which seem to favour general redemption, as
all men, the world, the whole world; see [Isa
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020). These words, "of them which are
saved", are left out in the Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic
versions, but are in all the copies. These nations are the inhabitants
of this city, and they

shall walk in the light of it, which is Christ; they shall enjoy it;
they shall have the light of life, and be partakers of the inheritance
with the saints in light, and that continually: they shall not only come
to it, but continue in it, and walk at it, and by the light of it: the
walk of these will be different from the walk of saints now, who walk by
faith, and not by sight; but these shall walk by sight, enjoying the
beatific vision of God, and the Lamb. The Jews say (b), that Jerusalem,
in time to come, will be made a lamp to the nations of the world, , "and
they shall walk in its light", or by the light of it, which is the sense
of [Isa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003) "the Gentiles shall come
to thy light"; see [Isa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it; by
whom may be meant either mystically all the saints, who will be kings as
well as priests unto God, and will reign as such with Christ in this
state, will cast their crowns at his feet, and give him all the honour
and glory; or literally, the kings of the earth, who shall have
relinquished antichrist, hated the whore, and burnt her with fire, and
who will have been nursing fathers in the spiritual reign; or rather all
good kings that ever have been in the earth: not that they will be kings
of the earth at this time, for now all rule, authority, and power, will
be put down; nor will any worldly riches, honour, and glory, be brought
by them into this state, nor will they be needed in it; but it is to be
understood of who have been kings on earth, though not of their having
brought earthly riches and grandeur into the interest and churches of
Christ; as David gave much towards the building of the temple, which was
begun and finished by King Solomon his son, and as Constantine greatly
enriched and aggrandized the church when he became emperor; but the
sense seems to be this, that such who have been Christian kings on earth
will prefer the happiness of this state to all their riches and
greatness here; and that could all the glory of the kings of the earth
be put together, it would not equal, but be greatly inferior to the
glory of the new Jerusalem; Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of the inhabitants of this place; see [Rev
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006) besides, these shall do all
homage, and submit to Christ the King of kings in the midst of the
church, which may be meant by "glory" and "honour".

\(b\) Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 56. 3.

[Revelation 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rev 21:25</span></span>

And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day,.... Which does not
design the free communication between the living saints on the new
earth, and the raised ones in the new heaven, as some have thought, for
these shall be together, and make up one body; but rather the universal
collection, and free admission of all the saints from all parts into
this city; though it seems best to interpret it of the safety of the
inhabitants, see [Jer 49:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#031) who will
have no enemy to fear, and therefore need never shut their gates; the
beast and false prophet will have been taken, and cast into the lake of
fire long ago; ungodly men will be destroyed in the general
conflagration, and Satan will be bound in the bottomless pit during the
thousand years:

for there shall be no night there; this is a reason given why it is
before said the gates shall not be shut by day, since it is unusual to
shut gates in the day, unless in time of war, because there will be no
night in this city, and so no need of ever shutting the gates; the night
time being the season for thieves and robbers, and for enemies to make
their incursions, and to surprise: but here will be no night; either
literally, times and seasons, as measured by the revolutions of the sun
and moon, will be no more, they will not have the use they have; at
least this city will stand in no need of them. The Jews say (c), that
the world to come will be , "all day": or mystically and figuratively,
there will be no night of spiritual darkness and desertion, of
drowsiness, sleepiness, and inactivity, of error and heresy, or of
calamity and distress of any kind; all which are sometimes signified by
night in Scripture; see [Sol 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001) [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009).

\(c\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 91. fol. 79. 4.

[Revelation 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rev 21:26</span></span>

And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it. The
glory of the nations are the people of God, who, though they are
reckoned the filth of the world, are the excellent in the earth; these
will be brought into this city, and be presented to the King of it, in a
glorious manner, and that by the kings of the earth; either such who
have been ecclesiastical rulers over them, who will introduce them as
their joy and crown of rejoicing; or who have been political governors
of them, their fathers and protectors; or the sense is as before, that
whatever is great and glorious in the nations of the world, will be
counted as nothing in comparison of the glory and magnificence of this
state, and not to be mentioned with it: the Arabic version renders it,
"the nations shall bring glory and honour to it"; in the sense before
given.

[Revelation 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rev 21:27</span></span>

And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth,.... As
evil thoughts, words, and actions do; and therefore he that enters into
this city must be free from all these: or "that is defiled", as the
Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions read; or "that is unclean", as the
Arabic and Ethiopic versions; alluding to the tabernacle and temple,
into which no unclean person might come; see [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001). No profane sinner, whose mind
and conscience are defiled, and whose conversation is defiling, may
enter here; nor any self-righteous person, whose righteousness is as
filthy rags, and he himself is as an unclean thing, shall be admitted
here; only such who are washed in the blood of Christ, and have on his
righteousness, and so are without spot or wrinkle; which shows the pure
and perfect state of this church and therefore cannot design any state
of the church previous to the coming of Christ and the first
resurrection:

neither whatsoever worketh abomination; commits sin, which is abominable
in the sight of God, lives and dies in a course of wickedness; or
particularly is guilty of idolatry, either makes idols, or serves them,
or both, which are an abomination to the Lord; see

or maketh a lie; any lie in general; who is a common liar, loves and
invents a lie, and speaks one; delivers that which is false with an
intention to deceive; or in particular, who embraces and propagates
antichristian lies, doctrinal ones, lies spoken in hypocrisy; such shall
be damned; see [Ti1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001) but they which
are written in the Lamb's book of life; who are predestinated to eternal
life; and though they are naturally, and in themselves defiled and
sinful creatures, yet they are justified by the righteousness of Christ,
and sanctified by his Spirit, and so are made meet and fit to enter this
city; See Gill on [Rev 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008). It is by
the Jews observed (d), that

"the Jerusalem of the world to come is not as the Jerusalem of this
world; the Jerusalem of this world, whoever would go up to it (or enter
into it) might; but that of the world to come, , "none may go up to it
(or enter into it) but those who are prepared", or appointed for it.''

\(d\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 75. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 22](rev022)

</div>
