<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev016)  [Next](rev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 17

This chapter contains a vision of a beast, and a woman on it, and the
interpretation of it; one of the seven angels that had the seven vials
proposes to John to show him the whore of Babylon, the Jezabel before
spoken of, who sits on many waters, with whom the kings and inhabitants
of the earth have committed fornication, being intoxicated by her, [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001) in order to which he carries him
into the wilderness, and there he sees a woman, who is described by the
beast she sat on, of a scarlet colour, full of blasphemous names, with
seven heads and ten horns; by her array, in purple and scarlet, decked
with gold, pearls, and precious stones; by a cup she had in her hand,
full of abominable filth; by a name written on her forehead, given at
large, and by the condition she was in, drunk with the blood of the
saints; which sight filled John with great wonder and admiration, [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003) wherefore, to remove his
astonishment, the angel proposes to explain to him the mystery of the
woman, and the beast she sat on, [Rev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007) and first the mystery of the
beast is explained, by its several states, past, present, and to come;
by its original and end, ascending out of the bottomless pit, and going
into perdition; by the veneration it would be had in by the reprobate
part of the world, [Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008) its seven
heads are interpreted of the seven mountains on which the city of Rome,
designed by the woman, stood, and of seven kings, or forms of
government, five of which had ceased, and one was in being in John's
time, another was to come, which should not continue long, and the beast
would be an eighth, [Rev 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009) its ten
horns are explained of ten kings, described by their kingdom they had
not as yet received, and which they should have one hour with the beast;
by their agreement in mind and conduct; and by their war with the Lamb,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords, and those that are with him, the
called, chosen, and faithful, and the issue of it, [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012) the waters on which the whore
sat are interpreted of a multitude of people, nations, and tongues, [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015) the hatred and destruction of
her by the ten kings, and the manner of it, are declared, [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016) which is owing to the will of
God, who put it into their hearts to agree to give their kingdom to the
beast till the prophecies and promises were fulfilled respecting this
matter, and now to destroy the whore that sat upon it, [Rev
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017) which woman is explained of the
great city of Rome, that reigns over the kings of the earth, [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018).

[Revelation 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 17:1</span></span>

And there came one of the seven angels that had the seven vials,.... It
may be the first of them, since one of the four beasts designs the first
of them, in [Rev 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001) though Brightman
thinks the fifth angel is meant, because he poured out his vial on the
seat of the beast, who is by this angel described; but rather this is
the seventh and last angel, concerned in the utter destruction of
antichrist: and therefore proposes to John to show him the judgment of
the great whore:

and talked with me, saying unto me, come hither: he conversed with him
in a friendly manner, see [Zac 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009) and
desires him to come nearer to him, and go along with him, adding,

I will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore; that noted and
famous one, known before to John by the names of Jezabel and Babylon,
who taught and caused many to commit fornication, [Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020) [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008) and is no other than Rome Papal;
for that a city or state is meant is clear from [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018) and it is usual for idolatrous
or apostate cities to be called whores or harlots, see [Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021) [Eze
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#002) and she is called a "great" one,
because of the largeness of the Papal see; and because of the multitude
of persons, the kings of the earth, and the inhabitants of it, with whom
the Romish antichrist has committed spiritual fornication, or idolatry:
her "judgment" signifies either her sin and wickedness; in which sense
the word is used in [Rom 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016) and
which is exposed, [Rev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005) namely,
her idolatry and cruelty; or else her condemnation, and the execution of
it, suggested in [Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008) and more
largely described in the following chapter:

that sitteth upon many waters; which in [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015) are interpreted of people,
multitudes, nations, and tongues, subject to the jurisdiction of Rome;
and so several antichristian states are in the preceding chapter
signified by the sea, and by rivers and fountains of water: and this is
said in reference to Babylon, an emblem of the Romish harlot, which was
situated upon the river Euphrates, and is therefore said to dwell upon
many waters, [Jer 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013) her sitting
here may be in allusion to the posture of harlots plying of men; or may
denote her ease, rest, and grandeur, sitting as a queen; and is chiefly
expressive of her power and dominion over the kings and nations of the
earth, [Rev 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018).

[Revelation 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 17:2</span></span>

With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication,.... These
are the ten kings, who being of the same mind, and of one religion, the
Popish religion, gave their power, strength, and kingdom to the beast,
[Rev 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012) and have been enticed by
the whore of Rome to commit spiritual fornication with her; that is,
idolatry, to worship, as that church enjoins, idols of gold, silver,
brass, and wood, the images of the virgin Mary, and other saints; hence
this whore appears to be no mean strumpet, but one of great note, and in
much vogue, being sought after and made use of by the great men of the
earth;

and the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of
her fornication; that is, the inhabitants of the Roman empire, or
earthly minded men, mere carnal persons, have been drawn into idolatrous
practices by the allurements of the church of Rome; such as riches,
honours, pleasures, lying miracles, and great pretensions to devotion
and religion; whereby they have been intoxicated as men with wine, and
have been filled with a blind zeal for that church, and the false
doctrines and worship of it, and with madness and fury against the true
professors of religion.

[Revelation 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 17:3</span></span>

So he carried me away in the spirit,.... Not in body, as if he was
removed from the isle of Patmos to some other place; but in a visionary
way, just as Ezekiel was carried between earth and heaven, in the
visions of God, to Jerusalem, [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003). It was represented to the mind of
John, to his spirit, or soul, as if he had been taken up by the angel
and carried through the air:

into the wilderness; by which may be meant either the wilderness of the
people, the world, the church hereafter described, being a worldly one,
and consisting of worldly men; or Gentilism, the Gentile world is often
in the prophecies of the Old Testament called a wilderness; the Romish
church having much of Heathen worship, and Heathen customs and practices
in it, hence its votaries are called Gentiles, [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002) or this circumstance may be
mentioned, and the thing so represented to John, because that a
wilderness is a solitary place, and fit for retirement and meditation;
and where he might, without any interruption, take a full view of the
following sight, and make proper observations upon it; and it is worth
notice, that this is the place where the true church and became out of
sight, in the room of which this apostate church appears: or, as others
have thought, John is had into the wilderness, where the true church was
hid and nourished, and the false one is there shown him, that seeing
both together, he might compare them, and observe the difference between
them; to all which may be added, that a wilderness is a fit place for
such a beast as hereafter described to be seen in:

and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast; the beast is the
same with that in [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) as the
description shows, and is no other than the Roman empire as Papal; the
"scarlet" colour is expressive of its imperial dignity, its power and
authority, it received from the dragon; and also of this beast's cruelty
and tyranny, and of its shedding the blood of the saints: the woman
sitting upon it is the great city of Rome, as is manifest from [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018) or the Romish antichrist, the
apostate church of Rome, represented by a woman, as the true church is,
[Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001) but in a very different
form, and is the same with the second beast in [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011) and the false prophet; and as
the two beasts respect the same, under different considerations, namely,
the Papacy, in its civil and ecclesiastic capacity, so this strange
phenomenon, a woman sitting on such a beast, means one and the same
thing as the horse and his rider in the seals, though in different
views; the woman designs the Romish church, with the pope at the head of
it, and the beast the Roman Papal empire as civil, by which the former
is supported and upheld, bore up on high, and exalted in the manner it
has been: moreover, as purple and scarlet are the colours of garments
wore by the pope, and cardinals, hence the woman in the next verse is
said to be "arrayed in purple and scarlet colour", so even the very
beasts on which they rode were covered with scarlet. Platina (h) says
that Pope Paul the Second

"ordered by a public decree, on pain or punishment, that no man should
wear a scarlet cap but cardinals; to whom also, in the first year of his
popedom, he gave cloth of the same colour, to put upon their horses and
mules when they rode; and besides, would have put into the decree, that
the cardinals' hats should be of scarlet silk:''

upon which Du Maulin (i) makes this remark;

"Pope Paul the Second was the first that gave scarlet to the cardinals,
as well for themselves as for their mules, to the end that this
prophecy, which agreeth in general with the see of Rome, might likewise
appertain particularly to everyone of the pillars of the said see, which
is to be set upon a "scarlet coloured beast".''

It follows,

full of names of blasphemy: that is, the beast, or Roman Papal empire,
was full of them; in [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) a name
of blasphemy is said to be upon his head, and he to have a mouth
speaking blasphemy; but here his whole body is represented as full of
them, and may refer to the blasphemous doctrines of worshipping of
images, of pardons and indulgences, of transubstantiation, &c. and to
the multitude of images, of the virgin Mary, and other saints, in the
antichristian state, in every part of it; and to those blaspheming
persons, the cardinals, priests, and Jesuits, which abound in it; as
well as to those blasphemous names and titles which are given to the
pope, the head of it, or assumed by him; such as God on earth, the vicar
of Christ, the head, and husband, and foundation of the church, with
many others:

having seven heads, and ten horns: the seven heads are the seven
mountains, on which the city of Rome, the metropolis of the empire, is
seated; and the seven kings, or seven forms of government, under which
it has been, as appears from [Rev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009); see Gill on [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) and the "ten horns" signify the
ten kings over the ten kingdoms, into which the empire was divided, when
overrun by the Goths and Vandals; and which ten kings gave their
kingdoms to the beast, the Romish antichrist; they gave their strength
and power to him, being of his religion, and have been his horns, his
defenders and supporters, ever since, as may be gathered from [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012).

\(h\) De Vitis Pontiticum, p. 312. (i) Defence of the Catholic Faith,
&c. c. 3. p. 38.

[Revelation 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 17:4</span></span>

And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour,.... Which may be
expressive of her grandeur, authority, and power, sitting as a queen,
and sovereign in the empire, ruling over kingdoms and nations in it; and
also of her bloody disposition to the saints, with whose blood she is
afterwards said to be drunk;

and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls; which may denote
her hypocrisy, she being gilded with these things, as the word
signifies, when she was inwardly rotten, corrupt, and filthy; and may
point out the things by which persons have been enticed into the
communion of the church of Rome, and to comply with her idolatrous
worship and practices; and may also respect the prodigious riches, which
have, by various methods, been brought into the pope's coffers; these,
with other things, are reckoned among the merchandise of Babylon, [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) and particularly this may have
reference to the adorning of their temples, or churches, and the decking
of their images, with those things; which gaudy pompous shows strike the
minds of carnal men, amuse them, and engage their attention. So Philo
(k) the Jew describes an whore as arrayed in purple, and adorned with
gold and precious stones; see [Pro
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#010).

Having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of
her fornication; in allusion to Babylon, [Jer
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#007) and also to harlots, who give
philters or love potions to men, to excite lust, and draw their
affections to them; and this being a golden cup may design the external
lustre and splendour of the worship of the church of Rome, by which many
have been drawn into a compliance with it, which is attended with many
abominable, filthy, and idolatrous practices: and perhaps some regard
may be had to the golden chalice, in which, it is pretended, is the very
blood of Christ, which the priests take as such, and worship and adore,
and is no other than an abominable and filthy piece of idolatry; and
such are the persons that partake of it; like the Pharisees of old, they
make clean the outside of the cup and platter; glister, and make a great
show of devotion, but within are full of extortion and excess.

\(k\) De Mercede Meretricis non recip. p. 861.

[Revelation 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 17:5</span></span>

And upon her forehead was a name written,.... As the high priest had on
his mitre upon his forehead written, holiness to the Lord, [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036) only a different inscription
from that; the allusion is thought to be to harlots, who not only used
to put their names over their doors, but some of them upon their
foreheads, that all might know who they were; of which Mr. Daubuz has
given proofs out of Seneca, Martial, Juvenal, and Petronius; and such
might be said to have an whore's forehead indeed: and this is expressive
of the openness and impudence of the church of Rome, in her idolatrous
worship; she openly declares it, and pleads for it, and invites and
ensnares persons to join with her in it: the name follows,

mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of
the earth; her name is "mystery"; not the mystery of godliness, that she
dislikes and opposes, but the mystery of iniquity; which is the name
antichrist went by in the Apostle Paul's time, when he was but in
embryo, [Th2 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007). Some reference may
be had to the mystery of the Mass, in which the Papists pretend are the
very body and blood of Christ; to their seven sacraments, for wherever
almost they find the word mystery, they make a sacrament of that to
which it is applied; and to their unwritten traditions, and the sense of
the Scriptures, which are locked up in the pope's breast: and it is very
remarkable what has been observed by some, that the word "mystery" was
formerly upon the frontlet of the pope's mitre, and was removed by Pope
Julius the Third, when it was observed that the Protestants made use of
this passage of Scripture, and applied it to the Romish antichrist.
Joseph Scaliger (l) affirms, that he saw mitres at Rome with this
inscription on them. Though others think that this is not any part of
the name, but only signifies that this woman was, in a mysterious or
mystical sense, called Babylon, &c. just as the great city is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008) but to me it seems to be a part
of the name, as well as what follows, "Babylon the great"; that is, the
great city, [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008) by which name
the church of Rome may well be called, because of the signification of
it, confusion, [Gen 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#009) its doctrine
and worship being a confused mixture of Paganism, Judaism, and
Christianity; and because of the pride and haughtiness of it, its
tyranny and cruelty, and its sorceries and idolatry; see [Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012).

And the mother of harlots, of all antichristian states and kingdoms; and
is different from the heavenly Jerusalem, the Gospel church, which is
the mother of true believers, [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026) or the "mother of fornications":
as some copies read, and the Vulgate Latin and eastern versions render
it; that is, the author and encourager of them, as the church of Rome
has been; of corporeal fornication, by commanding celibacy, and
forbidding marriage to priests, and setting up of brothel houses; and of
spiritual fornication or idolatry, everywhere required and encouraged by
it: and of "the abominations of the earth"; of abominable doctrines and
practices; all manner of wickedness that is to be found in the earth, as
murder, adultery, sodomy, perjury, &c. these, with everything that is
vile and wicked, are practised and connived at by her.

\(l\) In Scaligeran.

[Revelation 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 17:6</span></span>

And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints,.... To see a
woman drunk is a shameful sight; but to see one drunk, not with wine,
but with blood, is monstrous, cruel, and shocking; the sword, when it
devours, and is satiate, is said to be drunk with blood, [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010) but for a woman to be so is
unexampled; and not with her own blood, as she will be, [Isa
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026) but with the blood of others;
and not with the blood of wicked men, but with the blood of saints; such
as God the Father has set apart from everlasting, and chosen to be holy;
whom Christ has sanctified by his blood, or whose sins he has expiated,
and to whom he is made sanctification; and who have principles of grace
and holiness wrought in them by the Spirit of God, and live holy lives
and conversations:

and of the martyrs of Jesus; the saints, whose blood is shed by
antichrist, are martyrs also; but they seem to design the common people,
and these the ministers of the Gospel, who are the martyrs of Jesus,
both in life and death; they are his martyrs or witnesses, by their
doctrine and ministry, bearing testimony to him as Jesus, a Saviour;
testifying that he is the only Saviour, that there is salvation in no
other, in opposition to the antichristian doctrines of merit, penance,
purgatory, &c. for which they have been cruelly put to death, and in
great numbers, and so have sealed their doctrine by their blood. Now the
woman being drunk with their blood, denotes the blood thirstiness of the
church of Rome, her greedy aud insatiable desire after the blood of the
saints, and her delight in it, being exceeding mad against them; and the
multitude of it shed by her, as the slaughters of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, the butcheries of the duke d'Alva in the Low Countries, the
massacres in France, Ireland, and other places, the burning of the
martyrs in Queen Mary's days here, with numerous other instances, show.

And when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration; not at the sight
of the beast, which he had seen before, but at the sight of the woman,
as, upon the beast; he wondered that one of her sex, generally timorous
and fearful, should ride on such a monstrous creature; he was amazed at
her dress, and grand appearance, whereas the church in his time
consisted of poor persons, meanly arrayed; it was astonishing to him
that one bearing the name of a Christian church should rise to such
grandeur; and he wondered at the name upon her forehead, what the whole
of that inscription should mean; but, above all, at her drunkenness with
the blood of the saints; at her inhumanity and cruelty, being as savage
as the beast she rode on; and also at God's forbearance of her, that he,
who is a pure and holy Being, a lover of his saints, an avenger of his
elect, should suffer such a brutish, barbarous, and blood thirsty
creature, to live upon earth; see [Hab
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013).

[Revelation 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 17:7</span></span>

And the angel said unto me,.... The same as in [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001)

wherefore didst thou marvel? which is not said by way of reproof, as
questions of this kind sometimes are, [Act
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012) for John did not wonder at her
with a sinful admiration, so as to have her in great veneration, and to
do homage and worship to her, as the inhabitants of the world wondered
after the beast, [Rev 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003) but his
admiration was an amazement, or stupefaction of mind, joined with
indignation at her; and this is said by the angel to lead on to what he
had to declare unto him.

I will tell thee the mystery of the woman; that is, what is mysteriously
or mystically designed by her; for till it was made known to John by the
angel, it was a mystery to him; and when it was revealed, the
interpretation is given in such an obscure manner, that it is only
understood by the mind that has spiritual wisdom; and still remains a
mystery to carnal men, just as the Gospel itself does. The hidden
meaning of this woman, or the mystery of her, is told by the angel in
[Rev 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018).

And of the beast that carried her, which hath the seven heads, and ten
horns; the mystical sense of the beast, its heads and horns, and which
is also delivered in a mysterious manner, is given in [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008).

[Revelation 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 17:8</span></span>

The beast which thou sawest was, and is not,.... It is added at the end
of the verse where the same description is given, "and yet is"; this
beast is to be understood not of the devil, who "was" the god of this
world, "is not", being cast out by Christ, and yet is in being; for he,
the dragon, is distinguished from this beast, and indeed from him the
beast has his seat, power, and authority, [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) nor any particular emperor, as
Domitian, a cruel and savage one, who was in power in Vespasian's time,
when he was abroad, and then was out of it upon his return, and yet
afterwards was in again, being as one sent from hell, and went at last
into perdition; but the Roman empire itself is intended, as we have
seen, which carried and supported the Papacy; and variously may this be
interpreted; as that it was in the hands of the Romans originally, and
long continued with them, but now "is not", in John's time, being in the
hands of Trajan, a Spaniard, "and yet is" in being, Rome being the
metropolis of it: it was a very powerful and flourishing empire, "and is
not", being destroyed by the Goths and Vandals, "and yet is" a large
empire under the jurisdiction of antichrist; it was an idolatrous
empire, which encouraged the worshipping of Heathen gods, "and is not"
guilty of the same idolatrous practices it was, as the worshipping of
Jupiter, Mars, &c. "and yet is" much given to idolatry in another way,
worshipping the virgin Mary, and other saints; it "was" under kings,
consuls, dictators, tribunes, decemvirs, and emperors, it "is not" in
such a form of government, "and yet is" under its seventh head the pope;
"Rome was", but "is not" the same it has been, in some respects, and yet
is the same, for idolatry, cruelty, &c. it has the image of old Rome,
when Pagan, and under the power of the dragon; and though antichrist was
not risen up in the empire to an head, to supreme power yet it was in
being in the apostles' times, and began to work, and by degrees to show
itself. In short, the meaning is, that this beast "was" the Roman
empire, as Pagan, described by a dragon with seven heads, and ten horns,
with crowns on the heads, but is not as yet in the Apostle John's time,
as Papal, described with seven heads, and ten horns, and crowns on the
horns.

And shall ascend out of the bottomless pit: out of hell, from whence the
antichristian beast has its power; see [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008) otherwise all civil power is from
God, but not antichristian power, that is from the devil:

and go into perdition; everlasting destruction, the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone; this will be the end of the beast, [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020).

and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder; the inhabitants of the
Roman empire, earthly minded men, shall have the beast in great
veneration, and follow and worship him; see [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)

whose names were not written in the book of life from the foundation of
the world; none but reprobates, not any of the elect of God, are the
admirers and worshippers of antichrist; See Gill on [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008).

when they beheld the beast that was, and is not, and yet is; the Roman
empire in glory, under the emperors, destroyed by the Goths, and revived
in the Papacy. The Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions leave out the
last clause,

and yet is.

[Revelation 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 17:9</span></span>

And here is the mind which hath wisdom,.... This refers either to what
goes before, concerning the beast, his various states, rise, and ruin,
and his admirers; or to what follows after, concerning the meaning of
his heads and horns, or to both; and the sense is, that notwithstanding
the interpretation of these things by the angel, yet it requires a large
share of wisdom to understand them; and here is enough to exercise the
mind that is ever so well stored with knowledge and understanding; and
so the Arabic version renders it, "here it is required that one should
have judgment and wisdom"; for to a man that has not, the affair will
still be obscure and unintelligible. The words may be rendered, "here is
the mind, he that hath wisdom"; that is, let him make use of it, as in
[Rev 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018) and so the Vulgate Latin
version renders it, "and this is the sense, he that hath wisdom"; this
is the sense of the beast, and of his heads and horns; and he that has
wisdom, let him consider it, and take it in, and apply it to proper
persons, things, and times; and so the Ethiopic version, "he that has
wisdom and understanding, let him know this"; or take cognizance of it,
it being a matter of importance, and attended with difficulty:

the seven heads are seven mountains of which the woman sitteth that is,
they signify seven mountains, or are symbolical representations of them;
just as the seven good kine, and seven good ears, in Pharoah's dream,
signified seven years of plenty, and seven thin kine, and seven empty
ears, seven years of famine, [Gen
41:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#026). As the woman is a city, [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018) these seven mountains, on which
she sits, must be so many mountains on which the city is built; and what
city can this be but Rome, which is so famous for being built on seven
hills? This is taken notice of by Virgil (m), Horace (n), Ovid (o),
Claudian (p), Starius (q), Martial (r), and others; and indeed there is
scarce a poet that speaks of Rome but observes it: hence it has been
sometimes called, by writers, the seven hilled city, and sometimes
Septiceps, the seven headed city, which comes near to the language here:
the names of the seven mountains were these, Capitolinus, Palatinus,
Aventinus, Esquilinus, Coelius, Viminalis, and Quirinalis; the four
first of these were taken in by Romulus, the first founder of it, and
the three last by Servius Tullius, when he enlarged it; and upon the
addition of the seventh mountain there was a feast kept, called
Septimontium; and which was kept in seven places in the city (s); and
was annually observed; and in this situation it was in John's time; for
Pliny (t), who was contemporary with him, expressly says, that in his
time it took in seven mountains; and that this refers to a city in
John's time, then reigning over the kings of the earth, is certain from
[Rev 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018). Now there was no imperial
city, so built in his time, but Rome: for though Constantinople is built
on seven hills, yet this was not in being in John's time, but was built
by Constantine many years after, in imitation of Rome; and though the
situation is much altered now, being in Campus Martius, it being greatly
reduced, and in a less compass, yet this hinders not but that it is the
same city here designed: and this confirms that the beast before spoken
of, on whom the woman sat, is the Roman empire, since she is here said
to sit on the seven mountains, on which Rome, the metropolis of that
empire, was built; and this shows the pope of Rome to be antichrist, the
great whore, Babylon, the mother of harlots, since no other has his seat
at Rome but he.

\(m\) Aeneid. 6. (n) In Carmine Seculari. (o) De Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 4.
(p) L. 3. de Laud. Stilicon. l. 3. ver. 135. (q) Syl. l. 1. Syl. 2. ver.
191. (r) L. 4. Ep. 53. (s) Alex. ab Alex. Genial Dier. l. 6. c. 11. (t)
Nat. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.

[Revelation 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 17:10</span></span>

And there are seven kings,.... The Arabic version renders it, "who are
seven kings"; and it should be rendered, as it is by the Vulgate Latin,
Syriac and Ethiopic versions, "and they are seven kings"; that is, the
seven heads signify seven kings also, for they have in them a double
representation, first of seven mountains, and then of seven kings; by
which are meant not seven ages of the world, as from Adam to Noah; from
Noah to Abraham; from Abraham to David; from David to the Babylonish
captivity; from the Babylonish captivity to Christ; from Christ to
antichrist; and from antichrist to the end of the world; the five first
of which were gone in John's time, the sixth was then in being, and when
the seventh shall come it will continue for a short time: this is a
foolish and absurd interpretation of the Papists, who make the beast to
be the devil, and these his seven heads; whereas he rather is the head,
or god of the world: nor are seven emperors of Rome intended, which are
differently reckoned, according to the different times John is supposed
to have had this revelation. Grotius, who is followed by Hammond,
supposes this was written in the times of Vespasian, and reckons them
thus; Clandius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, and Titus; the
first five of these were dead in John's time, one was then, the sixth,
Vespasian, the then reigning emperor, and the other, Titus, was yet to
come to the empire; and when he came to it, continued but a short time,
two years and two mouths: others, who more rightly judge that John wrote
in Domitian's time, reckon them after this manner; Galba, Otho,
Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian, and Nerva; the first five of
these were dead; Domitian was then living, and Nerva, the other that was
to come and succeed him, reigned but a little while, not quite two
years; but to this sense must be objected, that there were other
emperors before either Galba or Claudius; and before John's time there
were more than five fallen or dead; according to the first account,
there must be nine dead, and according to the latter eleven; for before
Claudius there were Julius, Augustus, Tiberius, and Caius: besides, if
these were the seven heads of the beast, the beast must have been long
ago without any head, and consequently must have expired; whereas it is
still in being, and will be under the fifth, sixth, and seventh vials,
which are yet to come; it will be at the battle of Armageddon, and will
be taken then, and cast alive into the lake of fire; to which may be
added, that the beast, in the form in which John now saw it, was not yet
risen in the times of these emperors; but by the seven heads are meant
so many forms of government which took place successively in the Roman
empire, and were all of them idolatrous heads, as kings, consuls,
dictators, decemvirs, tribunes, emperors, and popes; it being usual for
any sort of governors, or governments and monarchies, to be called
kings, [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005).

Five are fallen; or ceased, are no longer in being as kings, consuls,
dictators, decemvirs, and tribunes; at least, the supreme power was not
lodged in any bearing either of these names in John's time:

and one is; the Pagan emperors; an Heathen emperor, Domitian, then
reigning, when John had this vision; and these continued to the opening
of the sixth seal, which put an end to that succession, as Pagan, and
till the woman brought forth the man child, or till Constantine's time:

and the other is not yet come; which some understand of the Christian
emperors, who immediately succeeded the Pagan ones, and were another,
and different from them, as to religion, though the form of government
was the same, and were not another head; for they were not an idolatrous
head, on which were names of blasphemy, but another king; for from the
following verse it appears, that there are eight kings, and but seven
heads, and therefore one of them should seem not to be a head; and
these, when they came, continued but a short time in comparison of the
Heathen emperors that reigned before them, and of the hope, or
antichrist, who was to reign after them 1260 years; for they reigned
not, put them all together, more than 150 years; and especially at Rome
their stay was short, for Constantine removed from thence to
Constantinople, in the nineteenth year of his empire. But these
emperors, though in religion they differed from the others, yet their
form of government and title were the same, and therefore must be
included in the sixth head: according to some, Theodoricus the
Ostrogoth, and his successors, are meant, who continued about an hundred
years; others have thought that the exarchs of Ravenna, who rose up upon
the destruction of the western empire, are intended, and who continued
but a short time; but then these had not their seat at Rome, which it
seems necessary each head of this beast should have; it is better,
therefore, to understand this of the popes of Rome, the seventh and last
head of the Roman empire; these were not yet come, in John's time, to
their supreme dignity and authority:

and when he cometh he must continue a short space; forty two months, or
1260 days; that is, so many years, which, though a long time in itself,
and in the account of man, yet with God, with whom a thousand years is
as one day, and in comparison of the everlasting kingdom of Christ, and
his people, it is but a short space; and so the reign of the beast, and
of the ten kings with him, is said to be one hour, [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012) and this is said for the comfort
of the saints, and to keep up their faith and patience under their
sufferings in antichristian states. Mr. Daubuz makes these seven heads,
or kings, signified by seven mountains, seven capital cities, which by
degrees came to belong to the Roman empire; as first Rome itself, the
capital of Italy; next Carthage, the capital of Africa; then Aege, the
capital of Macedonia; after that Antiochia, the capital of the east;
then Augustodunum, the capital of the Gauls; and Alexandria, the capital
of Egypt; five of these six, with the monarchies belonging to them, were
fallen; one, or the first of them now, was the mistress of all; and the
other seventh was to come, namely, Byzantium, or Contantinople, which
continued not long. This passage is so interpreted, as also the seven
heads, in [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) by this writer.

[Revelation 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 17:11</span></span>

And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth,.... That was
in embryo in John's time, and yet was not come to its power and
grandeur, is the eighth king; and this is the Papacy, which takes the
name of the beast, because it is the head of the beast, and the only
surviving head of the beast, or Roman empire, now become Papal:

and is of the seven; one of the seven heads, and the last of them, and
is an idolatrous one, as the rest were, requiring and encouraging the
worship of angels, of the virgin Mary, and saints parted: the pope of
Rome is the eighth king, and seventh head, the latter with respect to
his temporal power, and the former with respect to his ecclesiastical
authority; for his government is quite of a different sort from the
rest, being of a mixed kind, partly civil, and partly ecclesiastical,
and therefore is signified by two beasts in the thirteenth chapter:

and goes into perdition; being the son of perdition, and is justly
deserving of it; See Gill on [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008).

[Revelation 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 17:12</span></span>

And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings,.... Not ten Christian
emperors, which are reckoned up by Brightman from Constantine to
Theodosius; for these did not reign with the beast, or give their
kingdoms to him, and much less did they make war with the Lamb; they are
rather the angels of Michael, that fought for him, the Lamb, against the
dragon, and his angels, [Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007) nor
ten kings that will rise up and divide the Roman empire between them,
towards the end of the world, which is a sense devised by Papists to
obscure and hide from men the true meaning of the passage; but the ten
kingdoms which rose up, and into which the Roman empire was divided upon
its being ruined, and torn to pieces by the Goths, Huns, and Vandals.
They are the same with the "ten toes" of Nebuchadnezzar's image, and the
"ten horns" of the fourth beast, or kingdom, in [Dan
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042). These are differently reckoned
up by interpreters: by Napier thus; Spain, France, Lombardy, England,
Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, Italy, and the exarchate of Ravenna:
by Mr. Mede after this manner; the Britains in Britain, under Vortimer
their king; the Saxons in the same place, under Hengist; the Franks in
Gallia Belgica, or Celtics, under Childeric; the Burgundians in another
part of France, under Gunderic; the Wisigoths in Aquitain, and part of
Spain, under Theodoric; the Sueves and Alans in Gallaecia and Portugal,
under Riciarius; the Vandals in Spain and Africa, under Genseric; the
Almains in that part of Germany called Rhetia, under Sumanus; the
Ostrogoths in Pannonia, and after in Italy, under Theodomir; and the
Greeks in the rest of the empire, under Marcianus: and by another (u)
writer they are accounted for in this way; the Almains in both the
Rhetia, and in Pannonia, who rose in the year 356; the Ostrogoths, first
in Pannonia, and then in Italy, in 377; the Wisigoths in Pannonia, and
then in Italy, afterwards in France, and last of all in Spain, in 378;
the Huns in Pannonia, and for some time throughout all Europe, in 378;
the Britian Romans in Britain, and afterwards the Saxons, in 406; the
Sueves, first in France, and then in Spain, in 407; the Alans, first in
France, and then in Spain, in 407; the Vandals, first in France, then in
Spain, afterwards in Africa, in 407; the Burgundians in France, in 407;
the Franks in France, in 410. And it is generally thought all these ten
kingdoms were up by the year 450 at least. Though Dr. Allix makes the
epocha of them A. D. 486, when the western empire was taken from the
Romans, and fixes them in the following order; the Almains in Rhetia and
Pannonia; the Franks in Belgica; the Anglo-Saxons in Britain; the
Wisigoths in Gallia Aquitania and Hispania Tarraconensis; the Sueves and
Alans in Portugal; the Vandals in Africa; the Burgundians in Gallia
Sequanensis; the Ostrogoths in Pannonia, and afterwards in Italy; the
Lombards in Pannonia, and the Heruli and Turcilingi, who conquered
Augustulus: and though these kingdoms were thrown into different forms
and shapes afterwards, yet it is remarkable they were just of this
number; as, 1. Italy and Germany; 2. France; 3. Spain; 4. England with
Ireland; 5. Scotland; 6. Hungary; 7. Poland with Lithuania; 8. Denmark,
with Sweden and Norway, Sweden being since divided; 9. Portugal; 10. The
Grecian empire seized by the Ottomans. And as these kings cannot be
understood of single persons at the head of these kingdoms, or of so
many kings succeeding one another; so neither is it necessary to
consider these kingdoms as being in the same state, and made up of the
same sort of people always; it is enough that they are in the same
place, and within the empire; for we, may observe, that different
things, at different times, are ascribed to them, or at least to some.
They all are at first of one mind, and give their kingdom to the beast;
then they, at least some of them, hate the whore, and burn her with
fire; and yet others lament the destruction and burning of Rome, [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016).

Which have received no kingdom as yet: in John's time, when the Pagan
empire was in being, and the beast was not risen, with whom they were to
reign; hence these horns have no crowns on them, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003).

But receive power as kings one hour with the beast; as soon as he was
risen; and therefore the horns are represented with crowns upon them,
[Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001). Their rise was with the
Papal beast, who rose not to his supreme power and dignity until the
western emperor, which let and hindered, was removed out of the way;
which was done by the barbarous nations, who set up these kingdoms,
which made way for the lordly and tyrannical government of the pope of
Rome; so that he and they rose up together: and this may he meant by the
"one hour"; namely, that at one and the same hour or season he came to
his supreme authority and grandeur, and they received their kingly power
with him; or this may denote the time of their continuance in their
honour and greatness; it was but for an hour, or a short time, as that
phrase sometimes signifies, [Plm 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#015)
and so the Ethiopic version renders it, "for one hour"; to which agrees
the Arabic version,

and their power shall be of one hour: and this shall be "as kings"; for
they only have the title of kings, but not sovereign power; they are
vassals to the beast, the pope, who reigns over them, [Rev
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018) and sets up kings in these
kingdoms, and deposes them at pleasure; exalting himself above all that
is called God, or above all civil magistrates; so that these have only
the name, not the thing; they are as kings, and look like such, but are
not really so; though what power they have, they receive not from the
beast, but from God; the beast receives his power and authority, as well
as seat, from the dragon; but civil power and magistracy is from God,
who suffers these princes, and gives them up to such stupidity as to
give their kingdom to the beast, and to exercise their power as he
directs.

\(u\) De Excidio Antichristi apud Poli Synops. in loc.

[Revelation 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 17:13</span></span>

These have one mind,.... The princes of these kingdoms, and their
subjects, become, in time, of one religion; first they were Arians, and
then Papists; and for a long series of time there was great unity
between them, with respect to religious sentiments, being zealously
attached to the church of Rome, its principles and practices:

and shall give their power and strength unto the beast; the Papal
antichrist, the eighth king, and seventh head; to him they have given
power to exercise all ecclesiastical authority in their kingdoms; as to
ordain bishops, and deliver the pall to whom they will; to excommunicate
offenders, and even lay their kingdoms under an interdict when they
pleased; and have assisted and defended the popes of Rome with all their
force, with all their might and main, and to the utmost of their power,
and have engaged in what have been called the holy wars, at their
motion; they have given their riches and wealth, which are called the
forces of strength, [Job 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#019) which
they have, by various methods, drained them of; hence the whore of Rome
came to be decked with gold, and pearls, and precious stones; yea, they
have given them their kingdoms, and have received them from them, and
become tributary to them.

[Revelation 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 17:14</span></span>

These shall make war with the Lamb,.... The Lord Jesus Christ, so often
spoken of in this book under this character, [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). And this war is not to be
understood of a war with him personally, or of that last and decisive,
battle at Armageddon, in which will be the kings of the earth; but of a
war with his members, of their persecuting of the saints, and faithful
witnesses of Christ in all ages, within their jurisdictions, being
instigated to it by the beast, under whose influence they are:

and the Lamb shall overcome them: partly through the constancy of his
people, who will not love their lives to the death, but freely lay them
down for him; nor can anything separate them from the love of Christ, or
prevail upon them to desert him, his truths and ordinances, cause and
interest, but are more than conquerors through him, and so he overcomes
in them; and partly through a reformation which he effects, as in some
of those kingdoms already, as Sweden, Denmark, England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and others, and will do in others hereafter; see [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)

for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; he is so by nature, as God
and Creator, to whom the kingdom of nature and providence belongs; and
by office, as Mediator, being made higher than the kings of the earth;
hence he is more than a match for them, they cannot stand before him;
this is a reason why he overcomes them, and it cannot be thought it
should be otherwise: this Lamb is the lion of the tribe of Judah, and
when he rouses himself, and stirs up his wrath, and exerts his power,
kings and great men flee from him; see [Rev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015). This is a proof of Christ's
proper deity, the same titles being given to him, the Word and Son of
God, as to God himself, [Rev 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).

And they that are with him: his servants and his soldiers, that fight
under him, and abide by him,

are called, and chosen, and faithful; they are chosen in Christ from all
eternity, to grace here, and glory hereafter, and so stand opposed to
the admirers of the beast, whose names are not written in the book of
life, [Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008) for this is to be
understood of their eternal election, and not of their separation by the
effectual calling in time, for that is expressed by their being
"called"; and though their calling is here set before election, as in
[Pe2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010) yet it does not precede it;
the Arabic version reads, "chosen, called, faithful"; first "chosen" by
God the Father, then "called", not with the bare external call by the
ministry of the word, for, so, many are called, and not chosen; but by
special grace to special benefits, and with an holy and heavenly
calling, and which is irresistible, and without repentance; and being
called they remain "faithful": the meaning is, either that they have
faith, or are believers in Christ; which faith they have bestowed on
them in the effectual calling, as a fruit of electing grace; and by this
they overcome the world: or else, that they are persons of integrity and
uprightness, that are on the side of Christ; they are the faithful in
the Lord, and are made so by him; and they are faithful to him, and
abide by his Gospel and ordinances, and in his cause and interest, even
unto death; and so this character is expressive of the perseverance of
those who are chosen and called, even unto the end.

[Revelation 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 17:15</span></span>

And he saith unto me,.... That is, the angel, who proposed to give John
the interpretation of the vision, he went on with it as follows:

the waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth; see Gill on [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001),

are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues; denoting the vast
multitude of people, of which the several kingdoms, of divers languages,
consist, which belong to the jurisdiction of Rome Papal: it is an
eastern way of speaking, and is particularly used to express the various
kingdoms, and infinite number of people belonging to the Babylonish
monarchy, which was an emblem of the antichristian state, [Dan
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004) and these are compared to waters,
to many waters; which phrase sometimes is used for the sea, [Psa
107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023) because of the vast numbers of
them; the whole world wondered after the beast, and the kings and
inhabitants of the earth have been subject to the see of Rome; and
because of their overbearing force, carrying all before them; see [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007) [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003) and because, like waters, they
are continually upon the flux, one generation succeeding another; and
because of their instability, fickleness, and inconstancy, as in
religion, so in their constitution, they will hate the whore they love;
and as they frequently change and alter in their form, at last they will
utterly cease: so the Jews (w) interpret many waters, in [Sol
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#007) of all people, and of the kings of
the earth, and of the nations of the world; and they say, that many
waters never signify any other than all the nations, and those that are
appointed over them (x). So, "he drew me out of many waters", [Psa
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016) is by the Targum on the place
explained, he delivered me from many people. And so [Psa
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004) is paraphrased by the Targumist;

"people, "as rivers", and their streams, shall come, and make glad the
city of the Lord;''

see the Targum on [Isa 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007) and in [Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002) where it is observed kingdoms are
compared to waters (y).

\(w\) Targum in Cant. viii. 7. Shirhashirim Rabba fol. 26. 1. (x) Zohar
in Gen. fol. 51. 3. & Raya Mehimna in ib. & in Numb. fol. 105. 3.
Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 2. fol. 179. 4. (y) Yaikut Simeoni, par. 2. fol.
93. 2.

[Revelation 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 17:16</span></span>

And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast,.... [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003) and which are interpreted of ten
kings, [Rev 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012). The Alexandrian
copy, the Complutensian edition, and the Syriac Arabic, and Ethiopic
versions, read, "and the beast"; and then the sense is, that the ten
kings and states in particular, who have defended antichrist, and the
whole empire in general, which has bore up and supported the whore of
Rome:

these shall hate the whore; her principles and sentiments, her
doctrines, which are doctrines of devils, her wicked practices, her
idolatries, adulteries, murders, and thefts; they will repent of their
fornications with her, and cease from them; their love will be turned to
hatred, and the latter will be greater than ever the former was, like
Amnon's to Tamar; and as it usually is with men towards harlots, when
they see their follies, and how they have been deceived and abused by
them:

and shall make her desolate; leave her, quit her communion; no more
commit fornication with her, or join with her in her idolatrous worship;
but come out from that apostate church, and renounce all fellowship with
her, and persuade and engage as many as they can influence to do the
same:

and naked; strip her of her purple, scarlet colour, gold, pearls, and
precious stones; cease to give their power and strength, withhold their
taxes and tribute, deprive her of her power and authority, civil and
ecclesiastical, in their realms, and take away even her patrimony from
her; and not only so, but expose her shame and filthiness, her
abominable principles and practices, to all the world; which has been in
part done already:

and shall eat her flesh; not literally, but mystically; not out of love,
but hatred; they shall take that to themselves, and make use of, which
have fattened her, as bishoprics, and other benefices, lands, endowments
belonging to abbeys, and monasteries, and other religious houses; an
instance and example of which we have in King Henry the Eighth's time;
so some understand this phrase of devouring the substance of others, in
[Psa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002). So the Targumists often
interpret "flesh and fatness"; by "riches, goods", or substance; the
phrase in [Isa 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004) "the fatness of
his flesh shall wax lean", is paraphrased, , "the riches of his glory
shall be carried away"; and the words in [Mic
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#003) who shall also eat the flesh of my
people", &c. are rendered, "and they who spoil" , "the goods", or
"substance of my people, and take away their precious mammon, or money,
from them. And again, [Zac 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009) "let
the rest eat, everyone the flesh of another", is in the Targum, "let a
man spoil" "the goods or substance of his neighbour"; and in [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016) he shall eat the flesh of the
fat; the paraphrase is, "he shall" spoil "the goods or substance of the
rich".

And burn her with fire: alluding to the law in [Lev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009) which required that the daughter
of a priest, that played the whore, should be burnt with fire; and this
is to be understood literally of burning the city of Rome, the seat of
the whore, with fire; of which see [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008). It has been very near being
burnt in times past, as by Alaricus the Goth, Attila the Hun, Genseric
the Vandal, and by Totilas, and in later times by Charles the Fifth; and
would have been, had they not been dissuaded or diverted from it; and
which were so many preludes and warnings of its future fate: and we may
learn from hence, that Rome, and the Romish antichrist, will not be
destroyed by the Turks, but by the Christians; and by the same states,
and kingdoms, and princes, by which the whore of Rome has been supported
in her grandeur, power, and authority, who will revolt from Popery, and
embrace the pure Gospel of Christ: and this shows, that the ten horns,
or kingdoms, into which the Roman empire has been divided, will subsist
in this form at the destruction of Rome; wherefore, it has been rightly
observed by some, that not one of these kingdoms shall ever be able to
rise to universal monarchy. France has been for many years attempting
it, but in vain; and we may sit down easy and satisfied, assuring
ourselves with the greatest confidence, that all attempts this way will
be fruitless; there never will be another universal monarchy on earth
but that of Christ's; see [Dan 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037).

[Revelation 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 17:17</span></span>

For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will,.... By doing the
preceding things to the whore of Rome, whose destruction is according to
the will of God; it is his approving will, what he likes of, and will be
well pleased with; it is his will of command, what he will order to be
done, [Rev 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006) and it is his
determining will, his will of purpose, his decree, what he has resolved
shall be done; he has fixed the time of her reign, and longer than that
she shall not continue: and these kings, in destroying her, will not do
so much their own will, as the will of God, and God will put it into
their hearts to do it; he will work in them both to will and to do; he
will fill them with hatred to her; he will incline their minds to do the
above things, as it will be in the power of their hands to do them; he
who has the hearts of all men, and even of kings in his hands, and can
turn them as rivers of water, will move them hereunto, [Pro
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001) he that turned the hearts of the
Egyptians to hate his people Israel, [Psa
105:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#025) will turn the hearts of these
kings to hate the whore, and do unto her as is here predicted; and the
same God will do this, who has, on the other hand, already put into
their hearts to do the following things:

and to agree: this clause is wanting in the Alexandrian copy, and in the
Vulgate Latin version, and is the same with that of having one mind,
[Rev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013) that is, being of the same
religion; God giving them up to a reprobate mind, to believe a lie, that
they might be damned; which must be understood not of the same
individuals, but of their predecessors; unless this is to be interpreted
of their agreeing together against the whore, to pull her down, and set
up the pure worship and service of God; for this is a blessing of grace
from God, who gives his people one heart and one way, that they may fear
him, [Jer 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039) but the former sense
seems best, since it follows,

and give their kingdom unto the beast; the eighth king, and seventh
head, the pope of Rome; to whom they have given their power and strength
in things civil and ecclesiastical, their wealth and riches; and have
received their crowns from him, and have held their kingdoms by him, and
become tributary to him: and this is done, and will be,

until the words of God shall be fulfilled; concerning the afflictions of
his church and people, and the reign of antichrist, for the space of
forty and two months, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002) all
which while they are fulfilling the secret will of God, unknown to them,
and yet act against his revealed will, and break his commands; just as
the Jews, ignorant of the prophecies of the Old Testament, fulfilled
them in condemning Christ, [Act 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027).
That God should put it into the hearts of these kings to fulfil his
will, in destroying the whore of Rome, is easily received; but there
seems some difficulty that he should put it into their hearts to agree
and give their kingdom to the beast, which was sinful: now this he did,
not by infusing sin into them, which is contrary to his pure and holy
nature; but by leaving them, and giving them up to their own hearts'
lusts; stirring up, and moving upon their minds, and directing the
motions of it, to such and such objects, which they readily and
voluntarily fell in with; and yet the concern of God herein does not,
nor do his decrees about sin infringe the liberty of the will in acting,
or excuse the sinfulness of the action, or make God the author of sin;
as the instances of selling of Joseph by his brethren, and the
crucifixion of Christ by the Jews, show.

[Revelation 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 17:18</span></span>

And the woman which thou sawest,.... [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003) as there described,

is that great city, often mentioned in this book; great Babylon, the
city of Rome, [Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008) which reigneth
over the kings of the earth; which then reigned in John's time over the
kings of the earth; and this clearly points out the city of Rome, for
there was no other city then, but that, which reigned over the kings of
the earth; that was then the metropolis of the Roman empire, to which
the whole world was subject; and therefore it is called all the world,
[Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001) and since, all the kings of
the empire have been under the jurisdiction of Rome Papal. It was
formerly called Urbs Regum, a "city of kings" (z), either for the reason
in the text, or because its inhabitants looked like kings.

\(z\) Justin. l. 18. c. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 18](rev018)

</div>
