<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom000)  [Next](rom002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS 1

This chapter contains the inscription of the epistle, and salutation,
the preface to it, and the grand proposition of justification by faith,
so much enlarged on afterwards; and that this could not be by the law of
nature, and the works of it among the Gentiles, is demonstrated by a
detail of their horrible wickedness, impiety, and unrighteousness. In
the inscription an account is given of the author of the epistle, who is
described in [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001) by his name
Paul: by his relation to Christ, a servant of his; and by his office, an
apostle, whose business and concern were with the Gospel; to which he
was separated. This Gospel is commended from the author of it, who is
God himself; and from the antiquity of it, [Rom
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002), being as ancient as the writings
of the prophets; and from the subject of it, being the Lord Jesus
Christ; who is described by his relation to God, his Son, by his
dominion over the saints, their Lord, by both his natures, human and
divine; his human nature, as being of the seed of David, his divine
nature, being the Son of God, [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004), which is declared by the power he
is possessed of, by the Spirit of holiness that is in him, by his
resurrection from the dead, and by the apostles receiving from him grace
to fit them for their office, and by the office itself: the end of which
was to make some among all nations obedient to him, [Rom
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005), among whom were the saints at
Rome, who were called by him, and after his name, [Rom
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006), which introduces the account of
the persons to whom this epistle is written, who are described, [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007), by the place of their abode,
Rome; by their interest in the love of God; and by the effect, fruit,
and evidence of it, their effectual calling; and then follows the
apostle's usual salutation, as in all his epistles, in which he wishes
grace and peace for them, from God the Father, and from Christ. The
preface begins [Rom 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008), in which are
a thanksgiving to God, through Christ, for all the saints at Rome,
particularly on account of their faith, for which they were everywhere
so famous; an appeal to God, [Rom 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009),
for the truth of his incessant prayers for them, and particularly, [Rom
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010), that this was a request he made,
that if it was the will of God, he might have a speedy and prosperous
journey to, them; an expression of strong affection to them, and of his
great desire to see them, [Rom 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011),
his end in which was partly for their sakes, to communicate spiritual
things to them for their establishment, and partly for his own comfort,
and the increase of the mutual faith of both, [Rom
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012), also a vindication of himself,
[Rom 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013), showing, that it was not
any fault of his, or any neglect of them by him, that he had not been
with them as yet, but some things hindered him, in the execution of his
purpose to come to them; to which he was moved, partly by the hope of
having fruit among them, as among others, and partly through the
obligation that lay upon him by virtue of his office, to preach the
Gospel to all sorts of men, [Rom 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014),
he expresses his willingness and readiness to preach the Gospel to them
at Rome, as soon as an opportunity would offer, [Rom
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#015), which was his work and office,
what he delighted in, was closely attached to, and by no means ashamed
of, [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), partly because of the
nature of it, it was the Gospel, good news and true: and partly because
of the author and subject of it, Christ; as also because of the efficacy
of it in the salvation of Jews and Gentiles; and likewise because of a
principal doctrine revealed in it, [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), the doctrine of justification by
faith, in the righteousness of Christ, confirmed and illustrated by a
passage out of [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004), and which he
particularly mentions, because he intended to dwell upon it in this
epistle: and in order to show that the Gentiles could not be justified
in the sight of God by their obedience to the law, and the light of
nature, he observes, that they were the objects of the wrath of God,
[Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018), and that very justly,
because they sinned knowingly; they had some knowledge of the truth, but
they would not profess it: and that they had such knowledge of it, he
proves from the author of it, God, who showed it to them, [Rom
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019), and from the means of it, by
which they must, and did arrive to some degree of it, namely, the works
of creation, [Rom 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020). The apostle
goes on to expose the ingratitude of them, the vanity of their minds,
the pride and folly of their hearts, [Rom
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021), the gross idolatry they were
guilty of, [Rom 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023), for which
idolatry they were given up to their own hearts' lusts, to commit the
foulest and most scandalous iniquities, even to commit sodomitical
practices, and unnatural lusts, both men and women, [Rom
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024). And so far were they from having
a righteousness to justify them before God, that they were titled with
all unrighteousness; and a large list of the vilest sins, being
committed by them, is given; and a catalogue of the worst of sinners, as
among them, [Rom 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029). All which are
aggravated by their knowledge of the will of God, through the light of
nature, that these things were contrary to it, and were deserving of
death; and yet they both did them, and were delighted with those that
committed them also: the inference which he leaves to be deduced from
hence, and which may easily be deduced, is, that therefore there can be
no justification of such persons in the sight of God by their own works.

[Romans 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 1:1</span></span>

Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ,.... The name of the author of this
epistle is Paul, who formerly was called Saul. Some think his name was
changed upon his own conversion; others, upon the conversion of the
Roman deputy Sergius Paulus, [Act
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007); others, that he was so called
from the littleness of his stature; but rather it should seem that he
had two names, which was usual with the Jews; one by which they went
among the Gentiles, and another by they were called in their own land;
See Gill on [Act 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009). "A servant of
Jesus Christ"; not a servant of sin, nor of Satan, nor of man, nor of
Moses and his law, nor of the traditions of the elders, but of Jesus
Christ; and not by creation only, but by redemption, and by powerful
efficacious grace in conversion; which is no ways contrary to true
liberty; nor a disgraceful, but a most honourable character; and which
chiefly regards him as a minister of the Gospel:

called to be an apostle: an apostle was one that was immediately sent by
Christ, and had his authority and doctrine directly from him, and had a
power of working miracles from him, in confirmation of the truth of his
mission, authority, and doctrine; all which were to be found in the
author of this epistle, who did not thrust himself into this office, or
take this honour to himself, of which he always judged himself unworthy,
but was "called" to it according to the will, and by the grace of God:

separated unto the Gospel of God. This may regard either God's eternal
purpose concerning him, his preordination of him from eternity to be a
preacher of the Gospel, to which he was separated from his mother's
womb, [Gal 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015); or the separation of
him to that work made by the order of the Spirit of God, [Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002). The phrase used is either in
allusion to the priests and Levites, who were separated from their
brethren the children of Israel, to their sacred employments; or rather
to the apostle's having been "a Pharisee", which signifies "one
separated", as he was now; only with this difference, before he was
separated to the law, but now "to the Gospel", to preach and defend it,
which he did with all faithfulness and integrity; the excellency of
which Gospel is signified by its being called "the Gospel of God": he is
the author of it; his grace is the subject of it; and he it is who
commits it to men, qualifies them for the preaching of it, and succeeds
them in it.

[Romans 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 1:2</span></span>

Which he had promised afore,.... The Gospel is here further commended
from the antiquity it: it was no novel doctrine, an upstart notion, but
what God had conceived in his own breast from eternity. This mystery was
hid in him from the beginning of the world, and was ordained before the
world was; in time God was pleased to make it known to the sons of men;
he "promised" it, he spoke of it, and declared it

by his prophets, Isaiah and others, "afore" the Apostle Paul was called
forth to be a preacher of it; which promise, or promises of it, lie

in the Holy Scriptures; the books of the Old Testament, so called from
the author, matter, and usefulness of them. The apostle speaks in the
language of his nation, for the Jews frequently call the Bible,
writings, Holy Ones; "for", say they, , "all the Scriptures are holy"
(c), and style them, , "Scriptures of holiness", or holy Scriptures (d).

\(c\) Misn. Yadaim, c. 3. sect. 5. (d) Misn. Parah, c. 10. sect. 3. T.
Bab. Sabbat, fol. 116. 2.

[Romans 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 1:3</span></span>

Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,.... These words are in
connection with "the Gospel of God", [Rom
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001), and express the subject matter of
it, the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord; for Christ, as the Son of
God, the Saviour of sinners, the only Mediator between God and men, who
is Lord both of the dead and living, is the sum and substance of the
Gospel: he is here described by his relation to God, his Son, of the
same nature with him, equal to him, and distinct from him; by his usual
names, "Jesus Christ", the one signifying a "Saviour", the other
"anointed", and both, that he was anointed of God to be the Saviour of
his people; and by his dominion over the saints our Lord, not merely by
creation, but by redemption and grace, and happy is the person that can
claim interest in him, as is here done; and by the distinction of
natures in him:

which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; this
respects Christ in his human nature, who was made flesh, and of a woman;
and shows his existence before his incarnation, and the immediate power
and hand of God in it; and which was done, not by transmutation of him
into flesh, but by an assumption of human nature into union with his
divine person: he is said to be made "of the seed of David"; this points
out the family from whence he sprung; designs the posterity of David,
particularly Mary; has regard to the promise made to David, which God
fulfilled; and shows the royal descent of Christ: it is added,
"according to the flesh"; that is, according to his human nature; which
phrase does not denote the corruption, but the truth of that nature; and
supposes that he had another nature, otherwise there would have been no
need of this limiting and restrictive clause.

[Romans 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 1:4</span></span>

And declared to be the Son of God,.... Not made as he is said to be
before, when his incarnation is spoken of; nor did he begin to be the
Son of God, when he was made of the seed of David, but he, the Son of
God, who existed as such, from everlasting, was manifested in the flesh,
or human nature: and this his divine sonship, and proper deity, are
declared and made evident,

with, or "by"

his power; which has appeared in the creation of all things out of
nothing; in upholding all things in their beings; in the government of
the world, and works of Providence; in the miracles he wrought; in his
performing the great work of redemption; in the success of his Gospel,
to the conversion of sinners; and in the preservation of his churches
and people: here it seems chiefly to regard the power of Christ in
raising the dead, since it follows, and which is to be connected with
this clause,

by the resurrection from the dead; and designs either the resurrection
of others, as of Lazarus, and some other persons, in his lifetime, and
of some at his resurrection, and of all at the last day: or the
resurrection of his own body, which dying he had power to raise up
again, and did; and which declared him to be, or clearly made it appear
that he was the Son of God, a divine person, truly and properly God: and
this was done

according to the Spirit of holiness; which may be understood of the Holy
Spirit, the third person in the Trinity, who is holy in himself, and the
author of holiness in the saints; and who is the declarer of Christ's
sonship, partly by bearing a testimony to it in the word, and in the
hearts of believers, and chiefly by being concerned in the resurrection
of the body of Christ from the dead; or else by the Spirit of holiness
may be meant the divine nature of Christ, which, as it is holy, so by it
Christ offered himself to God, and by it was quickened, or made alive,
when he had been put to death in the flesh; and which must be a clear
and strong proof of his being truly the Son of God.

[Romans 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 1:5</span></span>

By whom we have received grace and apostleship,.... That is, either by
the Holy Spirit, from whom all grace and gifts come, qualifying for the
discharge of any office; or by the Lord Jesus Christ, who is full of
grace and truth, has received gifts for, and gives them to men to fit
them for whatsoever service he is pleased to call them to. By "grace and
apostleship" may be meant, either one and the same thing, the favour and
honour of being the apostles of Christ; or different things, and the one
in order to the other. Grace may design special saving grace in calling,
justification, pardon, and adoption, and sanctification, which was
received in common with other saints, and is absolutely necessary to an
apostle, and to any ordinary minister of the word; or the doctrine of
grace, which they received from Christ, and dispensed to others; or
rather the gifts of grace, and the various measures thereof, which they
received from their ascended Lord and King, by which they were furnished
for apostleship, that is, the work and office of apostles; to which they
were called by Christ, and from whom they received a commission to
execute it. The apostle takes in others sides himself, and says, "we
have received"; partly for the sake of modesty, and partly to keep up
his equal title with others to this office; and since this is had in a
way of receiving, which supposes giving, and excludes boasting, it
obliges to make use of all grace and gifts to the glory of Christ, by
whom they are received. The end for which they received such an office,
and grace to fit them for it, was, "for obedience to the faith"; that
men might be brought by the ministry of the word to obey the faith,
Christ the object of faith; to submit to his righteousness, and the way
of salvation by him, and to be subject to his ordinances or to obey the
doctrine of faith, which is not barely to hear it, and notionally
receive it, but to embrace it heartily by faith, and retain it, in
opposition to a disbelief and contempt of it; and which is the end and
design of the Gospel ministration to bring persons to, Moreover, by

obedience to the faith, or "obedience of faith", as it may be rendered,
may be meant the grace of faith, attended with evangelical obedience;
for obedience, rightly performed, is only that which is by faith, and
springs from it. Now grace and apostleship were received, in order to be
exercised

among all nations; not in Judea only, to which the first commission of
apostleship was limited, but in all the nations of the world, as the
commission renewed by Christ after his resurrection ordered; and that
some among all nations of the earth might, by the power of divine grace
accompanying the word, be brought to faith and obedience: and all this,
the qualifications for the office, the due exercise of it in all the
world, and the success that attended it, were

for his name; for the honour and glory of Christ, in whose name they
went, and which they bore and carried among the Gentiles, out of whom he
was pleased "to take a people for his name", [Act
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014).

[Romans 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 1:6</span></span>

Among whom are ye also,.... The Romans, though they were the chief, were
among the nations of the world to whom the apostles were sent; and since
Paul was called to be an apostle, and had, as others, grace and
apostleship, and particularly the apostleship of the uncircumcision, or
was ordained a teacher of the Gentiles, more especially he was an
apostle to them, and as such was to be regarded by them. This seems to
point out what they were originally; they were among all nations which
lay in darkness; and were without Christ and hope, and God in the world;
but now,

the called of Jesus Christ. The calling here spoken of is not to an
office, or a mere external one by the ministry of the word, but an
internal special call by the grace of God; and which is irresistible,
efficacious, and unchangeable, and is an high, holy, and heavenly one;
by it persons are called out of darkness into light, out of bondage into
liberty, out of the world, from the company of the men of it, and the
sinful pleasures thereof, to fellowship with Christ and his saints, and
off a dependence on themselves, and their own righteousness, to the
grace and righteousness of Christ, and to eternal glory. The persons so
called are the elect of God, who are secured in Christ, and redeemed by
him, and who has a concern with the Father and Spirit in the calling of
them: hence they are styled, "the called of Jesus Christ"; they are
called by him, and after his name; he has an interest in them; as they
were before his chosen and redeemed ones, they are now his called ones;
as Jacob and Israel of old were named of God, "my called", [Isa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012); so these were named Christ's
called ones; and who by calling came to be partakers of him and of his
grace.

[Romans 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 1:7</span></span>

To all that be in Rome,.... These words contain both the inscription of
the epistle, and the apostle's usual salutation, as in all his epistles,
The inscription of it is not to the Roman emperor; nor to the Roman
senate, nor to all the inhabitants in Rome; but to all the saints there,
whether rich or poor, bond or free, male or female, Jew or Gentile,
without any distinction, being all one in Christ Jesus: and these are
described as

beloved of God; not for any loveliness there was in them, nor because of
any love in them to God, nor on account of their obedience and
righteousness; but through the free favour and sovereign will and
pleasure of God, who loved them before he called them, even from
eternity, and will love them to eternity; which love of his is the
source and spring of all the blessings of grace, and, among the rest, of
the effectual calling: hence this character is set before the following
one,

called to be saints; not born so, nor become so through their own power,
but were so by calling grace, as a fruit of everlasting love; men are
first beloved of the Lord, and then called to be his saints. The
salutation follows; the things wished for in it are,

grace to you, and peace: by "grace" is not meant ministerial gifts,
which are not common to all the saints; nor the Gospel, which was at
Rome already; nor the love and favour of God, which these persons were
sharers in, as appears from their above characters; nor the principle of
grace, which was now formed there in their effectual calling; but an
increase of grace, as to its degrees, acts, and exercise; every grace is
imperfect in this respect, and those who have the most stand in need of
more; there is such a thing as growing in grace, which is very
desirable, and may be expected from God, who is able to make all grace
to abound, and has promised to give more: by "peace" is meant, peace
with God through Christ; peace in their own consciences, and with one
another; all manner of prosperity inward and outward here, and eternal
happiness hereafter. The persons from whom these are desired are,

God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ; God the Father of Christ is
spoken of as our Father, which is by adoption; partly to engage fear and
reverence of him at his throne; and partly to encourage freedom and
boldness there, and an expectation of receiving every blessing of grace
from him: "the Lord Jesus Christ" is mentioned, as being the person
through whom, and for whose sake, all the blessings of grace and peace
are communicated to us; and being put upon a level with the Father in
these petitions, shows him to be equal with him, and so truly and
properly God. "Grace" may be thought to be particularly wished for from
the Father, though not exclusive of Christ, since he is the God of all
grace, who has treasured up a fulness of it in his Son. And "peace" may
be considered as desired to be had from Christ, though not exclusive of
the Father; since the covenant of peace was made with him, the
chastisement of peace was laid on him, and he has made peace by the
blood of his cross, and is the giver of it to his people.

[Romans 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 1:8</span></span>

First, I thank my God, through Jesus Christ, for you all,.... After the
inscription and salutation, follows a thanksgiving, which begins the
epistle: it is usual with the apostle in all his epistles to make
requests for the churches, with thanksgivings for mercies; his view in
it was, to glorify God, to testify his affection to the saints, and to
show that all they had must be referred to the grace of God. The object
of thanksgiving is God not merely as a creator and preserver, but as a
Father, the Father of Christ, and our Father in Christ; as the one God,
and our God, Father, Son, and Spirit. The apostle styles him, my God;
which distinguishes him from all others, points out his particular
interest in him, expresses his knowledge of him and faith in him, and
demonstrates that what he did now, he did in faith. The person through
whom thanks are given is Jesus Christ. There is no coming to God but
through Christ, nor is any sacrifice either of prayer or praise
acceptable without him, and since all we have come through him, it is
but reasonable that thanks for them should be returned by and through
him; the persons for whom this thanksgiving is made were all the Romans,
all the saints at Rome, the members of the church there, of whatsoever
rank and degree, and in whatsoever, state and condition; the thing for
which the apostle was thankful for particularly was, not that their city
was mistress of the whole world, and their fame for power, wealth, and
grandeur, was spread abroad far and near; but, says he,

that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world; which shows
that faith is a grace of great account: God has put an honour upon it,
by making it the receiver of all his gifts, and that gives glory to God,
and without it nothing is acceptable to him; it answers many excellent
uses and purposes in experience; it is that by which saints live upon
Christ in this world, and look to the glories of another. This also
shows that the saints at Rome did not hide their faith in their breasts,
but declared it to others; a public profession both of the grace and
doctrine of faith is to be made, and constantly held; both are to be
shown forth to others, by deeds as well as words; which greatly redounds
to the honour of such churches, causes joy in other churches, and in all
the ministers of the Gospel, and is the occasion of many thanksgivings
to God.

[Romans 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 1:9</span></span>

For God is my witness, whom I serve,.... These words are an appeal to
God, and carry in them the nature and form of an oath; the reason of the
apostle's using it was, because he was personally unknown to the Romans,
and they to him, and so might doubt of his affectionate regard unto
them; and therefore for the confirmation thereof he uses it: this was a
case which was only known to God and himself, and hence he appeals to
him for the truth of it. The object of his oath or appeal, or by which
he speaks, is not himself, or anything that belonged to him, nor any
creature in heaven or on earth, but God; who in a solemn oath is only to
be appealed to and sworn by: he describes him as the God "whom he
served", to distinguish him from all false gods, and to show that he
that takes an oath, should be one that fears and serves the Lord; what
he served him in was not the law, but

the Gospel of his Son; Jesus Christ, who is the author, minister, and
subject matter of it: he served him in it, by preaching, spreading, and
defending it. This is a service, and a very laborious one, and makes for
the honour and glory of God. The manner in which he served him was, as
he says,

with my Spirit; either with the Spirit of God, which was given to him;
or in a spiritual manner, in opposition to the carnal worship of the
Jews; internally, in opposition to bodily exercise only, and
voluntarily, with his whole heart, soul, and spirit. The matter or
substance of his appeal or oath was,

that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers; whence
may be observed, that prayer to God ought to be constant; and that we
should be concerned for others as well as for ourselves; all the saints
should share therein.

[Romans 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 1:10</span></span>

Making request, if by any means now at length,.... A principal thing,
which be incessantly and importunately requested at the throne of grace,
was, that he might have an opportunity of coming to them; that God in
his providence would open a way for him; and that he might have a safe
and comfortable journey in a very little time; all which he submits to
the will of God, as a good man ought to do; and which he thus expresses,

I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God, to come unto you;
see [Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013).

[Romans 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 1:11</span></span>

For I long to see you,.... Not the city of Rome, which was one of
Austin's three wishes to have seen in its glory; nor the emperor of it,
nor the senate in it, nor its populous inhabitants, fine buildings,
riches and grandeur; but the poor saints there, which were the excellent
men of the earth, of the whole Roman empire, and in whom was his
delight: his desire to see them was not to gratify his curiosity, nor to
spend his time in idle chat with them, nor with a view to enrich himself
by them; but, says he,

that I may impart some spiritual gift: not any extraordinary gift of the
Spirit; but spiritual light, knowledge, peace, and comfort, through the
exercise of his ministerial gift: whence it may be observed, that that
which qualities men for the preaching of the word to the profit of
others, is a gift, a gift by grace; a spiritual one, which comes from
the Spirit of God, and may be, and is to be imparted to others in the
free use and exercise of it; and that,

to the end that saints may be established; for such who are called by
grace, need establishing. They are indeed in a safe state and condition;
they are encircled in the arms of everlasting love, they are fixed in
the hands of Christ, secured in an everlasting covenant, established on
the rock of ages, and settled in a state from whence they can never
fall: yet, notwithstanding this, they are sometimes very unstable in
their hearts, in their frames, in the exercise of grace, and the
discharge of duty, and in professing and adhering to the doctrines of
the Gospel; wherefore they need establishing, as to a more firm
persuasion of interest in the love of God, and in the covenant of grace,
as to a more stable exercise of grace in Christ, and as to a more
constant discharge of duty, and steady profession of adherence to the
truths of the Gospel; to all which the ministration of the word has a
tendency, with a divine blessing.

[Romans 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 1:12</span></span>

That is, that I may be comforted together with you,.... This is a
further explanation of his view, in being desirous of coming to them,
and preaching: the Gospel among them; for what makes for establishment,
makes for comfort; and what makes for comfort, makes for establishment;
and when souls are established, ministers are comforted as well as they;
and whilst ministers are imparting their spiritual gifts for the use of
others, they themselves are sometimes comforted of God in their work,
and particularly when they find there is an agreement between their
doctrine, and the experience of the saints:

by the mutual faith both of you and me. The grace of faith is the same
in all the saints, and so is the doctrine of it, as dispensed by
Christ's faithful ministers, and experimentally received and embraced by
his people; the consideration of which has a very great influence on the
comfort and establishment of each other; nor are any so perfect, but
they may receive benefit from others, even though inferior to them.

[Romans 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 1:13</span></span>

Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren,.... The apostle calls them
brethren, because many of them were Jews, his brethren and kinsmen
according to the flesh, and all of them were his brethren in a spiritual
relation; and this he does to express his affection to them, and engage
their attention and credit to him, and particularly to this matter which
he now acquaints them with, being unwilling they should be ignorant of
it;

that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you: it was not a sudden start
of mind, or a desire that lately arose up in him, but a settled
resolution and determination, and which he had often made:

but was let hitherto; either by God, who had work for him to do in other
places; or by Satan, who sometimes by divine permission has had such
power and influence; see [Th1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018), or
through the urgent necessities of other churches, which required his
stay with them longer than he intended: his end in taking up at several
times such a resolution of coming to them was, says he,

that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among other
Gentiles: by fruit he means, not any reward of his labour, either
temporal or eternal; but the conversion of sinners, the edification of
saints, and the fruitfulness of believers in grace and works. The
apostle seems to allude to the casting of seed into the earth: Christ's
ministers' are husbandmen, who sow the seed of the word, which lies some
time under the clods; wherefore patience is necessary to wait its
springing up, first in the blade, and then in the ear, then in the full
corn in the ear, when it brings forth fruit; all which depend on the
blessing of God: and when he adds, "as among other Gentiles", his design
is not so much to let them know that they were as other Gentiles, upon a
level with them, had no pre-eminence as citizens of Rome, over other
saints, being all one in Christ Jesus; as to observe to them his success
in other places, where he had been preaching the Gospel of the grace of
God.

[Romans 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 1:14</span></span>

I am a debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians,.... The meaning
is, that he was obliged by the call he had from God, the injunction that
was laid upon him by him, and the gifts with which he was qualified, to
preach the Gospel to all sorts of men; who are here distinguished into
Greeks and Barbarians: sometimes by Greeks are meant the Gentiles in
general, in opposition to the Jews; see [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016); but here they design only a part
of the Gentiles, the inhabitants of Greece, in opposition to all the
world besides; for the Greeks used to call all others that were not of
themselves Barbarians (e): or else by Greeks are meant the more
cultivated nations of the world, and by Barbarians the ruder and more
uncivil parts of it; to which agrees the next division of mankind,

both to the wise and to the unwise. The Gospel was to be preached "to
the wise"; such who thought themselves to be so, and were so with
respect to human wisdom and knowledge; though it should be despised by
them, as it was, and though few of them were called by it, some were,
and still are, though not many; and such wisdom there is in the Gospel,
as the wisest of men may learn by it, will be entertaining to them, is
far beyond their contempt, and what will serve to exercise their talents
and abilities, to search into the knowledge of, and rightly to
understand; and it must be preached "to the unwise"; for such God has
chosen to confound the wise; these he calls by his grace, and reveals
his Gospel to, whilst he hides it from the wise and prudent; and there
is that in the Gospel which is plain and easy to the weakest mind,
enlightened by the Spirit of God.

\(e\) Cornel. Nepos, l. 1. c. 2, 7. & 2, 3. & 3. 6. & 4. 1. & passim.
Quint. Curtius, l. 3. c. 4, 7. & 6. 5. & passim.

[Romans 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 1:15</span></span>

So, as much as in me is, I am ready,.... This explains what he was a
debtor to one and another for, namely,

to preach the Gospel; expresses the readiness of his mind to that work,
whatever difficulties lay in his way; and declares what a willing mind
he had to preach it also to the Romans, as elsewhere:

to you that are at Rome also; the metropolis of the Roman empire, a very
public place, the seat of Satan, and where was the heat of persecution.

[Romans 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 1:16</span></span>

For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,.... The reason why he was
so ready and willing to preach it, even where he ran the greatest risk
of his character and life, was, because it was "the Gospel of Christ" he
preached, and he was not ashamed of it. This supposes that some were,
though the apostle was not, ashamed of the Gospel; as all such are who
hide and conceal it, who have abilities to preach it, and do not: or who
preach, but not the Gospel; or who preach the Gospel only in part, who
own that in private, they will not preach in public, and use ambiguous
words, of doubtful signification, to cover themselves; who blend the
Gospel with their own inventions, seek to please men, and live upon
popular applause, regard their own interest, and not Christ's, and
cannot bear the reproach of his Gospel. It expresses, that the apostle
was not ashamed of it; that is, to preach it, which he did fully and
faithfully, plainly and consistently, openly and publicly, and boldly,
in the face of all opposition: and it designs more than is expressed, as
that he had the utmost value for it, and esteemed it his highest honour
that he was employed in preaching it: his reasons for this were, because
it was "the Gospel of Christ"; which Christ himself preached, which he
had learnt by revelation from him, and of which he was the sum and
substance: and because

it is the power of God; not essentially, but declaratively; as the power
of God is seen in making men ministers of it, in the doctrines held
forth in it, in the manner in which it was spread in the world, in the
opposition it met with, in the continuance and increase of it
notwithstanding the power and cunning of men, and in the shortness of
time, in which so much good was done by it in the several parts of the
world: it is the power of God organically or instrumentally; as it is a
means made use of by God in quickening dead sinners, enlightening blind
eyes, unstopping deaf ears, softening hard hearts, and making of enemies
friends; to which add, the manner in which all this is done, suddenly,
secretly, effectually, and by love, and not force: the extent of this
power is,

unto salvation; the Gospel is a declaration and revelation of salvation
by Christ, and is a means of directing and encouraging souls to lay hold
upon it. The persons to whom it is so, are in general,

everyone that believeth: this does not suppose that faith gives the
Gospel its virtue and efficacy; but is only descriptive of the persons
to whom the Gospel, attended with the power and grace of God, is
eventually efficacious: and particularly it was so,

to the Jew first; who as they had formerly the advantage of the
Gentiles, much every way, through the peculiar privileges which were
conferred on them; so the Gospel was first preached to them by Christ
and his disciples; and even when it was ordered to be carried into the
Gentile world, it was to begin with them, and became effectual for the
salvation of many of them:

and also to the Greek; to the Gentile; for after the Jews had rejected
it, as many being called by it as Jehovah thought fit, at that time, it
was preached to the Gentiles with great success; which was the mystery
hid from ages and generations past, but now made manifest.

[Romans 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 1:17</span></span>

For therein is the righteousness of God revealed,.... By "the
righteousness of God", is not meant the essential righteousness of God,
the rectitude of his nature, his righteousness in fulfilling his
promises, and his punitive justice, which though revealed in the Gospel,
yet not peculiar to it; nor the righteousness by which Christ himself is
righteous, either as God, or as Mediator; but that righteousness which
he wrought out by obeying the precepts, and bearing the penalty of the
law in the room of his people, and by which they are justified in the
sight of God: and this is called "the righteousness of God", in
opposition to the righteousness of men: and because it justifies men in
the sight of God; and because of the concern which Jehovah, Father, Son,
and Spirit, have in it. Jehovah the Father sent his Son to work it out,
and being wrought out, he approves and accepts of it, and imputes it to
his elect: Jehovah the Son is the author of it by his obedience and
death; and Jehovah the Spirit discovers it to sinners, works faith in
them to lay hold upon it, and pronounces the sentence of justification
by it in their consciences. Now this is said to be "revealed" in the
Gospel, that is, it is taught in the Gospel; that is the word of
righteousness, the ministration of it; it is manifested in and by the
Gospel. This righteousness is not known by the light of nature, nor by
the law of Moses; it was hid under the shadows of the ceremonial law,
and is brought to light only by the Gospel; it is hid from every natural
man, even from the most wise and prudent, and from God's elect
themselves before conversion, and is only made known to believers, to
whom it is revealed:

from faith to faith; that is, as say some, from the faith of God to the
faith of men; from the faith of preachers to the faith of hearers; from
the faith of the Old to the faith of the New Testament saints; or rather
from one degree of faith to another; for faith, as it grows and
increases, has clearer sights of this righteousness, as held forth in
the Gospel. For the proof of this, a passage of Scripture is cited,

as it is written, [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004);

the just shall live by faith: "a just", or righteous man is, not
everyone who thinks himself, or is thought by others to be so; nor are
any so by their obedience to the law of works; but he is one that is
made righteous by the righteousness of Christ imputed to him, which is
before said to be revealed in the Gospel. The life which this man lives,
and "shall live", does not design a natural or corporeal life, and a
continuance of that, for such die a natural death, as other men; nor an
eternal life, for though they shall so live, yet not by faith; but a
spiritual life, a life of justification on Christ, of holiness from him,
of communion with him, and of peace and joy; which spiritual life shall
be continued, and never be lost. The manner in which the just lives, is
"by faith". In the prophet Habakkuk, the words are, "the just shall
live" "by his faith" [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)); which
the Septuagint render, "by my faith": and the apostle only reads, "by
faith", omitting the affix, as well known, and easy to be supplied: for
faith, when given by God, and exercised by the believer, is his own, and
by it he lives; not upon it, but by it upon Christ the object of it;
from whom, in a way of believing, he derives his spiritual life, and all
the comforts of it.

[Romans 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 1:18</span></span>

For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven,.... The apostle having
hinted at the doctrine of justification by faith in the righteousness of
Christ; and which he designed more largely to insist upon in this
epistle, and to prove that there can be no justification of a sinner in
the sight of God by the deeds of the law, in order to set this matter in
a clear light, from hence, to the end of the chapter, and in the
following ones, represents the sad estate and condition of the Gentiles
with the law of nature, and of the Jews with the law of Moses; by which
it most clearly appears, that neither of them could be justified by
their obedience to the respective laws under which they were, but that
they both stood in need of the righteousness of God. By "the wrath of
God" is meant the displicency and indignation of God at sin and sinners;
his punitive justice, and awful vengeance; the judgments which he
executes in this world; and that everlasting displeasure of his, and
wrath to come in another world, which all through sin are deserving of,
some are appointed to, God's elect are delivered from, through Christ's
sustaining it, in their room and stead, and which comes and abides on
all impenitent and unbelieving persons. This is said to be "revealed",
where? not in the Gospel, in which the righteousness of God is revealed;
unless the Gospel be taken for the books of the four Evangelists, or for
the Gospel dispensation, or for that part of the ministry of a Gospel
preacher, which represents the wrath of God as the desert of sin, the
dreadfulness of it, and the way to escape it; for the Gospel, strictly
taken, is grace, good news, glad tidings, and not wrath and damnation;
though indeed in Christ's sufferings for the sins of his people, which
the Gospel gives us an account of, there is a great display of the wrath
of God, and of his indignation against sin: but this wrath of God is
revealed in the law, it is known by the light of nature, and to be
perceived in the law of Moses, and may be observed in the Scriptures,
where are many instances and examples of divine wrath and displeasure;
as in the total destruction of the old world by a world wide flood, the
burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, turning Lot's wife into a pillar of salt,
the plagues of Egypt, and the several instances mentioned in this
chapter. This wrath is said to be God's wrath "from heaven", by the
awful blackness which covers the heavens, the storms and tempests raised
in them, and by pouring down water or fire in a surprising manner, on
the inhabitants of the world; or "from heaven", that is, openly,
manifestly, in the sight of all; or from God who is in heaven, and not
from second causes; and more especially it will be revealed from heaven,
when Christ shall descend from thence at the day of judgment: the
subject matter or object of it,

against, or "upon" which it is revealed, are,

all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men; that is, all ungodly and
unrighteous men; or all men who are guilty of ungodliness, the breach of
the first table of the law, which respects the worship of God, and of
unrighteousness, the breach of the second table of the law, which
regards our neighbours' good: and these persons are further described as
such,

who hold the truth in unrighteousness: meaning either such who know the
Gospel, which is "the truth", and do not profess it openly, but hold and
imprison it in their minds, which is a great piece of unrighteousness;
or if they do profess it, do not live up to it in their lives: or rather
the Gentile philosophers are designed, who are spoken of in the
following verse; See Gill on [Rom
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022); who had some knowledge of the
truth of the divine Being, and his perfections, and of the difference
between moral good and evil; but did not like to retain it themselves,
nor communicate all they knew to others, nor did they live according to
that knowledge which they had.

[Romans 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 1:19</span></span>

Because that which may be known of God,.... There are some things which
could not be known of God by the light of nature; as a trinity of
persons in the Godhead; the knowledge of God in Christ as Mediator; the
God-man and Mediator Jesus Christ; his incarnation, sufferings, death,
and resurrection; the will of God to save sinners by a crucified Jesus;
the several peculiar doctrines of the Gospel, particularly the
resurrection of the dead, and the manner of worshipping of God with
acceptance: but then there are some things which may be known of God,
without a revelation. Adam had a perfect knowledge of him; and his sons,
though fallen, even the very Heathens have some notion of him, as that
there is a God; and by the light of nature it might be known that there
is but one God, who is glorious, full of majesty, and possessed of all
perfections, as that he is all powerful, wise, good and righteous: and
this

is manifest in them, or "to them"; by the light that is given them: it
is light by which that which may be known of God is manifest; and this
is the light of nature, which every man has that comes into the world;
and this is internal, it is in him, in his mind and conscience, and is
communicated to him by God, and that by infusion or inspiration; see
[Job 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008);

for God hath showed it unto them; what may be known of him by that
light; and which is assisted and may be improved by a consideration of
the works of creation and Providence.

[Romans 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 1:20</span></span>

For the invisible things of him,.... Not the angels, the invisible
inhabitants of heaven: nor the unseen glories of another world; nor the
decrees of God; nor the persons in the Godhead; but the perfections of
God, or his "properties", as the Arabic version reads it; and which are
explained by "his eternal power and Godhead": these,

from the creation of the world are clearly seen; this is no new
discovery, but what men have had, and might, by the light of nature,
have enjoyed ever since the world was created; these

being understood, in an intellectual way, by the discursive faculty of
the understanding,

by the things that are made; the various works of creation; all which
proclaim the being, unity, and perfections of God their Creator,

so that they are without excuse; the very Heathens, who have only the
light of nature, and are destitute of a revelation, have no colour or
pretext for their idolatrous practices, and vicious lives; nor have
they, nor will they have anything to object to God's righteous judgment
against them, or why they should not be condemned.

[Romans 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 1:21</span></span>

Because that when they knew God,.... Though they had such a knowledge of
the being and perfections of God, yet

they glorified him not as God. They neither thought nor spoke honourably
of him; nor did they ascribe those perfections to him, which belonged to
him; they did not adhere to him as the one and only God, nor honour him
as the Creator of all things out of nothing, and as the sole Governor of
the universe; they did not glorify him by the internal exercise of fear
of him, love to him, or trust in him, nor by any external worship
suitable to his nature, and their own notions of him, Seneca is an
instance of this, of whom Austin (f) says,

"that he worshipped what he found fault with, did what he reproved, and
adored that which he blamed.''

Neither were thankful; neither for the knowledge of things they had,
which they ascribed to themselves; nor for their mercies, which they
imputed to second causes:

but became vain in their imaginations; the vanity or their minds was the
spring and source of their evil conduct; which may design the wickedness
of their hearts, and the imaginations thereof, which were evil, and that
continually; the pride of their natures the carnality and weakness of
their reasonings, and the whole system of their vain philosophy; and
hence they ran into polytheism, or the worshipping of many gods:

and their foolish heart was darkened; where they thought their great
wisdom lay: darkness is natural to the hearts and understandings of all
men, which is increased by personal iniquity; Satan is concerned in
improving it, and God sometimes gives up the hearts of persons to
judicial blindness, which was the case of these men.

\(f\) De Civitate Dei, l. 6. c. 10.

[Romans 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 1:22</span></span>

Professing themselves to be wise,.... The learned men among the Gentiles
first called themselves "Sophi", wise men: and afterwards, to cover
their wretched pride and vanity, "Philosophers", lovers of wisdom; but
notwithstanding all their arrogance, their large pretensions to wisdom,
and boast of it

they became fools; they appeared to be so; they showed themselves to be
such in those very things they prided themselves with the knowledge of:
as, for instance, Socrates, after he had asserted the unity of God, and
is said to die a martyr for the truth; yet one of the last actions of
his life was sacrificing a cock to Aesculapius, at least he desired his
friend Crito to do it.

[Romans 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 1:23</span></span>

And changed the glory of the incorruptible God,.... God is incorruptible
and immortal in his nature, and so is opposed to all corruptible
creatures and things: he has a glory which is essential to him, and a
manifestative one in the creatures, and which is relative, and of right
belongs to him: his absolute essential glory cannot be changed, cannot
be taken away from him, nor given to another; but his relative glory may
be said to be changed, when another is worshipped in his stead, and
called by his name. So Philo the Jew (g) speaks of

"some, who, leaving the true God, make to themselves false ones, and
impose the name of the eternal and incorruptible upon created and
corruptible beings.''

Into an image made like to corruptible man; which was worshipped in
different forms by the several nations of the world:

and to birds; as the dove by the Samaritans, the hawk, the ibis, and
others by the Egyptians:

and fourfooted beasts; as the ox, and other creatures:

and creeping things; such as beetles, serpents, and others, by the same.

\(g\) De Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 678, 679.

[Romans 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 1:24</span></span>

Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness,.... Not by putting any
into them, but by leaving them to the pollution of their nature; by
withdrawing his providential restraints from them, and by giving them up
to judicial hardness:

through the lusts of their own hearts. The heart of man is the source of
all wickedness; the lusts that dwell there are many, and these tend to
uncleanness of one sort or another: by it here is meant particularly
bodily uncleanness, since it is said they were given up

to dishonour their own bodies between themselves; either alone, or with
others; so that as they changed the glory of God, and dishonoured him,
he left them to dishonour themselves by doing these things which were
reproachful and scandalous to human nature.

[Romans 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 1:25</span></span>

Who changed the truth of God into a lie,.... Not the truth of the
Gospel, which they were unacquainted with; but that which might be known
of God as true, and was known of them by the light of nature; or the
true God himself, whom they "changed into a lie"; by ascribing to false
deities, which were lying vanities, those things which were known of
God; and by worshipping them instead of him: for they

worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator; or "above him"
or "against him", in opposition to him, or "besides him", others along
with him; or neglecting him, and not worshipping him at all; which is
aggravated in that what they worshipped was a creature, either of their
own, or of God's making, and whom they neglected was the Creator of
them:

who is blessed for ever, Amen; is blessed in himself, and the fountain
of all blessedness to his creatures; which is so glaring a truth, that
everyone ought to say and set his "Amen" to it.

[Romans 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 1:26</span></span>

For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections,.... Because of
their idolatrous practices, God left them to very dishonourable actions,
sodomitical ones, both among the men and women:

for even the women did change the natural use into that which is against
nature; either by prostituting themselves to, and complying with the
"sodomitical" embraces of men, in a way that is against nature (h); or
by making use of such ways and methods with themselves, or other women,
to gratify their lusts, which were never designed by nature for such an
use: of these vicious women, and their practices, Seneca (i) speaks,
when he says,

"libidine veto nec maribus quidem cedunt, pati natae; Dii illas Deoeque,
male perdant; adeo perversum commentae, genus impudicitiae, viros
ineunt:''

also Clemens Alexandrinus (k) has respect to such, saying,

"gunaikev andrizontai para fusin, gamou men ai te kai .'

and such there were among the Jews, whom they call (l), and whom the
priests were forbidden to marry.

\(h\) Vid. R. Sol Jarchi in Gen. xxiv. 16. (i) Epist. 95. (k) Paedagog.
l. 3. p. 226. (l) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 65. 2. Piske Tosaph. ib. artic.
266. Yevamot, fol. 76. 1. & Piske Tosaph. ib. art. 141. Maimonides in
Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 4. & Hilchot Issure Bia, c. 21. sect. 8, 9.

[Romans 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 1:27</span></span>

And likewise also the men leaving the natural use of the women,.... The
very sin of "sodomy" is here designed, so called from Sodom, the place
where we first hear of it, [Gen 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005),
the men of which place, because they

burned in their lust one towards another, as these Gentiles are said to
do, God rained upon them fire and brimstone from heaven: an exceeding
great sin this is, contrary to nature, dishonourable to human nature,
and scandalous to a people and nation among whom it prevails, as it did
very much in the Gentile world, and among their greatest philosophers;
even those that were most noted for moral virtue are charged with it, as
Socrates, Plato, Zeno, and others (m): it is a sin which generally
prevails where idolatry and infidelity do, as among the Pagans of old,
and among the Papists and Mahometans now; and never was it so rife in
this nation as since the schemes of deism and infidelity have found such
a reception among us. Thus God, because men dishonour him with their
evil principles and practices, leaves them to reproach their own nature,
and dishonour their own bodies:

men with men working that which is unseemly; and of which nothing like
it is to be observed in the brutal world:

receiving in themselves the recompence of their error, which was meet:
God punishes sin with sin; for as the Jews say (n), as

"one commandment draws on another, so one transgression draws on
another; for the reward of the commandment is the commandment, and the
reward of transgression is transgression.''

\(m\) A. Gellius Noct. Attic. l. 2. c. 18. Laert. Vit. Philosoph. l. 2.
in Vit. Socrat. & l. 3. in Vit. Platon. (n) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 2.

[Romans 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 1:28</span></span>

And even as they did not like,.... This accounts for the justness of the
divine procedure in leaving them to commit such scandalous iniquities;
that since they had some knowledge of God by the light of nature, and
yet did not care

to retain God in their knowledge; or to own and acknowledge him as God,
to worship and glorify him as such; but took every method to erase this
knowledge out of their minds, and keep it from others:

God gave them over to a reprobate mind; a vain empty mind, worthless,
good for nothing devoid of all true knowledge and judgment; incapable of
approving what is truly good, or of disapproving that which is evil; a
mind that has lost all conscience of things, and is disapproved of by
God, and all good men:

to do those things which are not convenient; which are neither agreeably
to the light of nature, nor convenient to, or becoming the honour of
human nature; things which the brutes themselves, who are destitute of
reason, do not do.

[Romans 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 1:29</span></span>

Being filled with all unrighteousness,.... From hence, to the end of the
chapter, follows a large and black list and catalogue of the sad
characters of the Gentiles, and of the best men they had among them; for
the apostle is all along speaking, not of the common people, but of
their wise professors, and moral instructors; than which there never was
a more wicked set of men that ever lived upon the face of the earth; who
under the guise of morality were guilty of the greatest pride and
covetousness, and of the most filthy debaucheries imaginable: they were
"filled with all unrighteousness". This word includes in it all manner
of sin and wickedness in general; fitly expresses the condition of
fallen men, destitute of a righteousness; designs every violation of the
law respecting our neighbour; and is opposed to that vain conceit of
righteousness which these men had: particular branches of it follow; as,

fornication; which sometimes includes adultery and an unchastity; simple
fornication was not reckoned a sin among the Gentiles:

wickedness; or mischief, which intends not so much the internal
wickedness of the heart, as that particular vice, by which a man is
inclined and studies to do hurt, to others, as Satan does:

covetousness; this may intend every insatiable lust, and particularly
the sin which goes by this name, and is the root of all evil, and was a
reigning sin among the Gentiles. Seneca, the famous moralist, was
notoriously guilty of this vice, being one of the greatest usurers that
ever lived:

maliciousness; the word denotes either the iniquity of nature in which
men are conceived and born; or that desire of revenge in men, for which
some are very notorious:

envy; at the superior knowledge and learning, wealth and riches,
happiness, and outward prosperity of others:

murder: which sometimes arose from envy, wherefore they are put
together. There is an elegant "paranomasia" in the Greek text:

debate; strife about words more than things, and more for vain glory,
and a desire of victory, than for truth:

deceit; through their empty notions of philosophy; hence "philosophy and
vain deceit" go together, [Col 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008);
making large pretences to morality, when they were the vilest of
creatures:

malignity; moroseness; having no courteousness nor affability in them,
guilty of very ill manners; as particularly they were who were of the
sect of the Cynics. Now they are said to be "filled with", and "full
of", these things; not filled by God, but by Satan and themselves; and
it denotes the aboundings of wickedness in them, and which was
insatiable. The apostle goes on to describe them, as

whisperers; who made mischief among friends, by privately suggesting,
and secretly insinuating things into the mind of one to the prejudice of
another.

[Romans 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 1:30</span></span>

Backbiters,.... Who more publicly defamed the characters of their
neighbours, and hurt their good name, credit and reputation, though
behind their backs:

haters of God; some read it, "hated of God"; as all workers of iniquity
are; but rather this expresses their sin, that they were deniers of the
being and providence of God, and showed themselves to be enemies to him
by their evil works:

despiteful; both by opprobrious words, and injurious actions:

proud; of their natural knowledge, learning, eloquence and vain
philosophy:

boasters: of their parts, abilities, wisdom and works; all which they
attributed to themselves, and to the sharpness of their wit, their
sagacity and industry:

inventors of evil things; of evil schemes of morality and philosophy,
and of evil practices, as well as principles:

disobedient to parents; which was acting contrary to the light of
nature.

[Romans 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 1:31</span></span>

Without understanding,.... Of God, of his nature and worship, of things
divine and even moral, being given up to a reprobate mind:

covenant breakers; had no regard to private or public contracts:

without natural affection; to their parents, children, relations and
friends:

implacable; when once offended there was no reconciling of them:

unmerciful; had no pity and compassion to persons in distress.

[Romans 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 1:32</span></span>

Who knowing the judgment of God,.... Either of the law of God, the law
and light of nature, by which they might in some measure know the
difference between good and evil, and what was right and wrong; or the
judiciary sentence of God against sin:

that they which commit such things are worthy of death; at least of
corporeal death:

not only do the same, but have pleasure in those that do them; all which
greatly aggravated their wickedness, since they sinned against light and
knowledge, with approbation and good liking of their own sins, and took
pleasure in the sins of others. The Jews have a saying (p),

"that no man is suspected of a thing but he has done it; and if he has
not done the whole of it, he has done part of it, and if he has not done
part of it, he has thought in his heart to do it, and if he has not
thought in his heart to do it, , "he has seen others do it, and has
rejoiced".''

And if such a man is a wicked man, how much more wicked are such who
commit sin themselves, and delight in the sins of others? now from this
whole account we see the insufficiency of the light of nature to guide
persons in the way of salvation; what need there was of a divine
revelation; and how impossible it is that such men should ever be
justified before God, by any works of seeming righteousness done by
them; which the apostle had in view, in giving this account of the
depraved nature and conduct of the Gentiles, and of those among them who
professed to be, and were the wisest and most knowing of them.

\(p\) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 18. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 2](rom002)

</div>
