<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS 6

The Apostle having finished his design concerning the doctrine of
justification, refutes the charge brought against it as a licentious
doctrine, and prevents any ill use that might be made of it by men of
evil minds, justified persons by the strongest arguments, and with the
best of motives to holiness of life and conversation: he saw, that
whereas he had affirmed in the preceding chapter, that sin being made to
abound by the law, in the condemnation of sinners, the grace of God the
more abounded in their justification and pardon; that some would rise up
and object, that this doctrine countenances men's continuance in sin,
and opens a door to all manner of iniquity; and that others would abuse
this doctrine, and encourage themselves in a vicious course of life,
upon this mistaken notion, that the grace of God would be the more
illustrious by it; all which is suggested in [Rom
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001), to which an answer is returned in
[Rom 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002), with an abhorrence of
everything of this kind; and by an argument, showing the absurdity and
inconsistency of it, seeing persons dead to sin, as justified ones are,
cannot live in it: and that they are dead to sin, and under obligation
to live unto righteousness, he argues from their baptism into Christ's
death, which represents their being dead with Christ, and buried with
him, [Rom 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003), and likewise the
resurrection of Christ from the dead, and theirs by him, whereby they
are both fitted and obliged to walk in newness of life; since they are,
and should be like him, as in his death, so in his resurrection from the
dead: and the rather, as they are implanted in him, as the branches in
the vine, [Rom 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004), and especially as
it was the great end of his death, that by the crucifixion of sin with
him, it might so be destroyed, that his people should be no more
servants to it, [Rom 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006), this being
proved, that justified ones are dead to sin, the apostle argues upon it,
that such are freed from sin, [Rom
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007), and therefore ought not, and
cannot live in it; for this must be given into as an article of faith,
that such as are dead with Christ live, and shall live a life of
communion with him, [Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008), which is
inconsistent with living in sin: he further argues from the resurrection
of Christ, which was not to die more, [Rom
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009), and suggests, that in like
manner, those who have been dead and buried, and risen with him, which
their baptism signifies, should not live in sin, which is no other than
dying again; and to strengthen this, directs to the ends of Christ's
death and resurrection, [Rom 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010), the
end of the one being unto sin, to finish, make an end of that, and be
the death of it, and the end of the other, being living unto God;
wherefore in like manner, such who profess to be Christ's, to be
justified by his righteousness, to be baptized into his death, and to be
risen with him, should account themselves dead unto sin, and so not live
in it, and alive to God through the righteousness of Christ, and so live
to his honour and glory, [Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011),
and having thus answered the objection, and removed the calumny, and set
this matter in a clear light, the apostle proceeds to dehort from
sinning, and to exhort to holiness of life, [Rom
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012), in which he compares sin to a
tyrant, the lusts of it to the laws of such an one, and which therefore
should not be obeyed; and the rather, as the wages of them are death,
and have made the body already mortal; wherefore the members of it
should not be employed in such service, but in the service of God: and
whereas it might be objected, that sin is too strong and prevalent, and
has got the mastery, and will keep its power, the apostle declares it as
a promise of grace, that sin shall not have the dominion, [Rom
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014), giving this as a reason, because
such as are justified and sanctified, are not under the law, as a
covenant of works, but under the covenant of grace, of which this
promise is a part; and in order to prevent an ill use of this doctrine,
and remove an objection that might be made, that if not under the law,
men are under no restraints, but may go on in sin without control, he
answers it with his usual detestation, [Rom
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015), and argues the folly and
absurdity of living in sin upon such an account, because it would make
them servants of sin unto death, [Rom
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016), and so they were before
conversion, but now were otherwise, for, which they had reason to be
thankful, [Rom 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017), since through the
grace of God they had yielded an hearty obedience to the Gospel;
wherefore to obey sin would be to return to their former state of
bondage; whereas being freed from the power and dominion of sin, they
were now the servants of righteousness, and ought to act becoming such a
character, [Rom 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018), wherefore it was
but acting the part of reasonable men, it was but their reasonable
service, to yield themselves servants, not to sin and uncleanness, but
to righteousness and holiness, [Rom
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019), in order to engage to which, the
apostle puts them in mind of their former state; how that when they were
in subjection to sin, they had nothing to do with the exercise of
righteousness, [Rom 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020), and
therefore as there was an alteration made in them, they ought to be just
the reverse in their conduct and conversation; for he appeals to them,
that they had no pleasure nor profit in their former course of life;
which had brought upon them shame and confusion, and must have ended in
death, had it not been for the grace of God, [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021), but now as they were delivered
from the slavery and dominion of sin, they were under a better master,
were servants to God; and the fruit of their service was holiness, and
the issue of all would be everlasting life, [Rom
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022), which is illustrated by the
contrary, [Rom 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023), the wages due
from the service of sin, and which only could be expected from it, being
death; whereas grace and holiness, the gift of God, issue in eternal
life by Christ Jesus; in whose hands it is, and through whom it comes,
and is enjoyed.

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

What shall we say then?.... The apostle here obviates an objection he
saw would be made against the doctrine he had advanced, concerning the
aboundings of the grace of God in such persons and places, where sin had
abounded; which if true, might some persons say, then it will be most
fit and proper to continue in a sinful course of life, to give up
ourselves to all manner of iniquity, since this is the way to make the
grace of God abound yet more and more: now says the apostle, what shall
we say to this? how shall we answer such an objection? shall we join
with the objectors, and say as they do? and

shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? that is, shall we
persist in a vicious way of living with this view, that the grace of God
may be magnified hereby? is it right to commit sin on such an account?
or is this a fair inference, a just consequence, drawn from the doctrine
of grace? To be sure it was not, the objection is without any ground and
foundation; sin is not "per se", the cause of the glorifying God's
grace, but "per accidens": sin of itself is the cause of wrath, and not
of grace; but God has been pleased to take an occasion of magnifying his
grace, in the forgiveness of sin: for it is not by the commission of
sin, but by the pardon of it, that the grace of God is glorified, or
made to abound. Moreover, grace in conversion is glorified by putting a
stop to the reign of sin, and not by increasing its power, which would
be done by continuing in it; grace teaches men not to live in sin, but
to abstain from it; add to this, that it is owing to the want of grace,
and not to the aboundings of it, that men at any time abuse, or make an
ill use of the doctrines of grace; wherefore the apostle's answer is,

[Romans 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 6:2</span></span>

God forbid,.... By which he expresses his abhorrence of such a practice,
and that this was a consequence which did not follow from the premises,
and was far enough from his thoughts, and which he had in the greatest
detestation: and he further argues against it by asking,

how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? There is a
death for sin, a death in sin, and a death to sin; the latter is here
mentioned, and persons may be said to be "dead to sin", both as
justified and sanctified: justified persons are dead to sin, inasmuch as
that is not imputed to them to condemnation and death; they are
discharged from it; it cannot hurt them, or exert its damning power over
them; it is crucified, abolished, and made an end of by Christ:
sanctified persons are dead to sin; sin is not made their business, it
is not their course of life; it is no longer a pleasure to them, but is
loathsome and abominable; it is looked upon, not as a friend, but an
enemy; it does not reign, it has not the dominion over them; it is
subdued in them, and its power weakened; and as to the members of the
flesh, and deeds of the body, it is mortified: to live in sin, is to
live after the dictates of corrupt nature; and persons may be said to
live in it, when they give up themselves to it, are bent upon it; when
sin is their life, they delight in it, make it their work and business,
and the whole course of their life is sinful: now those who are dead to
sin, cannot thus live in it, though sin may live in them; they may fall
into sin, and lie in it some time, yet they cannot live in it: living in
sin, is not only unbecoming the grace of God revealed in the Gospel, but
is contrary to it; it is detestable to gracious minds, yea, it seems
impossible they should live in it; which is suggested by this question,
"how shall we?" &c. The thing is impracticable: for, for a gracious soul
to live in sin, would be to die again, to become dead in sin, which
cannot be; he that lives and believes in Christ shall never die,
spiritually or eternally.

[Romans 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 6:3</span></span>

Know ye not that so many of us as, You must know this, you cannot be
ignorant of it, that whoever

were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death: and
therefore must be dead to sin, and consequently ought not to live, nor
can they live in sin. This does not suppose, that some of this church
were baptized persons, and others not; but that some might be baptized
in water who were not baptized into Christ: there is a difference
between being baptized in water in the name of Christ, and being
baptized into Christ, which believers in their baptism are; by which is
meant, not a being brought by it into union with Christ, which is either
secretly from eternity, or openly at conversion, and both before the
baptism of true believers; nor a being brought by it into the mystical
body of Christ the church, for this also is before it; but rather it
designs a being baptized, or a being brought by baptism into more
communion with Christ, into a participation of his grace and benefits;
or into the doctrine of Christ, and a more distinct knowledge of it: the
power of which they feel upon their hearts, and so have really believed
in Christ, heartily love him, and make a sincere profession of him;
though rather the true meaning of the phrase "baptized into Christ", I
take to be, is to be baptized purely for the sake of Christ, in
imitation of him, who has set us an example, and because baptism is an
ordinance of his; it is to submit to it with a view to his glory, to
testify our affection for him, and subjection to him, without laying any
stress or dependence on it for salvation; such who are thus baptized,
are "baptized into his death"; they not only resemble Christ in his
sufferings and death, by being immersed in water, but they declare their
faith in the death of Christ, and also share in the benefits of his
death; such as peace, pardon, righteousness, and atonement: now this
proves, that such persons are dead to sin, who are so baptized; for by
the death of Christ, into which they are baptized, they are justified
from sin; by the death of Christ, their old man is crucified, and the
body of sin destroyed; besides, believers in baptism profess themselves
to be dead to sin and the world, and their baptism is an obligation upon
them to live unto righteousness.

[Romans 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 6:4</span></span>

Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death,.... The nature
and end of baptism are here expressed; the nature of it, it is a
"burial"; and when the apostle so calls it, he manifestly refers to the
ancient and only way of administering this ordinance, by immersion; when
a person is covered, and as it were buried in water, as a corpse is when
laid the earth, and covered with it: and it is a burial with Christ; it
is a representation of the burial of Christ, and of our burial with him
as our head and representative, and that "into death"; meaning either
the death of Christ as before, that is, so as to partake of the benefits
of his death; or the death of sin, of which baptism is also a token; for
believers, whilst under water, are as persons buried, and so dead; which
signifies not only their being dead with Christ, and their communion
with him in his death, but also their being dead to sin by the grace of
Christ, and therefore ought not to live in it: for the apostle is still
pursuing his argument, and is showing, from the nature, use, and end of
baptism, that believers are dead to sin, and therefore cannot, and ought
not, to live in it; as more fully appears from the end of baptism next
mentioned;

that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
father, even so we also should walk in newness of life; for the end of
baptism is not only to represent the death and burial, but also the
resurrection of Christ from the dead, which is here said to be "by the
glory of the Father", some read the words, "unto the glory of the
Father"; meaning either, that the Father might be glorified hereby; or
that Christ, being raised from the dead, might enjoy glory with the
Father, as he does in human nature; but rather the phrase expresses the
means by which, and not the end to which, Christ was raised from the
dead: and by the "glory of the Father" is meant, the glorious power of
the Father, which was eminently displayed in raising Christ from the
dead; and as baptism is designed to represent the resurrection of
Christ, which is done by raising the person out of the water, so
likewise to represent our resurrection from the death of sin, to a life
of grace: whence it must be greatly incumbent on baptized believers, who
are raised from the graves of sin by the power of Christ, to "walk in
newness of life"; for since they are become new creatures, and have new
hearts and new spirits given them, new principles of light, life, grace,
and holiness implanted in them, and have entered into a new profession
of religion, of which baptism is the badge and symbol, they ought to
live a new life and conversation.

[Romans 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 6:5</span></span>

For if we have been planted together,.... This is not to be understood
of an implantation of Jews and Gentiles together in One body; nor of an
implantation of believers together in a church state; but of an
implantation of Christ and his people together; which is openly done at
conversion, in consequence of a secret union with him before; when they
are transplanted from a state of nature, and are ingrafted into Christ;
have the graces of the Spirit of God implanted in them, and grow up
under the dews of grace, and shinings of the sun of righteousness upon
them, and bring forth much fruit; now as these persons, by virtue of
their secret union with Christ from eternity, as their head and
representative, with whom they were crucified, in whom they died
representatively, share in his death, enjoy the benefits of it, and feel
its efficacy, and through it become dead to the law, sin, and the world,
which is meant by

the likeness of his death; so these same persons shall be also planted

in the likeness of his resurrection; that is, they shall share in the
benefits, and feel and enjoy the effects of it; not only their bodies
will be raised at the last day, as their souls are now regenerated by
virtue of it, and in resemblance to it; but their are, and shall be so
influenced by his Spirit and grace, which has raised them from death to
life, that they shall walk in newness of life; of which baptism is a
lively representation, and to which it is a constant obligation.

[Romans 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 6:6</span></span>

Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him,.... By the old man
is meant the corruption of nature; called a man, because natural to men;
it lives and dwells in them; it has spread itself over the whole man; it
rules and governs in men; and consists of various parts and members, as
a man does: it is called "old", because it is the poison of the old
serpent, with which man was infected by him from the beginning; it is
derived from the first man that ever was; it is as old as the man is, in
whom it is, and is likewise called so, with respect to its duration and
continuance; and in opposition to, and contradistinction from, the new
man, or principle of grace: it is called "ours", because continual to
us; it is in our nature, it cleaves to us, and abides in us. This name
the apostle took from his countrymen the Jews, who were wont to call the
vitiosity of nature hereby; so R. Aba on that passage, "the firstborn
said to the younger, our father is old", [Gen
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#031), asks, what is the meaning of
this, "our father is old?" this, answers he, is the evil imagination, or
corruption of nature, which is called "old", according to [Ecc
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013); and is said to be old, ,
"because it is born with the man" (o); or as the reason is elsewhere
given (p), because it is joined to him from his birth, to his old age:
this, they say (q), is with a man as soon as he is born, from the hour
of his birth, as soon as ever he comes into the world. Now this is said
to be "crucified with him"; that is, with Christ, when he was crucified:
the Jews (r) have a notion that the evil imagination, or corruption of
nature, , will not be made to cease, or be abolished out of the world,
till the King Messiah comes, and by him it is abolished: this is so
crucified by the death, and at the cross of Christ, as that it cannot
exert its damning power over believers; and is so crucified by the
Spirit and grace of Christ in them, as that it cannot reign over them,
or exercise its domineering power over them; wherefore they are dead
unto it, and that to them, and therefore cannot live in it; which is
done,

that the body of sin might be destroyed: by "the body of sin" is meant
sin itself, which consists, as a body does, of various members; and also
the power and strength of it, which the Jews (s) call , "the power of
the evil imagination"; this is crucified with Christ, and nailed to his
cross by his sacrifice and satisfaction, that its damning power might be
destroyed, abolished, and done away: and it is crucified by the Spirit
and grace of Christ, that its governing power might be took away, and
that itself be subdued, weakened, and laid under restraints, and its
members and deeds mortified:

that henceforth we should not serve sin; not that it should not be in
us, for as yet, neither by virtue of the sacrifice of Christ, nor by the
power of his grace, is sin as to its being removed from the people of
God: but that we should not serve it, make provision for it, indulge it
and obey it, in the lusts thereof.

\(o\) Midrash Haneelam in Zohar in Gen. fol. 68. 1. Vid. Caphtor, fol.
20. 1. (p) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 70. 2. (q) Zohar in Gen. fol. 102. 1.
Tzeror Hammor, fol. 14. 4. (r) Zohar in Exod fol. 94. 4. (s) Ib.

[Romans 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 6:7</span></span>

For he that is dead, is freed from sin. This is not to be understood of
a natural or a corporeal death; for this is the effect of sin, and is
inflicted by way of punishment for it, on Christless persons; so far is
it from being an atonement for sin, as the Jews (t) fancy; besides,
there are many persons, who as they die in their sins, they will rise in
them; though a natural death is alluded to, when persons are free from
those laws and obligations to service and duty they are under whilst
living: but here it is to be understood of a spiritual or mystical
death, and of persons who are dead to the law, by the body of Christ;
dead to sin by the sacrifice and grace of Christ; who are baptized into
the death of Christ, and in imitation of him: such are "freed from sin";
not from the being of it; nor from the burden of it; nor from a
continual war with it; nor from slips and falls into it; no, not even
freed from it, in the most solemn services and acts of religion; but
they are freed from the dominion of it, from servitude to it, and also
from the guilt of it, and from obligation to punishment on account of
it: they are, as it is in the Greek text, and as the Vulgate Latin and
Arabic versions read, "justified from sin".

(t); see Gill on [Rom 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011).

[Romans 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 6:8</span></span>

Now if we be dead with Christ,.... This does not imply any doubt about
it, but is rather a taking it for granted: seeing we are dead with
Christ by union with him, as our head and representative, and by
communion with him in the benefits of his death, and being planted
together in the likeness of it; or being dead to the law, sin, and the
world, through the virtue and efficacy of Christ's death:

we believe that we shall also live with him; not only a life of
justification by faith in his righteousness; and a life of
sanctification from him, and to his glory; the continuance of which, and
a perseverance in it, are firmly believed; but a life of glory and
happiness with him hereafter, both in the new Jerusalem, in the new
heavens, and new earth, in the glorious state of the church on earth,
and in heaven to all eternity; where they shall be personally and
visibly with him, in soul and body, and shall live in the most intimate
and uninterrupted communion with him, enjoying the highest pleasure, and
the most consummate happiness; and are therefore under the greatest
obligation, whilst here on earth, to live, not in sin, but to
righteousness, and to his praise and glory; with whom they are now dead
to sin, and with whom they not only hope, but believe they shall live
throughout the endless ages of eternity.

[Romans 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 6:9</span></span>

Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead,.... That Christ is risen
from the dead, is a certain fact, well attested, thoroughly known, and
firmly believed; the prophets prophesied of it, Christ himself foretold
it, angels affirmed it, and the apostles were witnesses of it, as is
also the Holy Ghost: and it is as certain, that he

dieth no more; he is raised to an immortal life, and will live for
evermore; there is no need of his dying again, his death having been a
full atonement and expiation of all the sins and transgressions of his
people:

death hath no more dominion over him: it once had dominion over him; it
held him under its power for a time, according to the divine
determination, and by his own consent: but it was not possible he should
be holden of it longer; both on account of the dignity of his person, as
the Son of God, and the virtue and efficacy of his sacrifice, as the
surety of his people, having put away sin for ever by it. He is the holy
man the Jews (u) speak of,

"who is the mystery of the name Jehovah, and in him there is no sin,
neither shall death have the dominion over him.''

\(u\) Tikkune Zohar, fol. 112. p. 1. apud Rittangel. de verit. Relig.
Christ. p. 68.

[Romans 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 6:10</span></span>

For in that he died,.... The death of Christ was settled and agreed to
in the covenant and council of peace; it was spoken of by the prophets,
and typified by sacrifices; Christ came into the world in order to die,
and actually did die the death of the cross; in which the great love of
God and Christ is expressed to us; and which is a fundamental article of
the Christian faith: and when he died,

he died unto sin once: he died to that, which we by nature are dead in,
and could never make atonement for; which he himself never lived in, and
which men naturally love to in; and which had he not died for, we must
have died for to all eternity; and he died not for any sin of his own,
or of angels, nor for the sins of every man, but for the sins of his
people; it may be rendered, he died in sin: in the likeness of sinful
flesh, in which he was sent; having as a surety sin laid on him, and
bore by him, and for which he was wounded, bruised, and died: or rather
to sin; that is, to make atonement for it, procure the pardon of it,
take it away, and utterly abolish it: and this he did "once"; this is
observed, in reference to the repeated sacrifices of the old law, which
could never expiate or remove sin; and to show, that Christ's dying once
was enough, his sacrifice was fully satisfactory to the law and justice
of God:

but in that he liveth: which must be understood, not of his life as God,
but as man; and that not on earth, but in heaven; where he lives with
God, at the right hand of God, and by him, by the power of God: and

he liveth unto God; to his glory, and to make intercession for us.

[Romans 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 6:11</span></span>

Likewise reckon ye also yourselves,.... Two things the apostle would
have believers consider of themselves, and reckon themselves, to be, in
consequence of their relation to Christ, who was dead, but is alive, and
as agreeable thereunto: the one is, that they would look upon themselves

to be dead indeed unto sin: believe their discharge from it, and not
fear condemnation and death on account of it; and that it shall not be
imputed to them, or have any damning power over them, since Christ has
died unto it, or for it; and therefore should have no fellowship with
it, nothing to do with it, as being dead unto it, and that to them: the
other is, that they would consider themselves

alive unto God, through, Jesus Christ our Lord; and that either in a
legal sense, as justified persons; men in a state of nature, or of
"Pharisaism", think themselves alive, when they are not; but when they
come under a work of the Spirit of God, they see themselves otherwise,
and are convinced both of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the
insufficiency of their own righteousness to justify from it; and when
they have the righteousness of Christ revealed unto them, and faith is
wrought in them to look unto it, and lay hold upon it, they are in
themselves, and in their own apprehensions, alive, and that "unto God",
in the sight of God; and their life of faith on the righteousness of
Christ, is unto the glory of God, and will be followed with an eternal
life with God, to which the justifying righteousness of Christ gives
them a title; and this is all through Christ, and his righteousness: or
this is to be considered by them of themselves as sanctified persons,
who are quickened by the Spirit of Christ, and can feel the burden of
sin, see the corruption of their nature, hear the voice both of law and
Gospel, breathe after spiritual things, speak the language of Canaan,
walk by faith on Christ, and work and act for him; which life of faith
and holiness is "unto God", to his glory and honour, and is "through
Christ", and is maintained and supported by him: or they should consider
themselves not only as being justified before God, and made alive by his
Spirit, but as such who shall live to and with God, through Christ, for
evermore; for as Christ died and rose again, and lives unto and with God
for ever, so they being dead to sin through him, and being quickened
together with him and by his Spirit, shall never die the second death,
but shall have everlasting life.

[Romans 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 6:12</span></span>

Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body,.... Since grace reigns
in you, sin should not: seeing ye are dead to sin, are baptized into the
death of Christ, and are dead with him, and alive through him, sin
therefore should not reign in you, and over you. This exhortation does
not suppose a freewill power in man naturally, for this is spoken to
persons, who had the Spirit and grace of Christ, and in whom God had
wrought both to will and to do of his good pleasure; nor is this
exhortation unnecessary to believers, though they are dead to sin, and
though God has promised it shall not have the dominion over them, and
though reigning sin, as divines say, cannot be in regenerate persons;
for though they are entirely dead to sin as justified persons, yet not
perfectly so as sanctified: they are indeed dead to sin, but sin is not
dead in them; it struggles, it makes war, leads captive, and threatens
absolute and universal dominion, wherefore such an exhortation is
necessary; besides, though God has promised that sin shall not have the
dominion, yet making use of means, such as prayer to God that it may
not, striving against it, opposing it, in order to hinder its dominion,
are no ways inconsistent with the promise of God, whose promises often
have their accomplishment in the use of means: moreover, whereas some
divines say, that reigning sin may be and others that it cannot be in
regenerate persons, it should be observed, that if by reigning sin is
meant, sinning against God out of malice and contempt, with the whole
heart, without any struggle against it, or repentance for it, or so as
to lose the grace of God, and never rise more, then it must be said that
it cannot be in a regenerate man; but if by it is meant, falling into
sin against their consciences, knowingly and willingly, so as to
distress their minds, lose their peace, and grieve the Spirit of God, so
as to be held under it, and be led captive by it, such power sin may
have in them, and over them; and therefore the exhortation is not
needless; and when the apostle says, let it not reign "in your mortal
body", by it is either meant the whole man, or rather the body only,
which is the instrument of sinning, and is become mortal through sin;
and being so, is a reason why it should not reign in it, since it has
done so much mischief to it already: and this also denotes the time of
sin's being in us, and of the danger of its reigning in us; it is only
whilst we are in this mortal body; and the consideration of our
mortality should quicken us to war against sin, and be careful not to

obey it in the lusts thereof; the lusts of the body, or flesh, which are
therefore sometimes called fleshly lusts, are many, and have great power
and influence; and may be said to be obeyed, when provision is made to
fulfil them, when these are the business of a man's life, and the whole
of his conversation is taken up in them, without struggle against them,
or opposition to them; and heroin lies the reign of sin.

[Romans 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 6:13</span></span>

Neither yield ye your members,.... The apostle more fully explains what
he means by obeying sin in the lusts thereof; a presenting, or making
use of the "members, as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin": by
their "members" he means the several powers and faculties of the soul,
and so the Ethiopic version renders it, "your souls"; or the several
parts of the body, or both; by "yielding", or presenting of them, is
designed the employment of them in the service of sin,

as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: that is, as means of
performing unrighteous actions, in obedience to sin, or the corruption
of nature with its lusts: the word translated "instruments", signifies
"arms" or "weapons": so the ancients (w) formerly reckoned weapons the
members of soldiers; and here the apostle calls the members weapons,
which he would not have the saints use in favour of sin, an enemy and a
tyrant; for that would be unrighteous in itself, and injurious to God
and themselves: says he,

but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead:
that is, present themselves soul and body to God, give up and devote
themselves to him, and to his service, and yield a cheerful obedience to
him; considering themselves as under great obligation so to do, inasmuch
as they are freed from condemnation and death, by the righteousness of
Christ; and quickened, when dead in trespasses and sins, by his Spirit
and grace; and therefore should yield

your members, their whole selves,

as instruments, or weapons

of righteousness unto God; by fighting against sin, revenging all
disobedience, and fulfilling obedience to the commands of God: the same
is here meant, as is by putting on "the armour of light" [Rom
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012), and wearing and making use of
"the armour of righteousness, on the right hand and the left", [Co2
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007).

\(w\) Alexander ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 1. c. 12. p. 18.

[Romans 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 6:14</span></span>

For sin shall not have dominion over you,.... It has dominion over God's
people in a state of unregeneracy: and after conversion it is still in
them, and has great power oftentimes to hinder that which is good, and
to effect that which is evil; it entices and ensnares, and brings into
captivity, and seems as though it would regain its dominion, and reign
again, but it shall not. This is not a precept, exhortation, or
admonition, as before, though some read it as such, "let not sin have
dominion over you"; nor does it express merely what ought not to be, but
what cannot, and shall not be; it is an absolute promise, that sin shall
not have the dominion over believers; and respects not acts of sin, but
the principle of sin; and means not its damning power, though that is
took away, but its tyrannical, governing power: "it shall not lord it
over you", as the words may be rendered; for in regeneration, sin is
dethroned; Christ enters as Lord, and continues to be so; saints are in
another kingdom, the kingdom of Christ and grace; could sin reign again
over them, they might be lost and perish, which they never can: now this
is a noble argument why saints should use their members as weapons of
righteousness for God and against sin; since they are sure of being
conquerors, and are secure from the tyrannical government of sin over
them. The Jewish doctors say (x), there are three persons, , "over whom
the evil imagination", or "sin, had not the dominion"; and these are
they, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but these are not the only persons, for
all Abraham's spiritual seed, all that are of the faith of Abraham,
enjoy the same favour: the reason of this is,

for ye are not under the law; by which is meant, not the law of nature;
nor the civil law of the Jews; nor their ceremonial law; but either the
law of sin, as a governing principle; or rather the moral law: this they
were under, so as to obey it, but not in order to obtain righteousness
by it; or as forced to obey it by its threats and terrors; they were not
under its rigorous exaction; nor under its curse and condemnation; nor
as irritating sin, and causing it to abound; or as a covenant of works:

but under grace; under the covenant of grace, and in the enjoyment of
the blessings of it; under the Gospel, and the dispensation of it, which
leads and teaches men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; under and
in the possession of the grace of justification and pardon, which
strongly influence to righteousness and holiness; and under regenerating
and sanctifying grace as a reigning governing principle in the soul. The
apostle's view in this is, to affect the saints with their present
privilege, and to engage them in a cheerful conflict with sin, and to
stir up in them an abhorrence of living in it.

\(x\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 17. 1.

[Romans 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 6:15</span></span>

What then? shall we sin,.... Does it follow from hence, that therefore
we may sin, and go on and continue in it,

because we are not under the law, but under grace? here the apostle
meets with an objection of the adversary, saying, that if men are not
under the law, and are free from all obligation to it, then they may
live as they list; nor can they be chargeable with sin, or that be
objected to them; since where there is no law, there is no
transgression, and sin is not imputed where there is no law; and if they
are under grace, or in the love and favour of God, from which there is
no separation, then they cannot be damned, do what they will: but this
objection proceeds upon a mistaken sense of the phrase, "under the law";
for believers, though they are not under the law as the ministry of
Moses, yet they are under it, as it is in the hands of Christ; and
though not under its curse, yet under obligation to obedience to it,
from principles of love and grace; and a transgression of it is sin in
them, as in others; and which is taken notice of by God, and visited
with stripes in a: fatherly way, though his loving kindness is not
removed: and to argue from the unchangeableness of God's grace, or the
doctrines of it, as encouraging licentiousness, is greatly to abuse the
grace of God, and manifestly betrays such persons to be ignorant of it
and its influence; since nothing more powerfully engages to a love of
holiness, and hatred of sin; wherefore the apostle, answers to this
objection in his usual way,

God forbid; signifying his abhorrence of everything of this kind.

[Romans 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 6:16</span></span>

Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves,.... The apostle goes on
with his answer to the above objection, by making use of an argument
from the nature of servants and their obedience, a thing well known to
everyone, and which none could be ignorant of; which he delivers by way
of distribution, that such who yield themselves

servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin
unto death, or obedience unto righteousness: such who obey sin, are the
servants of sin; they are at the beck and command of sin; they give up
themselves to the service of it with delight and diligence, and are
perfect drudges to it: this is a very unhappy situation; their service
is very unreasonable; and they are rendered incapable of serving God,
for no man can serve two masters; they are hereby brought into the
drudgery of the devil; into a state of bondage, out of which nothing but
grace can extricate them; into a very mean and contemptible condition,
and even a deplorable one; for if grace prevent not, they will have the
wages of sin paid them, which is death, for their obedience is "of sin
unto death"; which will lie in an eternal separation from Father, Son,
and Spirit, in a sense of divine wrath, and in the company of devils and
damned spirits: now this is added, to show the malignant nature and just
demerit of sin, and to deter and dissuade persons from the service of
it: on the other hand, such as obey the Lord, are the servants "of
obedience unto righteousness": but why is not this obedience, which is
the obedience of faith to the Gospel, of Christ, and of the new man to
God or Christ, said to be "unto life", as the antithesis seems to
require? because though death is the fruit of sin, yet life is not the
fruit of obedience, but the fruit of obedience is righteousness; by
which is meant, nor a justifying one before God, but righteousness
before men; or a course of living soberly and righteously, which is the
effect of being under grace; and hence it appears, that true believers
can make no such ill use of their privilege, as is suggested in the
objection.

[Romans 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 6:17</span></span>

But God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin,.... Not that the
apostle must be thought to give thanks to God for that these persons had
been the servants of sin, than which nothing is more disagreeable to
God, or caused more shame to themselves; but that inasmuch as they had
been in the drudgery and service of sin, they were now freed from it.
Just as if a person, that has been a slave for some time in Algiers,
should bless God, or be thankful to the instrument of his deliverance,
that whereas he had been in such slavery, he is now redeemed from it:
wherefore it is added,

but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was
delivered you. By "the form of doctrine", is meant the Gospel, which is
the "doctrine" of the Scriptures, of Christ and his apostles, and is
sound and according to godliness; and is a "form", or contains a summary
and compendium of truths, and is a pattern or exemplar, according to
which ministers are to preach, and people to hear and receive. So the
word which is the same with here, is used by the Jewish (y) writers for
a form, copy, pattern, or exemplar of any sort of writings This form of
doctrine is "a Cabala", but not like that of the Jews' oral law, or form
of traditions (z), handed down, as they say, from one man, and set of
men, to another; but this is delivered from the Father to Christ, from
Christ to his apostles, and by them to the saints; and "into which they
were delivered", as it may be rendered, as into a mould; and so received
the impression of it, and were evangelized by it: so such are who have a
spirit of Gospel liberty, in opposition to a spirit of bondage; who live
by faith on Christ, and not by the works of the law; who derive their
comfort from him, and not from anything done by them; whose repentance
and obedience are influenced by the grace of God, and who are zealous of
good works, without any dependence on them. This form of doctrine was
"obeyed" by them; by which is meant, not a mere obedience to the
ordinances of the Gospel; nor a bare hearing of the doctrines of it, and
giving an assent unto them; but an embracing of them by faith for
themselves, so as to lay hold on Christ in them, submit to his
righteousness therein revealed, and be willing to be saved by him, and
him alone, in his own way; and this is the obedience of faith: the
reason why faith is expressed by obedience is, because faith receives
truth upon the veracity of God, and not upon the dictates of carnal
reason; and is always more or less attended with external obedience to
the will of God; and that is rightly performed only by faith. And this
obedience did not lie in words, or proceed on mercenary views, and in an
hypocritical way; but was "from the heart"; and was real and sincere:
and good reason there is why a hearty, cheerful, and voluntary obedience
should be yielded to t he Gospel; since it is from God; Christ is the
substance of it; it is truth, and the word of our salvation. The
Alexandrian copy reads, "from a pure heart"; and the Arabic version,
"from the sincerity of your heart"; and the Ethiopic version, "with your
whole heart".

\(y\) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 26. 1. Bava Bathra, fol. 44. 2. R. Moses
Kotzensis Mitzvot Tora, precept. Affirm. 50. (z) Vid. Pirke Abot, c. 1.
sect. 1.

[Romans 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 6:18</span></span>

Being then made free from sin,.... Not from a sinful nature; nor from a
corrupt heart; nor from vain thoughts; nor from sinful words; nor from
sinful actions altogether; but from the damning power of sin: sin
brought all men under a sentence of condemnation; Christ has bore the
execution of this sentence in himself for his people; hence, as
considered in him, they are free from it; and such as are born again
have passed from death to life, and shall never enter into condemnation:
likewise, such persons are free from the guilt of sin; men are in a
legal sense arraigned for sin, accused of it, and being convicted, are
pronounced guilty before God; and awakened souls have a sense of it in
themselves; but the blood of Christ sprinkled on their consciences frees
them from it; though fresh sins committed bring fresh guilt, which
requires the continual application of the blood of Jesus for pardon and
cleansing: but what is chiefly designed here is freedom from the
servitude of sin, as appears from the context. Now God's elect are not
released voluntarily by their former masters; nor is their freedom
obtained by their own power and will; but it is of God, Father, Son, and
Spirit; and the Gospel is generally the means of it, and happy are those
persons who are blessed with it! They are rid of a bad master; are freed
from the worst of bondage; will be no more servants, as before; are
delivered from the power, and out of the kingdom of darkness; are heirs
of heaven, and shall enjoy the glorious liberty of the children of God:
and for the time present are

become the servants of righteousness; servants to God, whose Gospel they
obey; servants to Christ, whose righteousness they submit to; and
servants to the law of righteousness, as held forth by Christ; they give
up themselves to a course and life of righteousness, in which there are
true honour, peace, and pleasure.

[Romans 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 6:19</span></span>

I speak after the manner of men,.... This refers either to what the
apostle had said already concerning service and liberty, things which
were known among men, and easy to be understood; or to the following
exhortation: what he was about to say, he delivered in a manner suited
to their understandings, and was "that which was human"; not angelic, or
what required the power, purity, and perfection of angels; or what was
unreasonable or impossible, but what was their reasonable service, as
men; and might be done through the grace of God, in the strength of
Christ, and by the assistance of the Spirit: and though he might have
insisted upon it with good reason, that they ought to be more diligent
and industrious in the service of God than they had been in the service
of sin; yet

because of the infirmity of their flesh, considering that they had
flesh, or corrupt nature, and were attended with weakness in knowledge,
faith, and obedience; he only pressed this upon them, that in like
manner as they had been servants to sin, they would be servants to
righteousness:

for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to
iniquity unto iniquity; what they yielded to the service of sin were
their "members"; by which, as before, may be meant, either the powers
and faculties of their souls, or the parts and members of their bodies,
or both; and particularly the latter, as the eyes and ears, the tongue,
the mouth, the hands, and feet, which are all employed by a natural man
in the drudgery of sin: these are yielded to sin under the form and
character of "servants"; and as such are governed, directed, and ordered
to fulfil this and the other lust, which is done willingly and readily:
these members are "yielded", presented, and given up cheerfully to this
slavery; which is both scandalous and unrighteous: it is "to
uncleanness"; which designs all sorts of pollution and filthiness, both
of flesh and spirit: "and to iniquity"; everything that is contrary to
the law, all unrighteousness and ungodliness; and it is added, "unto
iniquity"; which may design all sorts of sin, a progress in it, adding
continually to it; which shows them to have been thorough hearty
servants of sin. Now what the apostle exhorts to, and requires of them,
is, that

even so now they would yield their members servants to righteousness
unto holiness; that is, let the same members that have been employed in
the service of sin, be made use of in the service of righteousness: let
your eyes be employed in looking and diligently searching into the
Scriptures of truth; your ears in hearing the Gospel preached; your
lips, mouth, and tongue, in expressing the praises of God, for what he
has done for you; your hands in distributing to the interest of
religion, and the necessities of the saints; and your feet in hastening
to attend on public worship, and observe the testimonies of the Lord:
let them be employed under the same form and character as servants,
waiting upon the Lord, ready to fulfil his will; and in the same manner,
freely, willingly, and cheerfully, and that constantly and universally,
in all acts of righteousness and holiness.

[Romans 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 6:20</span></span>

For when ye were the servants of sin,.... This is an argument used, or a
reason given, why regenerate persons should be diligent in the service
of righteousness; because when they were employed in the drudgery of
sin, they

were free from righteousness; they had no righteousness, nor were they
desirous of any; yea, averse to it, threw off the yoke of the law of
righteousness, and lived in a very unrighteous manner: hence may be
observed what is the free will of man in an unregenerate state; not free
to, but "from" righteousness; free enough to evil, but from all that is
good; and also what obligation lies upon believers, who are delivered
from the bondage of corruption, and the servitude of sin, to a life and
service of righteousness; inasmuch as they were before free from it, and
unconcerned about it, but are now made by the grace of God free to it,
they ought therefore cheerfully to pursue it, and neglect no opportunity
of performing it.

[Romans 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 6:21</span></span>

What fruit had ye then in those things?.... That is, what profit,
pleasure, satisfaction, or comfort, had ye in the commission of sin? Sin
yields no real profit to the servants of it. If a man, by sinful
practices, could amass together the riches of the Indies, or gain the
whole world, yet if his soul is lost thereby, what advantage would it be
to him? he would be infinitely the loser by it; nor would all his wealth
and riches profit him in the day of God's wrath and righteous judgment:
nor is there any true pleasure in sin; persons may imagine within
themselves they enjoy a real pleasure whilst they are serving divers
lusts; but this is but imaginary, it is not real; and this imaginary
pleasure is but for a season; it issues in bitterness and death: nor is
there any satisfaction in it; when men have endeavoured to gratify their
carnal lusts and sensual appetites in every way that can be devised,
they still remain as they were; nor can they reflect with real
satisfaction, and without some slinging remorse, upon the methods they
have pursued to gain it: nor is there any true honour in sin, nothing
but what is scandalous and disgraceful to human nature; shame, sooner or
later, is the fruit of sin:

whereof ye are now ashamed; some men may be indeed for the present so
hardened as not to blush and be ashamed at the commission of the vilest
sins; such are they who have no sense of sin, have no fear of God, or
regard to men; and so sin openly, and without any guise, glory in it,
and make their boast of it: but when persons are wrought upon by the
Spirit of God, they are ashamed of sin; which might be exemplified in
the case of Adam and Eve, of Ephraim, of the prodigal son, and of the
poor publican; the reason is, because light is struck into their hearts;
and this makes manifest the odious and detestable nature of sin; sin is
hereby seen in its own proper colours, as exceeding sinful, loathsome,
and abominable: besides, the grace and goodness of God are discovered in
the forgiveness of it; and the glory of God's purity and holiness, and
the beauty and loveliness of Christ, are discerned by such persons; all
which have a tendency to make them ashamed of sin, out of love with it,
and to abhor it: and a good thing it is to be brought to be ashamed of
sin here; for such who are not ashamed of it here, shall be brought to
everlasting shame and confusion hereafter. Nay, this is not all; not
only shame will be the fruit of sin, but it will also issue in death:

for the, end of those things is death: the profit, the reward, and wages
of them is death: sin not only brings a spiritual or moral death on
persons, on all the powers and faculties of their souls, and is followed
with a corporeal death; but if grace prevent not, it will end in an
eternal one; for however right and good the ways of sin may seem to the
carnal mind, "the end thereof are the ways of death" (\#Pr 14:12 16:25).

[Romans 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 6:22</span></span>

But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God,.... In
what sense regenerate persons are free from sin, and are become the
servants of God, has been observed already; the consequence of which is,
that such have their

fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life: holiness is a fruit
of freedom from the bondage of sin, and of serving God; holiness begun
in regeneration, calling, and conversion, is a fruit of the Spirit; a
course of living righteously is a fruit of holiness, as a principle
implanted; a gradual increase in holiness is carried on by the Spirit of
God in a course of righteousness; and a course of righteousness, from a
principle of grace, issues in perfect holiness; "without which no man
shall see the Lord" [Heb 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014): here
it seems to design, that holiness is fruit, or that which is gain and
profit to persons, in opposition to sin, in which there is no profit: it
is not indeed profitable to God in point of merit; yet holiness, as a
principle of grace, is profitable to the saints in point of meetness for
glory; and holiness, as it denotes an external course of life, is useful
and profitable on many accounts; hereby God is glorified, the doctrine
of Christ is adorned, religion is honoured and recommended, our own
credit, reputation, and peace, are preserved, and our neighbour's good
promoted.

And the end is everlasting life: as sin issues, if grace prevent not, in
everlasting death; holiness issues in eternal life, not by way of merit,
but of free gift.

[Romans 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 6:23</span></span>

For the wages of sin is death,.... By sin, is meant every sin, original
sin, actual sin, every kind of sin, lesser and greater: the "death"
which sin deserves, is a corporeal death; which is not owing to the
original nature and constitution of men; nor merely to the divine
appointment; but to sin, and the decree of God, on account of it; which
is inflicted on Christless sinners, as a punishment for sin, though not
on believers as such, because Christ has took away the sting and curse
of it: a death of diseases and afflictions also follows upon sin, as its
proper demerit; which are properly punishments to wicked men, and are
occasioned by sin in believers: there is a death of the soul, which
comes by sin, which lies in an alienation from God, in a loss of the
image of God, and in a servitude to sin; and there is an eternal death,
the just wages of sin, which lies in a separation of soul and body from
God, and in a sense of divine wrath to all eternity; and which is here
meant, as is clear from its antithesis, "eternal life", in the next
clause. Now this is "the wages" of sin; sin does in its own nature
produce it, and excludes from life; it is the natural issue of it; sin
is committed against an infinite God, and righteously deserves such a
death; it is its just wages by law. The Greek word signifies soldiers'
wages; see [Luk 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014) and in

"At which time Simon rose up, and fought for his nation, and spent much
of his own substance, and armed the valiant men of his nation and gave
them wages,'' (1 Maccabees 14:32)

Sin is represented as a king, a mighty monarch, a tyrannical prince;
sinners are his subjects and vassals, his servants and soldiers, who
fight under him, and for him, and all the wages they must expect from
him is death. So the word is interpreted in the Glossary, , "soldiers'
wages"; and so it is used by the Jewish writers, being adopted into
their language; of a king, they say (a), that he should not multiply to
himself gold and silver more than to pay which they (b) interpret by ,
"the hire of armies", or the wages of soldiers for a whole year, who go
in and out with him all the year; so that it denotes wages due, and paid
after a campaign is ended, and service is over; and, as here used,
suggests, that when men have been all their days in the service of sin,
and have fought under the banners of it, the wages they will earn, and
the reward that will be given them, will be death: and it is frequently
observed by the Jewish doctors (c), that , "there is no death without
sin": sin is the cause of death, and death the fruit and effect of sin:

but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
These words, at first sight, look as if the sense of them was, that
eternal life is the gift of God through Christ, which is a great and
glorious truth of the Gospel; but their standing in opposition to the
preceding words require another sense, namely, that God's gift of grace
issues in eternal life, through Christ: wherefore by "the gift of God"
is not meant eternal life, but either the gift of a justifying
righteousness, or the grace of God in regeneration and sanctification,
or both, which issue in eternal life; the one is the saints' right and
title, the other their meetness for it: so that as death is the wages of
sin, and is what that issues in, and brings unto, eternal life is the
effect of grace, or what the grace of God in justifying and sanctifying
his people issues in; even a life free from all sorrow and imperfection;
a life of the utmost perfection and pleasure, and which will last for
ever: and as the grace of God, which justifies and sanctifies them, is
"through Christ", so is the eternal life itself which it brings unto:
this is in Christ, comes through his righteousness, sufferings, and
death; is bestowed by him, and will greatly consist in the enjoyment of
him. All grace is the gift of God, and is freely given, or otherwise it
would not be grace; particularly the justifying righteousness of Christ
is the gift of God; and the rather this may be meant here, since the
apostle had been treating of it so largely before, and had so often, in
the preceding chapter, called it the gift of righteousness, the free
gift, and gift by grace, and justification by it, the justification of
life, because it entitles to eternal life, as here: it may be said to
issue in it; for between justification and glorification there is a sure
and close connection; they that are justified by the righteousness of
Christ, are certainly glorified, or enjoy eternal life; and though this
may be principally intended here, yet is not to be understood to the
exclusion of other gifts of grace, which have the same connection and
issue: thus, for instance, faith is the gift of God, and not of a man's
self, and he that has it, has eternal life, and shall, Or ever possess
it; repentance is a free grace gift, it is a grant from the Lord, and it
is unto life and salvation; and on whomsoever the grace of God is
bestowed, so as to believe in Christ for righteousness, and truly repent
of sin, these shall partake of eternal glory. It may be observed, that
there is a just proportion between sin, and the wages of it, yet there
is none between eternal life, and the obedience of men; and therefore
though the apostle had been pressing so much obedience to God, and to
righteousness, he does not make eternal life to be the fruit and effect
of obedience, but of the gift of the grace of God.

\(a\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 4. (b) Jarchi & Bartenora in ib. Vid.
Cohen de Lara, Ir. David, p. 17. (c) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 55. 1. Vajikra
Rabba, parash. 37. fol. 176. 3. Midrash Kohelet, fol. 70. 4. Zohar in
Gen. fol. 44. 4. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 115. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007)

</div>
