<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut001)  [Next](rut003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO RUTH 2

In this chapter we have an account of Ruth's gleaning corn in the fields
of Boaz, a relation of Naomi, [Rut
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001), and of Boaz coming to his
reapers, whom he saluted in a very kind manner; and observing a woman
gleaning after them, inquired of them who she was, and they informed
him, [Rut 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#004), upon which he addressed
himself to her, and gave her leave to glean in his field, and desired
her to go nowhere else, and bid her eat and drink with his servants,
[Rut 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008) and gave directions to his
servants to let her glean, and to let fall some of the handfuls on
purpose, that she might gather them up, [Rut
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#015) and then an account is given of
her returning to her mother-in-law with her gleanings, to whom she
related where she had gleaned, who was owner of the field, and what he
had said to her, upon which Naomi gave her advice, [Rut
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#018).

[Ruth 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 2:1</span></span>

And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's,.... That was her kinsman by
her husband's side, who now lived at Bethlehem; and yet it does not
appear that Naomi made any application to him for assistance in her
circumstances, though well known to her, as the word used signifies;
which might arise from her modesty, and being loath to be troublesome to
him, especially as he was a relation, not of her own family, but of her
husband's; but, what is more strange, that this kinsman had taken no
notice of her, nor sent to her, who yet was a very generous and liberal
man, and had knowledge of her coming, for he had heard of the character
of Ruth, [Rut 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#011) but perhaps he was
not acquainted with their indigent circumstances:

a mighty man of wealth; a man of great wealth and riches, and of great
power and authority, which riches give and raise a man to, and also of
great virtue and honour, all which the word "wealth" signifies; to which
may be added the paraphrase the Targumist gives, that he was mighty in
the law; in the Scriptures, in the word of God, a truly religious man,
which completes his character:

of the family of Elimelech; the husband of Naomi; some say that his
father was Elimelech's brother; see Gill on [Rut
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#002),

and his name was Boaz; which signifies, "in him is strength", strength
of riches, power, virtue, and grace; it is the name of one of the
pillars in Solomon's temple, so called from its strength. This man is
commonly said by the Jews to be the same with Ibzan, a judge of Israel,
[Jdg 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008), he was the grandson of
Nahshon, prince of the tribe of Judah, who first offered at the
dedication of the altar, [Num 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012),
his father's name was Salmon, and his mother was Rahab, the harlot of
Jericho, [Mat 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005). A particular
account is given of this man, because he, with Ruth, makes the principal
part of the following history.

[Ruth 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 2:2</span></span>

And Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi,.... After they had been some
little time at Bethlehem, and not long; for they came at the beginning
of barley harvest, and as yet it was not over, nor perhaps for some time
after this; and knowing and considering the circumstances they were in,
and unwilling to live an idle life, and ready to do any thing for the
support of her life, and of her ancient mother-in-law; which was very
commendable, and showed her to be an industrious virtuous woman: she
addressed her, and said:

let me now go to the field; she did not choose to go any where, nor do
anything, without her advice and consent; so dutiful and obedient was
she to her, and so high an opinion had she of her wisdom and goodness;
she desired to go to the field which belonged to Bethlehem, which seems
to have been an open field, not enclosed, where each inhabitant had his
part, as Boaz, [Rut 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#003) though Jarchi
interprets it of one of the fields of the men of the city; hither she
asked leave to go, not with any ill intent, nor was she in any danger of
being exposed, since it being harvest time the field was full of people:
her end in going thither is expressed in the next clause:

and glean ears of corn after him, in whose sight I shall find grace; or
"in" or "among the ears of corn" (o); between the ears of corn bound up
into sheaves, and there pick up the loose ears that were dropped and
left. This she proposed to do with the leave of the owner of the field,
or of the reapers, whom she followed; she might be ignorant that it was
allowed by the law of God that widows and strangers might glean in the
field, [Lev 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009) or if she had been
acquainted with it by Naomi, which is not improbable, such was her
modesty and humility, that she did not choose to make use of this
privilege without leave; lest, as Jarchi says, she should be chided or
reproved, and it is certain she did entreat the favour to glean, [Rut
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#007).

and she said unto her, go, my daughter; which shows the necessitous
circumstances Naomi was in; though perhaps she might give this leave and
direction under an impulse of the Spirit of God, in order to bring about
an event of the greatest moment and importance, whereby she became the
ancestor of our blessed Lord.

\(o\) , Sept. "in spicis", Montanus, Drusius, Piscator; "inter spicas",
De Dieu, Rambachius.

[Ruth 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rut 2:3</span></span>

And she went, and came,.... That is, she went out of the house where she
was, and out of the city, and came into the field; though, according to
the Midrash (p), she marked the ways as she went, before she entered
into the field, and then came back to the city to observe the marks and
signs she made, that she might not mistake the way, and might know how
to come back again:

and gleaned in the field after the reapers; when they had cut down and
bound up the corn, what fell and was left she picked up, having first
asked leave so to do:

and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz, who
was of the kindred of Elimelech; the providence of God so ordering and
directing it; for though it was hap and chance to her, and what some
people call good luck, it was according to the purpose, and by the
providence and direction of God that she came to the reapers in that
part of the field Boaz, a near kinsman of her father-in-law, was owner
of, and asked leave of them to glean and follow them.

\(p\) Midrash Ruth, fol. 31. 4. Vid. Jarchi & Alshech in loc.

[Ruth 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 2:4</span></span>

And, behold, Boaz came to Bethlehem,.... Into the field, to see how his
workmen went on, and performed their service, and to encourage them in
it by his presence, and by his courteous language and behaviour, and to
see what provisions were wanting, that he might take care and give
orders for the sending of them, it being now near noon, as it may be
supposed; and though he was a man of great wealth, he did not think it
below him to go into his field, and look after his servants, which was
highly commendable in him, and which showed his diligence and industry,
as well as his humility. So a king in Homer (q) is represented as among
his reapers, with his sceptre in his hand, and cheerful. Pliny (r)
relates it, as a saying of the ancients, that the eye of the master is
the most fruitful thing in the field; and Aristotle (s) reports, that a
Persian being asked what fattened a horse most, replied, the eye of the
master; and an African being asked what was the best dung for land,
answered, the steps of his master:

and said unto the reapers, the Lord be with you; to give them health,
and strength, and industry in their work; the Targum is,"may the Word of
the Lord be your help:"

and they answered him, the Lord bless you; with a good harvest, and good
weather to gather it in; and though these salutations were of a civil
kind, yet they breathe the true spirit of sincere and undissembled
piety, and show the sense that both master and servants had of the
providence of God attending the civil affairs of life, without whose
help, assistance, and blessing, nothing succeeds well.

\(q\) Iliad. 18. ver. 556, 557. (r) Nat. Hist. l. 18. c. 6. (s) De
Administrat. Domestic. l. 1. c. 6.

[Ruth 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rut 2:5</span></span>

Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers,.... To
direct them their work, what part each was to do, and to see that they
did it well; to take care for provisions for them, and to pay them their
wages when their work was done. Josephus (t) calls him that had the care
of the field, and all things relative to it; the Jews (u) say, he was
set over two and forty persons, whom he had the command of:

whose damsel is this? to whom does she belong? of what family is she?
whose daughter is she? or whose wife? for he thought, as Aben Ezra
notes, that she was another man's wife; the Targum is, of what nation is
she? perhaps her dress might be somewhat different from that of the
Israelitish women.

\(t\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 2. (u) Midrash Ruth, fol. 32. 1.

[Ruth 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rut 2:6</span></span>

And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said,.... Who
had taken a great deal of notice of Ruth, and had conversed with her,
and so was capable of giving answers to his master's question:

it is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi, out of the country
of Moab; perhaps he had not got knowledge of her name, and therefore
only describes her by the country from whence she came; and by her
coming from thence along with Naomi, when she returned from Moab, with
whose name Boaz was well acquainted, and of whose return he had been
informed; and perhaps had seen her in person, and even Ruth also, though
he might have forgot her; the Targum makes the servant to add, that she
was become a proselytess.

[Ruth 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rut 2:7</span></span>

And she said,.... These are the words of the servant continued, who goes
on with the account of Ruth, and her conduct, since she had been in the
field:

I pray you let me glean, and gather after the reapers among the sheaves:
for though by the law of Israel she had a right, as a poor widow and
stranger, to glean, yet as the owner of the field, and his servants, by
his appointment, under him, might have power of fixing the time when
such might glean, and of judging who were the proper persons to be
admitted, Ruth in her great modesty and meekness did not choose to enter
on this work without leave:

so she came; into the field and gleaned, having obtained leave:

and hath continued even from the morning until now; had been very
diligent and industrious in gathering up the loose ears of corn among
the sheaves, as she followed the reapers cutting down and binding up the
corn in sheaves; she began pretty early in the morning, and had stuck
close to it till that time, which may be supposed to be about noon, or
pretty near it, for as yet it was not mealtime, [Rut
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014). The Septuagint version is
therefore very wrong, which reads"from the morning until the
evening,''for that was not yet come, [Rut
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017) but

she tarried a little in the house; not that she went home to the city,
and stayed a little in the house of Naomi her mother, and then returned
again, for she went not home until the evening, [Rut
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017), but the meaning of the passage
is, that she had been constant and diligent in gleaning all the morning,
only a very little time that she was in the house, which was in the
field; either a farm house of Boaz adjoining to the field; or rather a
cottage or booth, as Aben Ezra interprets it, which was in the field,
whither the reapers betook themselves when they ate their meals; or to
shelter themselves under the shade of it, as Abendana, from the heat of
the sun at noonday; and here Ruth set herself down awhile for a little
rest, and ease, and refreshment; and some think she was here when Boaz
came, and therefore took the more notice of her.

[Ruth 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 2:8</span></span>

Then said Boaz unto Ruth,.... Having heard what the servant said
concerning her, he turned himself to her, and addressed her in the
following manner:

hearest thou not, my daughter? meaning not what the servant had said,
but hereby exciting her to hearken to what he was about to say to her.
Noldius (w) takes the particle to signify beseeching and entreating, and
renders the words, "hear, I pray thee, my daughter". Some from hence
conclude that Boaz was a man in years, and Ruth much younger than he,
and therefore calls her his daughter:

go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence; which she might
be inclined to, lest she should be thought to be too troublesome to be
always in one man's field; but Boaz taking a liking to her, and willing
to do her some favour, chose she should not go elsewhere:

but abide here fast by my maidens; not maidens that gleaned also as she
did, poor maidens he permitted to glean; or that gleaned for the poor,
and much less that gleaned for him; a person so rich and liberal as he
was would never employ such for his advantage, and to the detriment of
the poor; nor would it be admitted of it being contrary to the law as it
should seem, and certain it is to the later traditions of the elders;
for it is said (x),"a man may not hire a workman on this condition, that
his son should glean after him; he who does not suffer the poor to
glean, or who suffers one and not another, or who helps any one of them,
robs the poor.''But these maidens were such, who either gathered the
handfuls, cut and laid down by the reapers, and bound them up in
sheaves, or else they also reaped, as it seems from the following verse;
and it was very probably customary in those times for women to reap, as
it is now with us.

\(w\) Ebr. Concord. part. p. 257. No. 1150. (x) Misnah Peah, c. 5. sect.
6.

[Ruth 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 2:9</span></span>

Let thine eyes be upon the field that they do reap, and go thou after
them,.... And gather up the loose ears of corn dropped and left by them:

have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? do her
no hurt, or offer any incivility or rudeness to her, or even play any
wanton tricks with her, as is too common with young persons in the
fields at harvest time. This charge he now gave in her hearing, or
however suggests that he would, and therefore she might depend upon it
she should have no molestation nor any affront given her:

and when thou art athirst: as at such a season of the year, and in the
field at such work, and in those hot countries, was frequently the case:

go unto the vessels, and drink of that which the young men have drawn;
which they had fetched from wells and fountains in or near the city, and
had put into bottles, pitchers, &c. for the use of the reapers and
gatherers; we read of the well of Bethlehem, [Sa2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#015) now she is ordered to go to
these vessels, and drink when she pleased, without asking leave of any;
and Boaz no doubt gave it in charge to his young men not to hinder her.

[Ruth 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rut 2:10</span></span>

Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,.... In great
humility, and under a deep sense of the favour done her, and as showing
the greatest respect, in a civil manner, she was capable of:

and said unto him, why have I found grace in thine eyes: how is it that
one so mean and unworthy should have such favour shown?

that thou shouldest take knowledge of me; take such notice of her, show
such affection to her, and bestow such kindness on her:

seeing I am a stranger? not a citizen of Bethlehem, nor indeed one of
the commonwealth of Israel; but, as the Targum,"of a strange people, of
the daughters of Moab, and of a people who were not fit and worthy to
enter into the congregation of the Lord.''

[Ruth 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rut 2:11</span></span>

And Boaz answered and said unto her,.... Alshech thinks, that he lift up
his voice that all that stood by might hear:

it hath fully been showed me; either by Naomi, or rather by some persons
of Boaz's Naomi and reacquaintance, that had conversed with Naomi and
related to Boaz what passed between them, by which he was fully informed
of the following things mentioned by him; though the above writer
supposes, that it was showed him by the Holy Ghost:

all that thou hast done to thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband; how that, instead of going home to her father and mother, she
continued with her; how tenderly she used her; what strong expressions
of love she had made unto her; what care she had taken of her, and how
she had fed and nourished her, as the Targum, and now was gleaning for
her support, as well as her own:

and how thou hast left thy father and mother; in a literal sense, to go
along with her mother-in-law, to assist her in her journey, and see her
safe to the end of it: and in a figurative sense her idol gods, as in
[Jer 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027) so the Midrash (y):

and the land of thy nativity; the land of Moab, where she was born, and
where her kindred, relations, and friends lived, dear and engaging to
her:

and art come unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore; but by
hearsay, and what she learned of them from her husband and
mother-in-law, even the people of Israel; to whom she was come to be a
proselyte, and dwell among them, as the Targum.

\(y\) Midrash Ruth, fol. 32. 3.

[Ruth 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rut 2:12</span></span>

The Lord recompence thy work,.... The Targum adds, in this world;
meaning the kind offices she had performed, and the good service she had
done to her mother-in-law; nor is God unrighteous to forget the work and
labour of love, which is shown by children to their parents; and though
such works are not in themselves meritorious of any blessing from God
here or hereafter, yet he is pleased of his own grace to recompence
them, and return the good into their bosom manifold, it being acceptable
in his sight:

and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel; the Targum
adds, in the world to come; which is called the reward of the
inheritance, [Col 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024) a reward not of
debt, but of grace; and that will be a full one indeed, fulness of joy,
peace, and happiness, an abundance of good things not to be conceived
of, see [Jo2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008),

under whose wings thou art come to trust; whom she professed to be her
God, and whom she determined to serve and worship; whose grace and
favour she expected, and to whose care and protection she committed
herself: the allusion is either to fowls, which cover their young with
their wings, and thereby keep them warm and comfortable, and shelter and
protect them, see [Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007) or to the
wings of the cherubim overshadowing the mercy seat, [Exo
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#020) and the phrase is now adopted by
the Jews to express proselytism; and so the Targum here,"thou art come
to be proselyted, and to be hid under the wings of the Shechinah of his
glory,''or his glorious Shechinah.

[Ruth 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rut 2:13</span></span>

Then she said, let me find favour in thy sight, my lord,.... Or rather,
since she had found favour in his sight already: the words are to be
considered, not as a wish for it, but as acknowledging it, and
expressing her faith and confidence, that she should for time to come
find favour in his sight, and have other instances of it; for so the
words may be rendered, "I shall find favour" (z), for which she gives
the following reasons:

for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly
unto thine handmaid; had spoken in her commendation, and wished her all
happiness here and hereafter; said kind and comfortable words to her, to
her very heart, as in [Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002) which
were cheering, refreshing, and reviving to her:

though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens; not worthy to be one
of them, or to be ranked with them, being meaner than the meanest of
them, a poor widow, and a Moabitish woman; the Septuagint and Syriac
versions leave out the negative particle, and read, "I shall be as one
of thine handmaids".

\(z\) "inveniam gratiam", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Ruth 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rut 2:14</span></span>

And Boaz said, at mealtime come thou hither,.... This looks as if she
was now in the booth, or house in the field, where the reapers used to
retire to eat their food, or rest themselves, or take shelter from the
heat of the sun. This meal was very likely dinner, the time of which was
not yet come, but would soon, and to which Boaz invited Ruth:

and eat of the bread; his servants did, that is, partake of the
provisions they should have; bread being put for all. So Homer (a)
speaks of a large ox slain for such a meal for the reapers, besides the
"polenta" afterwards mentioned, which the women prepared, and who uses
the same word for it the Septuagint does here: "to dip thy morsel in the
vinegar"; which was used because of the heat of the season, as Jarchi
and Aben Ezra remark, for cooling and refreshment; and such virtues
Pliny (b) ascribes to vinegar, as being refreshing to the spirits,
binding and bracing the nerves, and very corroborating and
strengthening; and it is at this day used in Italy, it is said, in
harvest time, when it is hot; where they also use wine mixed with
vinegar and water, as Lavater says (c); and who from a learned physician
(d) observes, that reapers, instead of wine, use vinegar mixed with a
great deal of water, which they call household wine, allayed with water;
to which if oil and bread be put, it makes a cooling meal, good for
workmen and travellers in the heat of the sun; and the Targum calls it
pottage boiled in vinegar. The Romans had an "embamma", or sauce, made
of vinegar, in which they dipped their food (e); and Theocritus (f)
makes mention of vinegar as used by reapers: in the Syriac version it is
bread dipped in milk; and in the Arabic version milk poured upon it. The
Midrash (g) gives an allegorical sense of these words, and applies them
to the Messiah and his kingdom, and interprets the bread of the bread of
the kingdom, and the vinegar of the chastisements and afflictions of the
Messiah, as it is said, "he was wounded for our transgressions", &c.
[Isa 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005) which, by the way, is a
concession that the prophecy in that chapter relates to him:

and she sat beside the reapers; the women reapers; she did not sit along
with them, or in thee midst of them, in the row with them, as ranking
with them, but on one side of them, which was an instance of her great
modesty:

and he reached her parched corn; either Boaz himself, or he that was set
over the reapers. This parched corn seems to be the new barley they were
reaping, which they fried in a pan and ate. Galen says (h), the parched
corn which is best is made of new barley moderately dried and parched;
and that it was the custom of some to drink the same with new sweet
wine, or wine mixed with honey, in the summertime, before they went into
the bath, who say they feel themselves by this drink freed from thirst.
But this seems to be a kind of food, what is sometimes called "polenta",
which is barley flour dried at the fire, and fried after it hath been
soaking in water one night; so Lavater says, they dry the barley, having
been soaked one night in water, the next day they dry it, and then grind
it in mills; some dress new barley beaten out of green ears, and make it
while moist into balls, and being cleansed, grind it; and thus dressed
with twenty pound of barley, they put three pound of linseed, half a
pound of coriander seed, and of salt, all being dried before, are
mingled in a mill; and if to be kept, are put into new earthen vessels
with the meal and bran: but a later writer (i) takes this "Kali",
rendered parched corn, not to be anyone certain species, but something
made of corn and pulse, as lentiles, beans, &c. and especially fried or
parched vetches, of all which together was this kali or pulse; and he
refutes the notion of some, who take it to be "coffee", since that has
only been in use since the beginning of the sixteenth century, and at
first in Arabia; and is not of the kind of pulse, but is the fruit of a
certain tree, of which a liquor is made, something to drink; whereas
this was food, and was ate, as follows, see [Sa2
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#028).

and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left; she had such a plentiful
share given her, that she had more than she could eat, and was obliged
to leave some, and which it seems she carried home to her mother-in-law,
[Rut 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#018).

\(a\) Iliad. 18. ver. 559, 560. (b) Nat. Hist. l. 23. c. 1. (c) In loc.
(d) Christophor. "a Vega de arte Medendi", l. 2. apud ib. (e) Salmuth in
Pancirol, par. 2. tit. 2. p. 83. (f) Idyll, 10. ver. 13. (g) Melrash
Ruth, fol. 33. 2. (h) De Aliment. Facult. l. 1. apud Lavater. in loc.
(i) Neumann. apud Rambachium in loc.

[Ruth 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 2:15</span></span>

And when she was risen up to glean,.... After she had ate sufficiently,
and refreshed herself, she rose up from her seat to go into the field
and glean again; which shows her industry:

Boaz commanded his young men; the reapers, or who gathered the handfuls,
and bound them up in sheaves:

saying, let her glean even among the sheaves; this she had requested of
the reapers when she first came into the field, and it was granted her,
[Rut 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#007) but this, as it was granted
by Boaz himself, so was still a greater favour; and there is some
difference in the expression, for it may be rendered here, "among those
sheaves" (h), pointing to a particular spot where might be the best ears
of corn, and where more of them had fallen:

and reproach her not; as not with her being a poor woman, a widow, a
Moabitish woman, so neither with being a thief, or taking such corn she
should not, or gleaning where she ought not.

\(h\) "inter ipsos manipulos", Tigurine version, Rambachius.

[Ruth 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rut 2:16</span></span>

And let fall some of the handfuls on purpose for her,.... That is, when
they had reaped an handful, instead of laying it in its proper order, to
be taken up by those that gathered after them, or by themselves, in
order to be bound up in sheaves, scatter it about, or let it fall where
they reaped it:

and leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not for taking
them, as if she did a wrong thing.

[Ruth 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 2:17</span></span>

So she gleaned in the field until even,.... An instance of her great
diligence and industry, attending to this mean employment constantly
from morning tonight:

and beat out that she had gleaned: she did not bind up her gleanings in
a bundle, and carry it home on her head, as gleaners with us do, but she
beat it out with a staff in the field, where she gleaned it, and
winnowed it, very probably in the threshingfloor of Boaz; by which means
what she had gleaned was brought into a lesser size and weight, and was
a lighter burden to carry home:

and it was an ephah of barley; or three seahs of barley, as the Targum;
which, according to Bishop Cumberland (i), was six gallons, and three
pints, and three solid inches: an omer is said to be the tenth part of
an ephah, and, made into bread, was as much as a man could eat in one
day, [Exo 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016), so that Ruth got
enough in one day, for herself and her mother-in-law, which would last
five days at least. This was a great deal for one woman to pick up, ear
by ear, in one day; and must be accounted for, not only by her diligence
and industry, but by the favour shown her by the reapers, under the
direction of Boaz, who suffered her to glean among the sheaves, and let
fall handfuls for her to pick up.

\(i\) Of Scripture Weights and Measures, ch. 3. p. 64.

[Ruth 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rut 2:18</span></span>

And she took it up,.... The ephah of barley, into her arms, or on her
shoulders:

and went into the city; the city of Bethlehem:

and her mother in law saw what she had gleaned: she set it down before
her, and she looked at it with admiration, that she should glean so much
in one day:

and she brought forth; not Naomi, as Josephus (k) represents it, who
understood it as if she brought forth some food her neighbours had
brought her, part of which she kept for Ruth, though he takes it in the
other sense also; but the meaning is, that Ruth brought forth out of a
scrip, as the Targum adds; besides the ephah of barley she set before
her, she brought some victuals out of a bag:

and gave to her, that she had reserved after she was sufficed; not that
she ate of the barley, and her mother-in-law also; and then she gave her
the rest to lay up against another time, as some interpret it; but the
remainder of the food which Boaz gave her at dinner time, which she
could not eat, [Rut 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#014) she reserved
for her mother, and now gave it to her; an instance of that piety
commended by the apostle, [Ti1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004).

\(k\) Antiqu l. 5. c. 9. sect. 2.

[Ruth 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rut 2:19</span></span>

And her mother in law said unto her, where hast thou gleaned today?....
In what part of the field of Bethlehem? or on whose land, that she had
gleaned so much? not that she suspected that she had got it in an
illicit manner, but supposed she had been directed by the providence of
God to a spot of ground where there was good gleaning; of that she had
met with some hand, that had dropped ears of corn plentifully in her
favour:

and where wroughtest thou? which is the same question repeated in other
words, and shows that gleaning is a work, and a hard work too, closely
followed, to be stooping and picking up ears of corn a whole day
together:

blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee: she knew, by the quantity
of corn she brought home, that she must have had kindness shown her by
somebody; and especially she knew it by the food she brought home, and
therefore pronounced the man blessed, or wished him happiness, before
she knew who he was; though perhaps she might guess at him, or
conjecture in her mind who it was that had taken notice of her:

and she showed her mother in law with whom she had wrought: that is,
with whose reapers, men and maidens, she had wrought, whom she followed
in gleaning, they working in one sort of work, and she in another, yet
in the same field:

the man's name with whom I wrought today is Boaz; that is, in whose
field, and with whose servants, she wrought; for Boaz wrought not
himself, unless this can be understood of her eating and drinking with
him; but the other sense is best.

[Ruth 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rut 2:20</span></span>

And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, blessed be he of the Lord,....
Or the Lord bless him with all kind of blessings, temporal and
spiritual; and as he has blessed him already, may he be blessed more and
more:

who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead; he had
been kind to Elimelech and to his sons, who were now dead, and he
continued his kindness to the reliefs of them, Naomi and Ruth, who were
living, and was kind to them for the sake of the dead; and showing
kindness to them expressed his respect to the memory of the dead:

and Naomi said unto her; continued her speech to her, and added to what
she had said:

the man is near of kin to us; a near relation of ours, meaning by her
husband's side: yea:

one of our next kinsmen; the nearest we have, there was but one nearer
than he: the word for kinsman here is "Goel", a redeemer; for to such
who were in the degree of kindred as Boaz was, and he that was nearer
still than he to them, belonged the right of redemption, and therefore
were called by the name of "Goel", a redeemer, as Ben Melech observes;
they had a right to avenge the blood of the slain, to redeem their
houses and possessions, if sold or mortgaged, and their persons by
marrying them, and raising up seed to a deceased brother, or kinsman.

[Ruth 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rut 2:21</span></span>

And Ruth the Moabitess said, he said unto me also,.... Besides the
favours he has shown me already, he has given me reason to expect more,
for he has given me this strict order:

thou shalt keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my
harvest; both barley harvest and wheat harvest; his will was, that she
kept following them, and gleaned after them, as long as both harvests
lasted. The Septuagint version is, "with my maidens", and which agrees
with [Rut 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#008), where the order of Boaz
is expressed, and with the instructions of Naomi in the next verse, who
so understood it; but if we understand it of young men here, there is no
contradiction; for both young men and maidens wrought together in the
same field, either in reaping or binding up; so that if she kept fast by
the one, she also would do the same by the other.

[Ruth 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rut 2:22</span></span>

And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law,.... Observing the charge
Boaz had given her, she thought fit to advise her upon it:

it is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens; that is, go
out in the morning with them, set out from Bethlehem when they went to
work, and so continue with them all the day:

that they meet thee not in any other field; the meaning is, either that
men might not meet her in another field alone, or rush upon her at once
and unawares, and reproach her, or beat her, or indeed force her; or
else that the servants of Boaz might not meet her, or see her in another
field, and report it to their master, who would be offended at her; and
take it as a slight of his kindness to her; which latter seems rather to
be the sense.

[Ruth 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rut 2:23</span></span>

So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean,.... Accepting the
kindness of Boaz, and attending to the advice of her mother-in-law, as
well as using all diligence to get a livelihood for her mother and
herself; in which she was a wonderful instance of dutiful affection,
humility, and industry: and so she continued

unto the end of barley harvest, and of wheat harvest; which latter began
at Pentecost, as the former did at the passover; and, according to the
Midrash (l), from the beginning of the one, to the end of the other,
were three months; though it may be, they were gathered in sooner:
indeed from the passover to Pentecost were seven weeks, which was the
difference between the beginning of one harvest, and the beginning of
the other:

and dwelt with her mother in law; which is to be understood either of
her coming home at night, after she had been gleaning all day, and
lodging with her mother-in-law, which was her constant custom during
both harvests; or that after the harvests were ended, she continued to
dwell with her mother-in-law; which seems to be added for the sake of
carrying on the history in the following chapter.

\(l\) Midrash Ruth, fol. 33. so Alshech in loc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 3](rut003)

</div>
