<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1030)  [Next](sa2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 31:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 31

This chapter gives an account of the battle between the Philistines and
the Israelites, which had been preparing for, and the issue of it; in
which Saul, his three sons, and his servants, were slain, upon which his
army fled, and several of his cities were taken, [Sa1
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001); what the Philistines did with
his body and his armour, [Sa1 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008);
the former of which, together with the bodies of his sons, the men of
Jabeshgilead rescued, and burnt them, and buried their bones under a
tree at Jabesh, expressing great sorrow and concern, [Sa1
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 31:1</span></span>

Now the Philistines fought against Israel,.... Being come to Jezreel
where Israel pitched, [Sa1 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001); they
fell upon them, began the battle:

and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines; at the first
onset, as it should seem:

and fell down slain in Mount Gilboa; which was near, and whither fleeing
they were pursued and slain, at least great numbers of them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 31:2</span></span>

And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul,.... Stuck to him, pushed
him close, bore hard upon him in that part of the army where he was
having a design upon his person:

and upon his sons; who were with him:

and the Philistines slew Jonathan; who is mentioned first, being the
eldest son, and perhaps first slain; and this was so ordered by the
providence of God, that David's way to the throne might be more clear
and easy; for though Jonathan would not have opposed him himself, yet
the people, fond of him, would, at least many of them, been for setting
him on the throne; and though he would have refused it, knowing David
was the Lord's anointed, and have made interest for him, this would have
looked as if he had made him king, and not the Lord:

and Abinadab and Malchishua, Saul's sons; these also were slain; former
of these is called Ishui, [Sa1 14:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#049);
Ishbosheth either was not in the battle, being left at home, as unfit
for war, or to take care of the kingdom; or else he fled with Abner, and
others, and escaped, and who was to be a trial to David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 31:3</span></span>

And the battle went sore against Saul,.... Pressed heavy upon him; he
was the butt of the Philistines, they aimed at his person and life:

and the archers hit him; or "found him" (a); the place where was, and
directed their arrows at him:

and he was sore wounded of the archers; or rather "he was afraid" of
them, as the Targum, for as yet he was not wounded; and so the Syriac
and Arabic versions render it, and is the sense Kimchi and Ben Melech
give of the word: he was not afraid of death, as Abarbinel observes, he
chose to die; but he was afraid he should be hit by the archers in such
a way that he should not die immediately, and should be taken alive and
ill used; the Philistines, especially the Cherethites, were famous for
archery; See Gill on [Zep 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005).

\(a\) "et inveserust cum", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 31:4</span></span>

Then said Saul unto his armourbearer,.... Who, the Jews (b) say, was
Doeg the Edomite, promoted to this office for slaying the priests:

draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; for if he was wounded,
yet not mortally, and it is certain he did not so apprehend it. It is
much the sword of the armourbearer should be sheathed in a battle; but
perhaps he was preparing for flight, and so had put it up in its
scabbard:

lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me; lest
they should not dispatch him at once, but put him to a lingering and
torturing death, and insult him, and mock at him, as they did Samson:

but his armourbearer would not, for he was sore afraid; to lay his hand
on the king the Lord's anointed, to take away his life, being more
scrupulous of doing that, if this was Doeg, than of slaying the priests
of the Lord; or he might be afraid of doing this, since should he
survive this action, he would be called to an account by the Israelites,
and be put to death for killing the king:

therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it; or rather "the sword",
the sword of his armourbearer, and so was a suicide: the Jews endeavour
to excuse this fact of Saul, because he knew he should die in battle
from the words of Samuel; and being pressed sore by the archers, he saw
it was impossible to escape out of their hands and therefore judged it
better to kill himself than to fall by the hands of the uncircumcised;
but these excuses will not do. Josephus (c) denies he killed himself;
that though he attempted it, his sword would not pierce through him, and
that he was killed by the Amalekite, and that that was a true account he
gave to David in the following chapter; though it seems rather to be a
lie, to curry favour with David, and that Saul did destroy himself.

\(b\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 77. B. (c) Antiqu. l. 6. c.
14. sect. 7.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 31:5</span></span>

And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead,.... By his own hands,
and not by the hands of the Amalekite, which the armour bearer would
scarcely have suffered:

he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with him; some think that
Saul, and his armourbearer, died by the same sword, which was the
armourbearer's; and if he was Doeg, they fell probably by the same sword
with which the priests of the Lord were murdered at Nob, [Sa1
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#018); and it is observed by an
historian (d), that the murderers of Julius Caesar slew themselves with
the same dagger they destroyed him.

\(d\) Sucton. Vit. Caesar. c. 89.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 31:6</span></span>

So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer,.... Only with
this difference, his three sons died honourably in the field of battle,
but he and his armourbearer destroyed themselves. Josephus says (e) he
reigned eighteen years in the life of Samuel, and after his death twenty
two years, which make the forty years the apostle ascribes to him, [Act
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021); Eupolemus (f), an Heathen
writer, makes him to reign twenty one years; but of the years of his
reign, both before and after the death of Samuel, chronologers are not
agreed, see [Sa1 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001); and See Gill on
[Act 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021),

and all his men that same day together; not all the soldiers in his
army; for many of them fled and escaped, and even Abner the general of
the army, but his household servants, or those that were near his
person, his bodyguards.

\(e\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14. sect. 9. (f) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l.
9. c. 3. p. 447.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 31:7</span></span>

And which the men of Israel that were on the other side of the
valley,.... The valley of Jezreel; of which See Gill on [Hos
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005),

and they that were on the other side Jordan; or rather "on that side";
for the phrase will bear to be rendered either way, and so may mean that
side of Jordan on which the battle was fought; for as for the other
side, or that beyond it, the Israelites there could not be in such fear
of the Philistines, nor do we ever read of their inhabiting any cities
there; though as the phrase is used of the valley, as well as of the
river, it may be rendered "about the valley, and about Jordan" (g), and
so describes such that dwelt near to each of them:

saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead;
that is, had information and intelligence of those facts, for it is not
to be supposed they saw them with their eyes:

they forsook, the cities, and fled; fearing they should be put to the
sword, or carried captive:

and the Philistines came and dwelt them; having nothing more to do than
to come and take possession.

\(g\) "circa convellem illiam--circa Jordanem", Junius & Tremellius,
Picator; so Noldius, p. 295. No. 936.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 31:8</span></span>

And it came to pass on the morrow,.... The day after the battle, which
perhaps was fought till night came on:

when the Philistines came to strip the slain; of their clothes, and take
from them whatever was valuable, as their booty:

that they found Saul and his sons fallen in Mount Gilboa; to which they
had betaken themselves, when the battle went against them in the valley;
of which see [Sa1 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 31:9</span></span>

And they cut off his head,.... And fastened it in the temple of Dagon,
[Ch1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#010); perhaps that which was at
Ashdod, one of the principalities of the Philistines, [Sa1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#001),

and stripped off his armour; or vessels (h), his clothes as well as his
armour, and what he had about him; as for his crown on his head, and the
bracelet on his arm, the Amalekite took them before the Philistines
came, [Sa2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#010),

and sent into the land of the Philistines round about: not his head and
his armour, for they were placed in the temple of their idols; unless we
can suppose these were first carried about for show, and as proofs of
the victory: but rather messengers, who were sent express with the news:

to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people; that so
they might be glad and rejoice, and give praise to their idols, to whom
they ascribed the success they had.

\(h\) "vasa ejus", Munster, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 31:10</span></span>

And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth,.... A temple
dedicated to their deities, called by this name; of which See Gill on
[Jdg 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013); Nothing was more common
with the Gentiles than to place in their temples the arms they took from
their enemies, as is strongly expressed by Homer (i) and Virgil (k); and
indeed the Jews did the same, as appears by the sword of Goliath being
laid up in the tabernacle, [Sa1 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#009).
Here also the Heathens (l) hung up their own arms when the war was
ended:

and they fastened his body to the wall of Bethshan; which Josephus (m)
says is the same which in his time was called Scythopolis, from the
Scythians that possessed it, before called Nysa, according to Pliny (n):
it was given to the tribe of Manasseh, but they could not drive out the
inhabitants of it, so that it was always in the possession of others,
[Jos 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011); where it is called
Bethshean; to the wall of the city they fastened the body of Saul with
nails, as it is commonly understood; but it is more likely they hung it
on a gibbet without, and near the walls of the city; so the Targum, they
hung his body; or, as Josephus (o), they crucified it there; and so they
did also the bodies of his sons, as appears from [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012).

\(i\) , Iliad. 7. ver. 83. (k) "Multaque praeterea sacris in postibus
arma", &c. Aeneid. 7. ver. 183. So Persius, Satyr. 6. ver. 45. (l)
Messal. Corvin. de August. Progen. (m) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14.)
l. 8. (n) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 18. Vid. Solin. Polyhistor. c. 49. (o) Ut
supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14. l. 8.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 31:11</span></span>

And the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead,.... Who lived on the other side
Jordan, about eight miles from Bethshan, according to Fuller (p):

heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul; not only that they
had got the victory over him, and routed his army, but had abused his
body, and hung it up by way of reproach and ignominy; which they could
not bear to hear of, remembering with gratitude the kindness he had
shown to them, in delivering them out of the hands of Nahash the
Ammonite, [Sa1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001).

\(p\) Pisgah-Sight of Palestine, b. 2. ch. 2. p. 82.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 31:12</span></span>

All the valiant men arose,.... Of the city of Jabeshgilead, fired with
indignation at the Philistines' ill usage of Saul and the bodies of his
sons:

and went all night; not only for secrecy, but for haste:

and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of
Bethshan, and came to Jabesh; brought them with them thither, the
Philistines either having no knowledge of it, or not daring to oppose
them:

and burnt them there: that is, the flesh of them, for the bones they
buried, as in [Sa1 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013); and this
they did, contrary to the common usage of the country, which was not to
burn; but this they did, that if the Philistines should come to recover
them, they would not be able to do it: though the Targum is,

"they burnt over them, as they burn over their kings there;''they made a
burning for them of spices over them; or of their beds, and other
household goods, as Kimchi and Ben Melech observe, though they prefer
the other sense; see [Ch2 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014)
perhaps the true reason might be, because they were putrid and
infectious.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 31:13</span></span>

And they took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh,....
For though they burned the bodies, yet so as to preserve the bones; and
these, together with the ashes of the parts burnt, they gathered up, and
buried under a tree near this city; this tree is said to be an oak, [Ch1
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#012); so Deborah, the nurse of
Rebekah, was buried under an oak, [Gen
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008). The Jews generally interred
their dead under some oak, as aforementioned writer observes (q);
pleased perchance with the parallel, as he expresses it, that as these
plants, seemingly dead in winter, have every spring an annual
resurrection, so men's dry bones shall have new sap put into them at the
day of judgment:

and fasted seven days; not that they ate and drank nothing all that
time, but they fasted every day till evening, as the Jews used to do; so
long it seems a man may live without eating, but not longer; See Gill on
[Exo 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018) and see Gill on [Kg1
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008); this they did, as Kimchi thinks,
in memory of the seven days Nahash the Ammonite gave them for their
relief, in which time Saul came and saved them, [Sa1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#003).

\(q\) Pisgah-Sight of Palestine b. 2. ch. 2. p. 82.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Introduction](sa2000)

</div>
