<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1021)  [Next](sa1023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 22

This chapter gives us an account of the flight of David from place to
place, from Gath to the cave of Adullam, where his relations came to
him; from thence to Mizpeh in Moab, where he got leave of the king of
Moab for his father and mother to dwell there; and from thence, by the
advice of Gad the prophet, departed into the land of Judah, and came to
the forest of Hareth, [Sa1 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001); and
of the complaint of Saul to his servants of their unfaithfulness to him,
and indolence and unconcern at the behaviour of Jonathan and David to
him, [Sa1 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#006); when Doeg the Edomite
informed him of David being seen by him at Nob, and of his receiving
food and a sword from Ahimelech the priest, who inquired of the Lord for
him, [Sa1 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009); upon which Saul sent
for Ahimelech and all the priests at Nob, and charged them with a
conspiracy against him; and notwithstanding the defence the priest made,
Saul ordered him and the rest of the priests to be slain by his guards;
which they refusing, Doeg became the executioner of them, and of all the
inhabitants of the city of Nob, and the cattle in it, [Sa1
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#011); only Abiathar a son of
Ahimelech escaped and fled to David with the sorrowful news; which
greatly affected David, looking upon himself to be the occasion of this
sad disaster, and he took Abiathar under his protection, and promised
him safety, [Sa1 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 22:1</span></span>

David therefore departed from thence,.... From Gath, being driven by
Achish from his court, and let go by his servants, and glad he was of
the deliverance:

and escaped to the cave Adullam; which was no doubt near to a city of
the same name in the tribe of Judah, of which See Gill on [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035); this being a strong place, and
in his own tribe, he might hope to be in greater safety; here he penned
his hundred forty second psalm, see [Psa
142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001),

and when his brethren and all his father's house heard it; that he was
come thither:

they went down thither to him; to visit and comfort him, counsel and
assist him all they could; and chiefly to secure themselves from the
rage and malice of Saul, who they might fear would fall upon them, and
avenge himself on them for David's sake.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 22:2</span></span>

And everyone that was in distress,.... In straitened circumstances,
through the oppression of men, through poverty, and afflictive
providences in their families:

and everyone that was in debt; and not able to pay their debts, and
whose creditors were pressing upon them:

and everyone that was discontented; with Saul's government and conduct:
or "bitter in soul" (x); distressed and uneasy in their minds, being
pinched with want, or pressed with sore afflictions, which made them
very disconsolate: these

gathered themselves unto him; to help him, or rather to be helped by
him; hoping in time things would take a favourable turn with him, and he
should be advanced to the throne, and so their circumstances would be
mended thereby:

and he became a captain over them; they enlisted themselves in his
service, and he took the command of them; he might not know the
circumstances of those in debt, nor of any of them thoroughly, nor their
views in joining him; however he meant not to shelter them from paying
their just debts if able, nor to encourage them in disloyalty to their
king, only to make use of them for his own preservation for the present.
In this he was a type of Christ, who receives sinners distressed with a
sense of sin, discontented in their present state, and in debt, and,
unable to pay their debts; see [Mat
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028),

and there were with him about four hundred men; among whom some think
were the three mighty men spoken of in [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013).

\(x\) "amarus animo", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 22:3</span></span>

And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab,.... So called to distinguish it
from a place of the same name in the land of Israel; which Junius says
is the same with Malle, and signifies a fortified place, and refers to
the Apocrypha:"And how that many of them were shut up in Bosora, and
Bosor, and Alema, Casphor, Maked, and Carnaim; all these cities are
strong and great:'' (1 Maccabees 5:26)here he might think himself safer,
though in an enemy's country, than in the land of Israel:

and he said unto the king of Moab, let my father and my mother, I pray
thee, come forth; out of the land of Israel, or out of the cave of
Adullam, whither they were come to him:

and be with you; if not with the king of Moab at his court, yet in some
part or other of his country, where they might be safe from the rage of
Saul:

till I know what God will do for me; on whose power and providence he
wholly relied, and not upon the men that flocked to him, nor upon his
own power and policy, courage and wisdom; he knew the promise of God to
him, and he put his trust in him for the performance of it; but knew not
the time, nor way, and manner, in which it would be performed; and
expected in the meanwhile to be obliged to remove from place to place;
and considering that his aged parents were not fit for such quick and
sudden motions, and long flights, he provided as well as he could for
their settlement; which was an instance of his filial affection for
them, and piety towards them. His father's name is well known, Jesse,
[Rut 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#022), &c. but his mother's name
is nowhere mentioned; the Jews say her name was Natzbet, the daughter of
Adal (y).

\(y\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 91. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 22:4</span></span>

And he brought them before the king of Moab,.... Having leave from him
for it, and left them with him; so the Targum,"caused them to remain
before him:"

and they dwelt with him all the whole time that David was in the hold;
either in the cave of Adullam, as some think; or rather at Mizpeh in
Moab, which might be a fortified place; or the sense may be, while he
was in any hold in those parts, as he might go from one to another; what
became of David's parents afterwards, we nowhere else read. The Jews (z)
say the king of Moab slew his father and his mother, and his brethren,
all but one, whom Nahash the Ammonite preserved; and is the kindness
David speaks of, [Sa2 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#002); and if
this was the case, now it was that his father and mother forsook him,
and God took him up, [Psa 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010).

\(z\) Bemnidbar Rabba, sect. 14. fol. 212. 1. Tanchuma apud Jarchium in
loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 22:5</span></span>

And the prophet Gad said unto David,.... Who either accompanied him in
his exile, or was sent unto him on this account, being one of the
company of the prophets, over whom Samuel was president, [Sa1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020),

abide not in the hold, depart, and get thee into the land of Judah; this
seems to confirm it that the hold David was in was not the cave of
Adullam, because that was in the tribe of Judah; but rather some hold in
the land of Moab, which he is directed by the prophet to leave, and go
into the country of Judah, his own tribe, where Saul would not be so
forward to pursue him, and where he would be among his friends, and in
the way, upon Saul's death, to be anointed king over Judah; besides,
appearing more openly would show the innocence of his cause, and his
confidence in the Lord, more than to lurk about in a foreign land:

then David departed; from "Mizpeh" in "Moab"; or, however, from the hold
in which he was:

and came into the forest of Hareth; where he would have places and
opportunity enough to hide himself as he saw fit. Jerom (a) speaks of a
village called Arath, where David abode, to the west of Jerusalem.
Kimchi says this was a dry barren place, but for the sake of David it
was made by the Lord a well watered and fruitful one.

\(a\) De loc. Heb. fol. 88. L.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 22:6</span></span>

When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with
him,.... That it was known where David was, and what number of men were
gathered to him, and that they now openly appeared in the tribe of
Judah; for some time Saul had heard nothing of him, but now a report had
reached his ears that David was in arms, and at the head of a number of
men; which now greatly alarmed Saul, and possessed him with fears and
jealousies of his people, and all about him:

now Saul abode in Gibeah, under a tree in Ramah; this was Gibeah of
Saul, and in or near which was a place called Ramah, or an high place,
as the word signifies, on which was a remarkable tree, and under that
Saul abode, being a proper shelter for him from any inclemency of the
weather; for this was not Ramah where Samuel dwelt, though the Jews in
the Talmud (b) so think, and metaphorically understand the tree in it of
Samuel in Ramah praying for him, by means of which he continued two
years in the height of his kingdom; but this was a tree in a literal
sense. R. Jonah (c) says it is possible it might be the same which in
Arabia is called Ethel, and is like to a tamarisk tree:

having his spear in his hand: ready to defend himself, and revenge his
enemies; or rather which he held as a sceptre in his hand; See Gill on
[Sa1 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#033),

and all his servants were standing about him; in reverence of him, and
honour to him, waiting upon him, and ready to obey his orders: these
were his courtiers, or his guards, or both.

\(b\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 5. 2. (c) Apud Ben Melech in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 22:7</span></span>

Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him,.... He took this
opportunity of addressing them in the following manner, upon the report
of David being at the head of a certain number of men:

hear now, ye Benjamites; for Saul being of the tribe of Benjamin, his
courtiers and his bodyguards chiefly, if not altogether, consisted of
persons of that tribe; and therefore as they were under obligation to
him, and ought to abide by him, and adhere closely to him, so it was the
more ungrateful in them, as he thought, not to be concerned for his
honour and interest:

will the son of Jesse give everyone of you fields and vineyards; as Saul
had done, or was capable of doing, and would do if they were faithful to
him; whereas it was not in the power of David, whom in contempt he calls
the son of Jesse, to do it; and even should he ever be king, and in his
power to make such donations, it cannot be thought he would give them to
them, but to the favourites of his own tribe:

and make you all captains of thousands and captains of hundreds; which
he now could not do, since he had with him but four hundred men in all;
and should his army increase, and the kingdom come into his hands, so
far would all of them be from being advanced to posts in the army, that
it was probable none of them would, but those of his own tribe and
party.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 22:8</span></span>

That all of you have conspired against me,.... For though they had not
revolted from him, and been guilty of overt acts of treason, yet since
they did not discover to him what he supposed they knew, and showed no
concern for the circumstances in which he was, he interpreted this a
conspiracy against him:

and there is none that showeth me that my son hath made a league with
the son of Jesse; Saul did not know this certainly, he only suspected it
from the strict and close friendship between them, and imagined that
some of his servants were acquainted with it, though they kept it from
him; whereas none knew of it but Jonathan and David themselves:

and there is none of you that is sorry for me; concerned, troubled, and
grieved, that he should be in such circumstances, his own son and his
son-in-law in league against him: or, as De Dieu renders it, were not
"solicitous" for him, cared not how things went with him, or, against
him:

or showeth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me to
lie in wait, as at this day? which he concluded was the case, from
Jonathan's not appearing at court since Saul cast the javelin at him,
[Sa1 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#010); or, however, if he did,
his countenance showed he was uneasy and discontented, and displeased
with Saul; and, besides, he could not think that David, with such a
handful of men he had with him, would ever attempt to invade his
kingdom, and seize his crown and throne, unless he was privately
encouraged by his own son; and David's being either in the cave of
Adullam, or forest of Hareth, whichever of them Saul heard of, he
interpreted as lying in wait for him, whereas it was only for the
security of himself; and what Saul took ill of his servants was, that
none of them apprized him of his son's concern in this matter.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 22:9</span></span>

Then answered Doeg the Edomite,.... Josephus (d) calls him a Syrian, and
so the Septuagint version; see [Sa1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007); being full of enmity to David,
and willing to curry favour with Saul, and eager of further preferment,
which Saul seemed to promise; and being more forward than the rest of
his servants, prevented them and spoke first:

(which was set over the servants of Saul): over his herdsmen; see [Sa1
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#007),

and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob to Ahimelech the son of
Ahitub; in imitation of Saul, he calls David by way of contempt the son
of Jesse; and signifies that what he had to say of him was not by
report, but he himself was an eyewitness of his coming to Nob, a city of
the priests, and to Ahimelech the high priest there, and of what passed
between them.

\(d\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 12. sect. 1, 4.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 22:10</span></span>

And he inquired of the Lord for him,.... Which not being expressed
before, some have taken it to be a lie of Doeg's, he being charged with
lying by David, [Psa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003); but it is
not at all improbable that David should desire him to inquire of the
Lord for him, and that he did; and he seems to acknowledge it, [Sa1
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#015); but according to the Jewish
writers Doeg meant by this to prove a charge of treason both against
David and Ahimelech; that the former made himself king, and the latter
owned him to be so, since inquiry by Urim and Thummim was not made for a
private person, but for a king (e):

and gave him victuals; hallowed bread, loaves of shewbread, which none
but priests might eat of; such was his kindness to him:

and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine; which David took from
him, and slew him with it. All this was true, but then he acted the
deceitful part, with which he is charged in the above psalms, in not
declaring how David had imposed upon the priest, by pretending he was
sent in haste on the king's business; which was the reason he was so ill
provided with servants, food, and armour; which if Doeg had reported
faithfully, as he ought to have done, would have saved the credit and
life of the priest, and of his family.

\(e\) Misn. Yoma, c. 7. sect. 5.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 22:11</span></span>

Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub,....
Sent messengers to him, and summoned him to appear before him:

and all his father's house; the family of Eli, which God had threatened
to destroy, and now the time was hastening on:

the priests that were in Nob; in which dwelt none but priests, at least
these were the chief of the inhabitants, and therefore called the city
of the priests, [Sa1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019),

and they came all of them to the king; not being conscious of any evil
they had committed, or that could be charged upon them; or otherwise
they would not have appeared, but would have fled to David for
protection.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 22:12</span></span>

And Saul said, hear now, thou son of Ahitub,.... The charge exhibited
against him; in contempt of him, he does not so much as call him by his
name, nor give him the title of his office, as high priest; though he
was the second person in the kingdom, and to whose office a few years
ago the civil government was annexed:

and he answered, here I am, my lord; giving due honour to Saul, though
he received none from him, and appearing with great boldness, as having
a clear conscience, and so ready to hear what was to be said unto him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 22:13</span></span>

And Saul said unto him, why have ye conspired against me,

thou, and the son of Jesse?.... No less than treason and rebellion is he
charged with, in conjunction with David; the proof follows:

in that thou hast given him bread and a sword; the shewbread, and the
sword of Goliath, [Sa1 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006), and so
had furnished him with food and arms; one that he suggests was in
rebellion against him, and therefore he must be involved in the same
crime; but the stronger proof follows

and hast inquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie
in wait as at this day: inquired of the Lord for him by Urim and
Thummim, to know his mind in this affair, and thereby encouraged him to
rise up in rebellion against him, and to lie in wait, as he did at the
present time, watching for an opportunity to seize his crown and
kingdom.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 22:14</span></span>

Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said,.... First with respect to
David, and then with regard to himself; with respect to David as
follows:

and who is so faithful amongst thy servants as David; I considered him,
as if he should say, as a servant of thine, upon an errand of thine, and
doing thy business; and as a faithful one, none more so, and as such I
valued and regarded him, not as a rebel to thee, having no such thought
of him:

which is the king's son in law; who has behaved himself so well, and
thou hast entertained such an opinion of him, as to take him into thy
family, and marry thy daughter to him; wherefore showing him favour, and
doing him honour, was doing honour to thee and thy family, and surely
there can be no blame in that:

and goeth at thy bidding; has always been ready to execute thy commands,
and obey thine orders, let them be what they will; as to go out against
an enemy, and fight Saul's battles for him:

and is honourable in thine house? behaved honourably there, and highly
esteemed by all, as well as had the honour bestowed upon him to be the
king's son-in-law, and made captain of a thousand; and therefore who
could think that showing respect to such a man could be deemed treason
and conspiracy, or he be thought to be a traitor to the king? and then
with respect to himself he answers,

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 22:15</span></span>

Did I then begin to inquire of God for him?.... Was this the first time
of inquiring of God for him? no; I have done this many a time, when he
has been going upon the king's business, engaging in war with his
enemies; he has then consulted the Lord by me, and I have inquired of
the Lord for him, as I now did; and which I did as innocently, and as
much for the king's service, as ever I did any. Kimchi observes it may
be read without the interrogation, "that day I began to inquire of God
for him"; it was the first time I ever did, and I did not know it would
have been grievous to thee, or have given thee any disturbance or
uneasiness. I did not know that he fled from thee, or was not in thy
service, and upon thy business; had I known it, I would never have done
it, and as it is the first time it shall be the last:

be it far from me; from doing such a thing, had I known it to be
disagreeable to thee, or how David stood with thee:

let not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house
of my father; charge me or them with the crime of treason, or conspiracy
against him, or with aiding:, assisting, and abetting traitors and
conspirators:

for thy servant knew nothing of all this, less or more; was entirely
ignorant of this affair; which plain, honest, account of things, one
might have thought, would have been satisfying to Saul; but it seems it
was not by what follows.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 22:16</span></span>

And the king said, thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech,.... He pronounces
the sentence himself, without taking the opinion and advice of others,
or further time; which was an act of arbitrary power, and upon an
innocent person, which was an act of great injustice:

thou, and all thy father's house; more unrighteous still; but God
suffered him to do this to fulfil his will, and execute his threatenings
against the house of Eli, which was this priest's father's house, for
former wickedness; but this is no excuse for, nor extenuation of the sin
of, Saul.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 22:17</span></span>

And the king said unto the footmen that stood about him,.... Or the
"runners" (f); the running footmen, that used to run before him when he
went out from place to place, and were here waiting on him, ready to set
out whenever he should give the orders to go elsewhere. The tradition of
the Jews is, that these were Abner and Amasa (g); but, as Kimchi
observes, they were not footmen, but princes, captains in the army, and
the first of them the general of it:

turn and slay the priests of the Lord; he owns them to be the priests of
the Lord, and calls them so, and yet gave orders to put them to death,
though innocent; one would have thought this their character would have
flown in his face, and stung his conscience, and deterred him from so
foul a fact:

because their hand also is with David; as well as Ahimelech; which did
not at all appear, nor that they had so much as seen him at Nob, only
Ahimelech; and still less that they had entered into a conspiracy with
him:

and because they knew when he fled, and did not show it to me; which
also was false; they knew nothing of the flight of David, and therefore
could not discover it to the king:

but the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon
the priests of the Lord; their consciences would not suffer them to do
it; they refused to obey the king's orders, and chose rather to expose
themselves to his resentment, than to be guilty of such a crime. Saul's
footmen had more sense of honour, justice, and truth, than he himself
had, and were worthy of praise; but they would have been deserving of
more, if they could not have prevailed upon him by entreaties and
remonstrances to have forborne such a bloody execution, instead of being
the tame spectators of it, they had taken him, and bound him as a
madman, and so facilitated the escape of the priests, and prevented this
shocking scene of wickedness.

\(f\) "cursoribus", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.
(g) Midrash Tillim apud Abarbinel. in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 22:18</span></span>

And the king said to Doeg, turn thou and fall upon the priests,.... For
determined he was they should die; if one would not put them to death,
another should, and who so fit for this bloody work as the false accuser
of them, and false witness against them?

and Doeg the Edomite turned; immediately, he at once obeyed the king's
orders, as brutish as they were:

and fell upon the priests; with his sword in hand:

and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen
ephod; not the ephod of Urim and Thummim, which was only worn by the
high priest, but a garment wholly linen, worn by common priests; the
Targum is,"who are fit to be clothed with a linen ephod;''not that they
were clothed with it, but were deserving of it; or it designs the great
and more honourable among the servants of the Lord, as Kimchi observes,
for such were clothed with this garment, as Samuel and David; and he
thinks it suggests, that more were slain than these; and the Septuagint
version makes them to be eight hundred five, and Josephus (h) three
hundred eighty five; in the slaying of whom, as the same writer says,
Doeg was assisted by some wicked men like himself; and the slaughter did
not end here, as the [Sa1 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019) shows.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 12. sect. 6.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 22:19</span></span>

And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the
sword,.... Either Doeg or Saul; who, as Josephus (i) says, sent men
thither to slay all the inhabitants of it:

both men and women, children and sucklings; not sparing sex nor age:

and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword; Saul, who
was so tender hearted and merciful in the case of the Amalekites, when
his orders from the Lord were utterly to destroy them, [Sa1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#002), that he spared their king, and
the best of their cattle, [Sa1 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#007);
yet now so cruel to a city of the priests, as to destroy all the
inhabitants of it, and cattle in it; and yet this bloody affair of
Saul's is not taken notice of afterwards, only his slaughter of the
Gibeonites, [Sa2 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001); and Abarbinel
is of opinion, that the inhabitants of this place were Gibeonites, who
were hewers of wood, and drawers of water, to the house of the Lord
here, [Jos 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#023). Now Saul was the more
severe this city, to deter others from joining with David, who, if they
did, must expect the same treatment.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 12. sect. 6.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 22:20</span></span>

And one of the sons of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar,
escaped,.... Who very probably was left by his father to take care of
the sanctuary, and the holy things in it, when he and the rest of the
priests were summoned to appear before Saul; who having heard of his
bloody execution of them, before his messengers could get to Nob, took,
the ephod, with the Urim and Thummim, and made his escape, as appears
from [Sa1 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006); this man succeeded his
father in the high priesthood, and continued in it until the times of
Solomon:

and fled after David; who was now removed, or removing from the forest
of Hareth to Keilah, whither Abiathar followed him, and came to him
there, [Sa1 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006), and with whom only
he could be safe, and therefore it was right to flee unto him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 22:21</span></span>

And Abiathar showed David that Saul had slain the Lord's priests. Of
which perhaps he had not as yet heard; though tidings of such a nature
generally fly swiftly; and a sorrowful shocking account he had to give,
and which was so to David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 22:22</span></span>

And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day,.... That is, he
thought in his mind at that time:

when Doeg the Edomite was there; at Nob; in the tabernacle, at the same
time that David was there:

that he would surely tell Saul; that he saw David there, and what passed
between him and Ahimelech; he knew he was a spiteful mischievous man;
that he was a true Edomite, though a proselyte, and bore hatred and
enmity in his mind against an Israelite, and especially an Israelite
indeed, as David was:

I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house: or
have been the cause of all the evils that befell them, and the death
they were put unto, not with design, but by accident; and it grieved him
that he should be any ways an accessory thereunto, though without
intention.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 22:23</span></span>

Abide thou with me, fear not,.... He appeared to be in a fright; which
is not to be wondered at, as not knowing what to do, and where to go and
provide for his safety; when, to allay his fears, and make him easy,
David invites and encourages him to stay with him, and not be afraid of
Saul, nor any other:

for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life; or, as Kimchi observes, it
may be interpreted, "my life he seeks who seeks thy life"; we are in the
same circumstances, and have the same common enemy, and therefore it is
best and safest to be together; as the Targum,"he that seeks to kill me
seeks to kill thee;''and as Jarchi adds, he that loves me will love
thee, and he that keeps my life will keep thine:

but with me thou shalt be in safeguard; intimating, that he would be as
careful of him as of himself; and that for this reason, as Ben Gersom
suggests, because he brought the ephod with the Urim and Thummim with
him, by which he could inquire of God for him; but this was the thing
David was confident of, that God would preserve him, and raise him to
the kingdom, and therefore Abiathar might be sure of safety with him: at
this time he penned the fifty second psalm, which shows the frame of
spirit he was now in; see [Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 23](sa1023)

</div>
