<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1019)  [Next](sa1021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 20

David fleeing from Naioth came to Jonathan, and acquainted him with his
circumstances, and entreated his favour, [Sa1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001); which Jonathan promised, and
renewed the covenant with him, [Sa1
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009); a scheme was formed between
them, by which David might know whether Saul was reconciled to him, and
he might come to court, [Sa1 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#018);
which being tried, Jonathan found it was not safe for him to appear,
[Sa1 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#024); of which he gave notice by
the signals agreed on, [Sa1 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035); and
they took their leave of one another with strong expressions of
affection and attachment to each other, [Sa1
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 20:1</span></span>

And David fled from Naioth in Ramah,.... While Saul was prophesying, or
lay in a trance there:

and came; to Gibeah, where Saul dwelt, and had his palace, and kept his
court:

and said before Jonathan; whom he found there, and for whose sake he
thither fled to have his advice, and to use his interest with his
father, and be his friend at court:

what have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life? surely, as if he should say, I must
have been guilty of some very great crime, and yet I am not sensible of
it; canst thou tell me what it is that has so provoked thy father, that
nothing will satisfy him but the taking away of my life, which he seeks
to do?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 20:2</span></span>

And he said unto him, God forbid, thou shalt not die,.... He could not
believe his father had any such intention; and that if he discovered
anything of that kind, it was only when he was in a frenzy, and a
melancholy disorder had seized him; and that David had nothing to fear
on that head, and that he would secure him from all danger in that
respect; the thing was too gross and detestable to be credited:

behold, my father will do nothing, either great or small, but that he
will show it me; such an interest had he in him, and in his favour,
being his son and heir to his crown, and having done many warlike
exploits, which had the more endeared him to him, that he made him privy
to all his secret designs, and took his opinion in all matters of moment
and importance:

and why should my father hide this thing from me? his design of taking
away the life of David, if he had really formed one:

it is not so; Jonathan concluded, from his ignorance of it, there was
nothing in it, and that it was only a surmise of David's; and yet it is
strange that Jonathan should know nothing of the messengers being sent
to David's house to take him, and of others sent to Naioth after him,
and of Saul's going there himself with such a design; and if he did know
anything of the matter, he made the best of it to David, partly to allay
his fears, and partly that his father might not appear so black and vile
as he really was.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 20:3</span></span>

And David sware moreover, and said,.... To assure Jonathan of the truth
of it, that he did most certainly seek after his life, of which, as he
had no doubt himself, by an oath he endeavoured to remove any that might
be in Jonathan, who was not willing to believe his father could be
guilty of so foul a crime:

thy father certainly knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes: that
he was high in his favour, that he had a great value for him, and he had
a large share in his love and friendship, and that was the reason why he
hid from him his base intentions:

and he saith, let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved; as he
would be, both for the evil his father would be guilty of, and the
danger David, his beloved friend, would be in:

but truly, as the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but a
step between me and death; as appeared by his casting a javelin at him,
[Sa1 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#011), sending messengers to his
own house to slay him, [Sa1 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011), and
others to Naioth to seize him, [Sa1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020), and coming himself thither with
an intention to kill him, [Sa1 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#022),
and in each of these instances he had a narrow escape for his life; and
this he declared in the most solemn manner by an oath, for the
confirmation of the truth of it to Jonathan.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 20:4</span></span>

Then said Jonathan unto David,.... Now giving credit to what he had
said, and in order to comfort and support him under the apprehensions he
had of danger:

whatsoever thy soul desireth, I will even do it for thee; for the
preservation of his life, by speaking to his father on his behalf,
endeavouring to dissuade him from his evil intentions, or by hiding and
concealing him in some obscure place, that he might not execute his evil
designs upon him, or by any method he could point out to him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 20:5</span></span>

And David said unto Jonathan,.... Moved that the following method might
be taken as a trial of the disposition of Saul's mind towards David:

behold, tomorrow is the new moon; the first day of the month, which was
kept solemnly with burnt offerings and peace offerings, see [Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010). Some say (r) this feast was not
kept for the new moon, but because it was the day of the feast of
trumpets or the first day of the new year, which fell together on that
day; the calends, or first day of the month, was with the Heathens
sacred to deity (s), in imitation of the Jews:

and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat; it had been usual
for him at such a time to sit at table with the king; next to him, as
Jarchi interprets it, either as his son-in-law, or as one of his
princes; the custom being for the king, and his family and nobles, to
eat together on that day upon the peace offerings; and it was the duty
of David to attend at that time, and it might be expected he would:

but let me go; he asked leave of Jonathan, who had power in his father's
absence to grant it, he not being yet returned from Naioth:

that I may hide myself in the fields, unto the third day at even; or
until the time of the evening of the third day, as the Targum, which was
the evening of the second day of the month; for that was the third from
that evening they were discoursing together, as Ben Gersom observes; the
fields he proposed to hide himself in were near to Gibeah, and he
doubtless meant some cave in those fields, where he might be, and not be
seen by men; though it cannot be thought that he remained, or proposed
to remain, in such a place during that time, where he would be in want
of food, but that he would abide incognito among his friends somewhere
or another, until the festival was over.

\(r\) Weemse's Expos. Ceremon. Law, c. 22. p. 100, 101. (s) Macrob.
Saturnal. l. 1. c. 15. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c. 18. in
fine.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 20:6</span></span>

If thy father at all miss me,.... Or diligently inquires after me:

then say, David earnestly asked leave of me, that he might run to
Bethlehem his city: the place of his birth, called the city of David,
where he was born and had lived, [Luk
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004), which was not far from Gibeah,
and whither he could soon run; and which shows the haste he proposed to
make, and his eager desire to be there, and which also is signified by
his earnest and importunate request; for all this might be true, and no
lie of David, framed for an excuse; and after he had hid himself some
time in the field, until it was evening, he might go to Bethlehem, and
return soon enough to meet Jonathan in the field at the time fixed by
them on the third day:

for there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family; it was
customary for the family of Jesse one day in a year, and as it should
seem on a first day of the month, and perhaps the first day of the first
month, or New Year's Day, to have an anniversary feast by way of
gratitude and thankfulness for the mercies of the year past, and for the
continuance of them for time to come; in which the family rejoiced
together at the great goodness of God unto them, [Sa1
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#012).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 20:7</span></span>

If he say thus, it is well,.... It is very well, it is very good and
right in him to do so:

thy servant shall have peace; it will be a token that the wrath of the
king was removed, and that his mind was well disposed towards David, and
things had taken an happy turn, and would issue in his peace and
prosperity:

but if he be very wroth; with Jonathan for giving leave, and with David
for going away:

then be sure that evil is determined by him; that he has a settled
obstinate malice in his heart, which is become implacable and
inveterate, and confirmed in him; and that it is a determined point with
him to slay David if possible, which he hoped to have an opportunity of
doing at that time in which he was disappointed, and caused such wrath
in him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 20:8</span></span>

Therefore thou shall deal kindly with thy servant,.... By informing him
how his father's mind stood affected to him, that he might conduct
himself accordingly, either by appearing at court, or by providing for
his safety by flight:

for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the Lord with thee;
a covenant of friendship between Jonathan and David, of which Jonathan
was the first mover, and so is said to bring or persuade him into it;
called the covenant of the Lord, because made in his name and fear, and
before him as a witness of it; and this David pleads as an argument with
Jonathan, to deal kindly and faithfully by him in the present case:

notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself: or pass
sentence upon him to be slain; which, if guilty, he might have power to
do in his father's absence, and which David desires might be done,
notwithstanding the covenant of friendship between them, should he
appear to deserve it by any action of his, of which he was not
conscious; this expresses the strong sense he had of his own integrity,
and served to confirm Jonathan in his opinion of it:

for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father? deliver him up into his
hands to be put to a cruel death by him, or give him the trouble of
doing it, when he might as well dispatch him at once.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 20:9</span></span>

And Jonathan said, far be it from thee,.... To entertain such a thought
of me, or to have the least suspicion of me, that I should conceal my
father's ill intentions against thee, if known to me:

for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come
upon thee, then would I not tell it thee? certainly I would; canst thou
doubt of my kindness and fidelity? surely thou hast no reason, when such
a covenant of friendship subsists between us, and there has not been the
least breach of it on either side.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 20:10</span></span>

Then said David to Jonathan, who shall tell me?.... The disposition of
Saul's mind towards him, whether he gave a kind answer to the report of
Jonathan concerning him:

or what if thy father answer thee roughly? or hard words, as the Targum,
whether he answers in a kind, loving, and smooth manner, or whether in a
rough and angry one: the question is here, how he should be informed of
this, since especially, if in the latter, it would not be safe for
Jonathan to come himself to him, nor could he well trust the message
with any other. Abarbinel thinks, that the first of these expressions is
by way of question, who should declare to him his father's will and
intention, whether good or bad: and the latter by way of outcry, woe
unto me, if thy father should answer thee roughly; I greatly fear he
will chide thee for my sake; my heart will be filled with sorrow if thou
shouldest suffer reproach and rebuke on my account.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 20:11</span></span>

And Jonathan said unto David, come, and let us go out into the
field,.... That they might more fully, and freely, and familiarly talk
of this affair between them, without any danger of being overheard by
the servants of Saul, as they were in his palace, where they now were:

and they went out both of them into the field; which belonged to Gibeah.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 20:12</span></span>

And Jonathan said unto David, O Lord God of Israel,.... Or by the Lord
God of Israel, I swear unto thee; for this is the form of the oath, as
Jarchi and Kimchi observe:

when I have sounded my father about tomorrow any time, or the third day;
searched, inquired, and found out how his disposition is:

and, behold, if there be good toward David; if he is well disposed to
him, as may appear by speaking respectfully of him, or kindly inquiring
after him, and by being satisfied with the account given him:

and I then send not unto thee, and show it thee; then let the vengeance
of God fall upon me in some remarkable manner or another, as follows; or
"shall I not then send unto thee, and show it thee" (t)? certainly I
will; that is, I will send a messenger to thee to acquaint thee with it,
who shall tell it, and cause thee to hear it, as from myself.

\(t\) "an non tune mitterem?" Junius & Tremellius; "nonne tunc mittam ad
te?" so some in Vatablus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 20:13</span></span>

The Lord do so and much more to Jonathan,.... Recompense evil more than
can be thought of and expressed, should he neglect to inform David of
the good disposition of Saul unto him:

but if it please my father to do thee evil; if he seems determined upon
it to take away thy life:

then I will show it thee; not by a messenger, by whom it would not be
safe to communicate it, lest by that means Saul would know where he was,
and come and slay him; but Jonathan would come himself, and acquaint him
with it:

and send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace; give him leave, and
advise him to depart, and provide for his own safety, adding his
blessing on him, and prayer for him:

and the Lord be with thee, as he hath been with my father; in the
beginning of his reign, giving him counsel and advice in all things, and
victory over his enemies, succeeding and prospering him in whatsoever he
engaged in; the Targum is,"the Word of the Lord be for thy help, &c.''

Jonathan seemed to be fully apprized that David was to succeed in the
kingdom.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 20:14</span></span>

And thou shalt not only, while yet I live, show me the kindness of the
Lord,.... Such kindness as is well pleasing in the sight of God, and
imitate what he shows to men, and which was covenanted, promised, and
agreed to in the presence of the Lord, when David and Jonathan entered
into covenant with each other; this Jonathan did not doubt of, and
therefore did not make this a request:

that I die not; he had no fear nor dread on his mind, should David come
to the throne while he was alive, that he would take away his life;
which was usually done by tyrants and usurpers, when there were any that
had a fairer title, and better claim to the throne than they.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 20:15</span></span>

But also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever,....
His family should partake of it as well as himself:

no, not when the Lord hath cut off the enemies of David, everyone from
the face of the earth; Saul and his sons, and everyone that should
oppose his settlement in the kingdom: Jonathan's meaning is, that the
covenant between them should not be only between them personally, but
include their posterity, as follows.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 20:16</span></span>

So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David,.... Not with David
himself only, which was now renewed, but with his family also:

saying, let the Lord even require it at the hand of David's enemies;
take vengeance on Jonathan, or on any of his posterity, should they
break this covenant, by showing themselves enemies to David, and his
crown; and, on the other hand, also on David, and his posterity, should
they not show kindness to Jonathan and his seed, according to the tenor
of this covenant.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 20:17</span></span>

And Jonathan caused David to swear again,.... Or Jonathan added to make
David swears (u); having sworn himself to make a covenant of friendship
with David and his family, he moved and insisted on it, that David
should swear to keep covenant with him, and his family:

because he loved him; it was not so much for the good and safety of his
offspring that he made this motion, and was so desirous of renewing and
enlarging his covenant with David, as it was his strong love and
affection for him; being on that account desirous that there might be
the strictest friendship imaginable retained between the two families;
or he made him swear by his love to him, as some understand it, which is
not so likely; the former sense is better, for he himself sware by the
Lord, [Sa1 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#012),

for he loved him as his own soul; or "with the love of his soul" (w);
with the most cordial affection, with a truly hearty and sincere love,
see [Sa1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001).

\(u\) "et addidit", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; so the Tigurine
version. (w) "secundum dilectionem animae suae", Pagninus; "amore sui
ipsius", Junius & Tremellius.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 20:18</span></span>

Then Jonathan said to David, tomorrow is the new moon,.... The first day
of the month, as David had before observed, [Sa1
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#005),

and thou shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty; or be inquired
after, because not in his usual place at mealtime.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 20:19</span></span>

And when thou hast stayed three days,.... From court, either at
Bethlehem, which seems most probable, or in some other place incognito;
however, not in the field he proposed to hide himself in, where he could
not continue so long for want of food:

then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst
hide thyself; which makes it clear that he did not continue there during
that time, but went elsewhere; from whence he was to come in haste at
the expiration of three days, to the place he first hid himself in, and
which was fixed upon to meet at:

when the business was in hand; when the affair was discoursed of, about
getting knowledge how Saul was affected to David, and of informing him
of it; or "on the day of work" (x); or business, on a working day, as
the Septuagint; and so the Targum, on a common day; when, as the Vulgate
Latin, it was lawful to work on it; and such was the day when Jonathan
and David conversed together about the above affair; it being the day
before the new moon, or first day of the month, on which day they used
not to work: Some render it, "thou shalt three times go down" (y) to
that place; and the sense is, that he should come on the morrow, and if
he found not Jonathan there, he might conclude that as yet he knew
nothing of his father's mind, and therefore should come the day
following that; and if he found him not then, to come on the third day,
that so he might be on the spot, let him come on which day he would:

and shalt remain by the stone Ezel; which, because it signifies "going",
the Jewish commentators generally understand it as a sign to direct
travellers which way to go; but one would think this should be an
improper place for David to be near, since it must be where two or more
ways met, and so a public frequented place; others think therefore it
had its name from David and Jonathan often going thither, to discourse
with each other; the Septuagint calls it Ergab; and so the place where
Jonathan, the son of Saul, exercised himself by shooting darts, is
called by Jerom (z); it is said by Josephus (a) to be an hundred fifty
furlongs (about nineteen miles), from Jerusalem, and from Jordan sixty,
(about eight miles).

\(x\) "in die operis", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; "die profesto",
Tigurine version. (y) "tertiabis, descendes valde", Montanus; "descendes
ter, vel tertiabis descendere", Castalio; so Patrick. (z) De loc. Heb.
fol. 91. C. (a) Apud Adrichem. Theatrum T. S. p. 17.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 20:20</span></span>

And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof,.... On the side of
the stone Ezel; three are pitched upon, according to the number of the
days David was missing:

as though I shot at a mark; as if he made the stone the mark he shot at;
so that his shooting would not be taken notice of.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 20:21</span></span>

And, behold, I will send a lad,.... That attended on him, and carried
his bow and arrows, and fetched his arrows when he had shot them:

saying, go, find out the arrows; where they are fallen, and return them:

if I expressly say unto the lad, behold, the arrows are on this side of
thee, take them; on one side of him, whether the one or the other, which
he would bid him take up, and bring them to him:

then come thou; David, out of the place where he hid himself:

for there is peace to thee, and no hurt, as the Lord liveth; he might
appear, and not be afraid of being seen by any, since by this sign he
might be assured that Saul was well affected to him, and would show him
favour, and do him no injury; and that he might promise himself
prosperity and safety, and be assured of it for the present.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 20:22</span></span>

But if I say thus unto the young man, behold, the arrows are beyond
thee,.... Being shot to a greater distance than where the young man was:

go thy way, for the Lord hath sent thee away; then he was to depart
directly, without staying to have any conversation with Jonathan, which
would not be safe for either of them, and so make the best of his way
into the country, and escape for his life; for so it was ordered by the
providence of God, that he must not stay, but be gone immediately: the
signals were these, that if things were favourable, then he would shoot
his arrows on one side of the lad, and David might come out and show
himself at once; but if not, he would shoot them beyond him, by which he
might know that he must flee for his life.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 20:23</span></span>

And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of,.... The
covenant they had made between them and their families:

behold, the Lord be between me and thee for ever: as a witness of the
covenant, and a revenger of those that should break it; so the
Targum,"behold, the Word of the Lord be between me and thee a witness
for ever.''

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 20:24</span></span>

So David hid himself in the field,.... Not directly, but at the time
appointed; for he went to Bethlehem, and returned from thence before
that time:

and when the new moon was come; the first clay of the month, which was a
solemn festival:

the king sat him down to eat meat; Saul sat down at his table to eat of
the provisions that were set upon it; which it is very probable were the
peace offerings for that day, which he, his family, and nobles, feasted
on together; it is in the Hebrew, "he sat down at the bread" (b), which
is put for all the food on the table, and the provisions of it.

\(b\) "ad vel juxta panem", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 20:25</span></span>

And the king sat upon his seat as at other times,.... Upon the seat he
usually sat on:

even upon a seat by the wall; on a couch by the side of the wall; or, as
Jarchi and R. Isaiah say, at the head of the couch by the wall, which
was the most honourable place; and Kimchi observes, it was the custom in
those days to eat meat sitting on beds or couches, see [Sa1
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#023),

and Jonathan arose; either in reverence to his father, when he came in
and took his seat, or in respect to Abner upon his coming in, being the
son of Saul's uncle, and general of the army; for though he arose, he
did not depart, it is plain he sat down again, [Sa1
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034). Kimchi thinks, that after
Jonathan had sat down at the side of his father, he arose and placed
Abner there, because he would not be near his father, that if he should
be wroth with him on account of David, he might not be near him to smite
him:

and Abner sat by Saul's side; according to Josephus (c) Jonathan sat at
his right hand and Abner on the left, and it was usual for the master,
or principal person, to sit in the middle; so Dido in Virgil (d).
Abarbinel places them thus, Saul was at the head of the table, and David
was used to sit by him, and Jonathan by David, and Abner by Jonathan;
and now the king sat in his place, and Jonathan in his place, and Abner
after him; and David's place being empty, Jonathan was left next to his
father, without any between; wherefore he now arose from his place, and
Abner sat on that side where Saul was, so that Abner was between
Jonathan and Saul:

and David's place was empty; where he used to sit at table, he not being
there, and no one taking it.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 11. sect. 9. (d) "----- mediamque locavit".
Aeneid. 1. prope finem. Vid. Servium in ib.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 20:26</span></span>

Nevertheless, Saul spake not anything that day,.... About David's
absence, took no notice of it, said nothing about it:

for he thought something had befallen him; some impurity, some nocturnal
pollution, see [Lev 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#016),

he is not clean, surely he is not clean; which he repeated in his mind
for the confirmation of it, and in contempt, and to the reproach of
David; and in this way he accounted for his absence the first day, and
so was easy, it not being lawful and fitting for an unclean person in a
ceremonial sense to eat of the peace offerings, which Saul and his
family were now partaking of.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 20:27</span></span>

And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of the
month,.... The Targum is,"and it was on the day after it, which was the
intercalation of the second month;''when the beginning of the month was
judged of by the appearance of the moon, and there was a difficulty
about that, what day it appeared on, two days were kept for it; and
Abarbinel (e) is clear for it, that two days were kept in this month;
but if this was not the case, since the remainder of peace offerings
might be eaten the next day, [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016). Saul and his guests might meet
on the second day for that purpose:

that David's place was empty: on that day also:

and Saul said to Jonathan his son; who he knew was David's friend and
confident, and could give the best account of him:

wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday nor
today; he accounted for his not coming yesterday, because he supposed he
might be under some ceremonial uncleanness; but then that only lasted to
the evening of that day; but not coming the second day when he was
clean, he inquires after him; and not owning him for his son-in-law, by
way of contempt, and to lessen him in the esteem of all at table, he
calls him the son of Jesse.

\(e\) Comment. in Exod. xii.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 20:28</span></span>

And Jonathan answered Saul,.... In reply to Saul's question, and to
excuse David, he said:

David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem; his own city, his
native place, where his family lived, whom he was desirous to see, and
yet chose not to go without asking leave; and as Saul was not at home,
he asked leave of Jonathan, who was next to him, and acted for him; and
he was very pressing and importunate in his suit, and therefore Jonathan
could not well deny him it; and he hoped this would ben sufficient
excuse for his absence, especially when what follows should be observed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 20:29</span></span>

And he said, let me go, I pray thee, for our family hath a sacrifice in
the city,.... In the city of Bethlehem where they lived, a peace
offering on account of the new moon, and as an anniversary thanksgiving
for the mercies of the year, [Sa1
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#006); and seeing, though he was not at
the feast in one place, he observed it in another, his absence at court
was the more excusable; and the rather, since it was kept by him with
his own family, in his own city: besides, it is added:

and my brother he hath commanded me to be there; his elder brother
Eliab, whose commands, as a younger brother, he judged he ought to obey;
it is probable his father was now dead, since no mention is made of him,
and his elder brother took upon him the command of the family:

and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray
thee, see my brethren: he should take it as a favour to have leave to
depart, and be free for the present from waiting upon the king at court,
and so have an opportunity of seeing his brethren, for which he had a
great desire; having not seen them a long time, not even since he saw
them in the camp, when he slew Goliath:

therefore he cometh not to the king's table: this was the reason of it,
at least one reason of it, and Jonathan was not obliged to tell the
whole.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa1 20:30</span></span>

Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan,.... For giving David
leave to go, and for excusing him in this manner:

and he said unto him, thou son of the perverse and rebellious woman;
most of the Jewish commentators supply it as we do, but the supplement
of woman may as well be left out, and be read, "thou son of perverse
rebellion" (f); thou perverse and rebellious wretch, perverse in thy
temper, and rebellious in thy conduct; for the design of the expression
is not to reproach his mother, for which there seems no provocation, but
Jonathan only; and the next clause confirms it, which expresses a
concern for his mother's honour and credit; the Targum is,"an obstinate
son, whose rebellion is hard,''or intolerable; according to which,
Abarbinel says, it may refer to David:

do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own
confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother's nakedness? The above
writer observes, that he does not say to his own confusion, because
David would not reign in his lifetime, only after his death, but to the
shame of Jonathan and his mother; to Jonathan's shame, who would be
reckoned by men an arrant fool, to be so friendly to a rival, and who in
all probability would jostle him out of the throne; and what would men
say of him? that either he was not fit to reign, or had no right to the
throne, that a son-in-law took place before him; and that his mother had
played the whore, and he was no son of Saul, having nothing of his
genius, temper, and disposition in him, as appeared by loving such his
father hated; and besides, his mother would not have the honour she
expected, to be the mother of a king.

\(f\) "fili perversae rebellionis", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa1 20:31</span></span>

For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not
be established, nor thy kingdom,.... He would not, though heir to the
crown, be sure of it; it would be precarious to him, he would be in
great danger of being deprived of it on the death of his father; and
therefore it would be his highest wisdom to deliver David up to be
slain, as it was his greatest folly to protect him, and provide for his
satiety:

wherefore now send and fetch him unto me; send to Bethlehem for him to
come to court directly:

for he shall surely die; or he is "the son of death" (g); guilty of
death, as the Targum, deserves to die, and Saul was determined upon his
death if possible.

\(g\) "filius mortis", V. L. Montanus, Vatablus, Piscator; "reus
mortis", Junius & Tremellius.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 20:32</span></span>

And Jonathan answered Saul his, father, and said unto him,.... Making no
answer to the charges of perverseness, rebellion, and folly brought
against himself, which he bore with patience, but could not bear to hear
his dear friend spoken against, and as worthy of death; and therefore in
answer to that says:

wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done? has he attempted to take
away thy life? to deprive thee of thy crown? to settle himself upon the
throne? what overt act of treason has he been guilty of; that he should
die? on the contrary, has he not done many things worthy of immortal
honour, for the good of the nation, and the glory of thy reign? and if
God has determined the kingdom for him, and anointed him to it, what
blame can be laid upon him? nay, should he not be the rather respected
and honoured?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 20:33</span></span>

And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him,.... So provoked to wrath
was he by what he said. It seems by this that Saul always had a javelin
or spear in his hand, which is to be accounted for by the custom of
those times; in other countries, as well as in this, the kings used to
carry spears in their hands instead of sceptres, and which they used as
such; so Justin (h), speaking of the times of Romulus, says, that kings
in those times had spears, as an ensign of royalty, which the Greeks
call sceptres; and so the Greeks called sceptres spears (i):

whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay
David; for since he attempted to smite him, his own son, for speaking on
his behalf, it might be well concluded, that such was his settled wrath
and malice, that he would if possible kill David, could he get him into
his hands.

\(h\) E Trogo, l. 43. c. 3. (i) Pausanias in Boeoticis, sive, l. 9. p.
859. Vid. Barthii Animadv. ad Claudian in nupt. Honor ver. 119.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa1 20:34</span></span>

So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger,.... Resenting his
father's attempt to smite him, and his resolution to slay David:

and did eat no meat the second day of the month; not then at that meal
he was just sat down to, nor at another time that day, his stomach was
so full through indignation at his father, and grief for his friend
David; and besides, being a mourner on the above accounts, he might not
eat of the sacrifices:

for he was grieved for David; that his death should be determined upon
by his father, and he in so much danger of it; as also that he himself
must be parted from and lose so dear a friend, which was one reason he
ate no meat that day: and another follows:

because his father had done him shame; the copulative "and" being
wanting; and this he did by calling him a perverse and rebellious son,
and representing him as an arrant fool, and particularly by casting a
javelin at him to smite him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 20:35</span></span>

And it came to pass in the morning:,.... The next morning, the morning
of the third day of the month:

that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David;
he went to the place in the field, or near it, where David hid himself,
and at the time agreed between them; which, Abarbinel says, was the time
the nobles agreed on for walking, and motion, and for hunting, and
casting of arrows, so that Jonathan could go forth without suspicion:

and a little lad with him; to carry his bow and arrows, and fetch his
arrows when cast.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa1 20:36</span></span>

And he said unto his lad, run, find out now the arrows which I
shoot,.... He no doubt told him the mark which he should shoot at, the
stone Ezel, and bid him look out about that for them:

and as the lad ran; before he had got to the mark:

he shot an arrow beyond him: or it; beyond the lad, or beyond the mark
he shot at; purposely shooting with great strength, that he might
exceed, and thereby give notice to David how things stood, which was the
sign agreed on.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa1 20:37</span></span>

And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had
shot,.... To the mark which he told him he should shoot at, and
whereabout he might expect to find the arrow:

Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, is not the arrow beyond thee? he
cried with a loud voice and said this, not so much that the lad might
hear him, but that David, who lay hid near the place, might hear him; so
that if they had no opportunity of seeing and conversing with each other
through any person going by at that time, David might know by this sign
that evil was determined against him, and must flee for his life; the
Syriac and Vulgate Latin versions read, "behold, the arrow is beyond
thee"; so Noldius (k).

\(k\) Concord. Ebr. Part. p. 265. No. 1141.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa1 20:38</span></span>

And Jonathan cried after the lad, make speed, haste, stay not,.... But
bring the arrows to him directly, that he might dismiss him; for,
observing that no man was passing by, he was desirous of embracing the
opportunity for a few minutes to have an interview with David alone
before he fled:

and Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows; for though the textual
reading is singular, the marginal is plural, to show, as Kimchi
observes, that he cast three arrows, as he said he would, [Sa1
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#020);

and came to his master; with them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 20:39</span></span>

But the lad knew not anything,.... What was meant by shooting the
arrows, and by shooting them beyond where he was, and by bidding him
make haste to bring them:

only Jonathan and David knew the matter; what was signified by them,
those being signs agreed upon between them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa1 20:40</span></span>

And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad,.... "His vessels" (l) or
instruments; his arms, as the Targum, his quiver, bow, and arrows:

and said unto him, go, carry them to the city; to Gibeah, to Jonathan's
house, or to his apartments at court there.

\(l\) "vasa sua", Montanus; "instrumenta sua", Piscator; "arma sua", V.
L. Tigurine version.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">sa1 20:41</span></span>

And as soon as the lad was gone,.... Which David could observe from his
lurking place:

David arose out of a place toward the south; to the south of the field
in which he was hid, or to the south of the stone Ezel, near which he
was; and so the Targum,"and David arose from the side of the stone Atha,
which was towards the south;''Jonathan shooting his arrows to the north
of it, lest the lad should have discovered David when he ran for them:
and fell on his face to the ground; in reverence of Jonathan, as the son
of a king, and in respect to him as his friend, who had so faithfully
served him, and was so concerned to save his life:

and bowed himself three times: this was before he fell prostrate on the
ground. Abarbinel observes, that bowing three; times was fit and proper
to be done to a king; once at the place from whence they first see him,
the second time in the middle of the way to him, and the third time when
come to him; but though this may have been a custom in more modern
times, it is a question whether it obtained so early; however it is
certain bowing was as ancient, and therefore Xenophon (z) is mistaken in
ascribing it to Cyrus as the first introducer of this custom; and be it
that he was the first that began it among the Persians, it was in use
with others before, as this behaviour of David shows:

and they kissed one another; as friends about to part:

and wept one with another: as not knowing whether they should ever see
each other's face any more:

until David exceeded; in weeping more than Jonathan; he having more to
part with, not only him his dear friend, but his wife and family, and
other dear friends and people of God, and especially the sanctuary and
service of God, which of all things lay nearest his heart, and most
distressed him; see [Sa1 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019); and
many of his psalms on this occasion. Ben Gersom suggests that he wept
more than was meet, through too much fear of Saul; but that seems not to
be the case.

\(z\) Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 23.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">sa1 20:42</span></span>

And Jonathan said to David, go in peace,.... In peace of mind,
committing himself, his family, and affairs, to the providence of God,
who would take care of him, and keep him in safety from the evil designs
of Saul; and particularly he would have him be easy with respect to what
had passed between them two, not doubting but it would be faithfully
observed on both sides:

forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord: had made
a covenant with each other by an oath, in the name and presence of God
as a witness to it:

saying, the Lord be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy
seed for ever; as a witness of the agreement between them, including
them and their offspring, and as a revenger of such that should break
it. The Targum is,"the Word of the Lord be between thee and me, &c."

and he arose and departed; that is, David arose from the ground, and
took his leave of Jonathan, and departed into the country for the safety
of his person and life:

and Jonathan went into the city; into the city of Gibeah, where Saul
dwelt and had his court.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 21](sa1021)

</div>
