<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1002)  [Next](sa1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 3

This chapter gives an account of the Lord's calling to Samuel in the
night season, which he first took for the voice of Eli, but being
instructed by him, made answer to the voice, [Sa1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001), and of a message sent from him by
Samuel to Eli, foretelling the destruction of his family, [Sa1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#011) and of the delivery of it to him,
which Samuel was first fearful of doing, but, encouraged by Eli, he
delivered it to him, to which he patiently submitted, [Sa1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#015) and the chapter is closed with
the establishment of Samuel as a prophet of the Lord, who continued to
appear and reveal himself to him, [Sa1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 3:1</span></span>

And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli,.... Under his
direction and instruction; the Targum is, in the life of Eli, and in
such parts of service, relating to the tabernacle of the Lord, as he was
capable of, such as opening and shutting the doors of it, lighting the
lamps, singing the praises of God, &c. according to Josephus (n), and
others, he was now about twelve years of age:

and the word of the Lord was precious in those days; that is, a word
from the Lord in a dream or vision, directing, informing, instructing,
or reproving, this was very rarely had; of late there had been but very
few instances; and which accounts for it why not only the child Samuel
knew not that it was the voice of the Lord that called to him, but Eli
himself thought nothing of it until he had called a third time, so rare
and scarce was any instance of this kind; for which reason these words
are premised in the following narration: and as everything that is
scarce and rare is generally precious, so the word of God in this way
also was; and so it is as considered in every view of it; as the written
word of God; when there was but little of it penned, as at this time,
and few or none to teach and instruct in it, Eli being old, and his sons
so vile; or when it is forbidden to be read, and the copies of it
destroyed, and become scarce, as in the times of Dioclesian; or when
there are but very few faithful evangelical ministers of the word;
which, though it is always precious to them that have precious faith in
it, the promises of it being exceeding great and precious, and the
truths of it more precious than fine gold, and the grand subject of it a
precious Saviour, who is so in his person, offices, blood,
righteousness, and sacrifice; yet is generally more precious when there
is a scarcity of it, when God makes a man, a Gospel minister, more
precious than fine gold, even than the golden wedge of Ophir, see [Isa
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012) where the word is used in the
same sense as here:

there was no open vision; or prophecy, as the Targum; no publicly known
prophet raised up, to whom the people could apply for counsel,
direction, and instruction in divine things; in all the times of the
judges we read only of Deborah the prophetess, and one prophet more,
[Jdg 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#014), excepting the man of God
lately sent to Eli, [Sa1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027), and
this want of prophecy served to set off with greater foil the glory of
Samuel as a prophet of the Lord, when he was an established one; there
having been none of that character in the memory of man, and therefore
he is spoken of as at the head of the prophets, [Act
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024), for though there might be some
private visions to particular persons, or God might appear in vision to
private persons for their own special use and instruction; yet there was
no public vision, or what was for public good and general use: some
render it, "no broken up vision" (o); it lay hid, concealed out of
sight, as if it was immured and shut up within walls, or like water pent
up, that cannot break through its fences, and spread itself; or "not
multiplied", as R. Isaiah, not frequent and repeated, the instances of
it few and rare; the sense of this clause is much the same as the
former.

\(n\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 10. sect. 4. (o) "perrupta", Piscator; "fracta
vel rupta", Drusius.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 3:2</span></span>

And it came to pass at that time,.... When the word of the Lord was
scarce and precious, and there was no open vision; or, as Ben Gersom,
the same day the man of God came to Eli at night, the following affair
happened:

when Eli was laid down in his place; on his bed to sleep, in one of the
chambers or apartments of the tabernacle; for as there were such in the
temple for the priests, so in that:

and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; to help himself to
anything he might want when in bed; which seems to be the reason Samuel
lay near him, and why, when he heard his voice, he immediately ran to
him, supposing he needed his assistance. Some, as Kimchi and others,
understand this not of the eyes of his body, but of his mind; and that
the Holy Spirit, as a spirit of prophecy, was departing from him,
because of his connivance at the sins of his sons; and so the following
prophecy came not to him, but to Samuel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 3:3</span></span>

And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the Lord,.... The
tabernacle so called; lamp is put for the lamps in the candlestick in
the tabernacle, which were lighted every evening, and burnt till
morning; by which time some of them at least usually went out, only it
is said the western lamp never went out. Now the reason why this is
observed is to show that it was in the night, before morning, that the
following transaction was: some by this lamp understand the lamp of
prophecy, that before that was quite extinct in Eli, only began to
depart, as his eyes are said to begin to wax dim, the spirit of prophecy
came to Samuel; so that, as the Jews express it, before one sun was set
another arose; thus before the sun of Moses set, the sun of Joshua
arose; and before the sun of Eli set, the sun of Samuel arose:

where the ark of God was; that is, in the temple or tabernacle; not in
that part of it where the lamps were burning in the candlestick, that
was in the holy place; but the ark was in the holy of holies, where the
Lord dwelt, and was the symbol of his presence; and which is observed to
point out the place from whence the voice came, after mentioned; and
which the Targum expresses here,"and a voice was heard out of the temple
of the Lord, where the ark of the Lord was:''and Samuel was laid down to
sleep; after Eli was in bed, and Samuel had done all his business, he
laid himself down to sleep in his place; in the court of the Levites, as
the Targum, with which the Jewish commentators in general agree: it must
be somewhere near to Eli, so that he could quickly come at him, when he
needed his assistance; though, according to the Misnah (p), the priests
shut the doors of the court within, and the Levites slept without. It is
highly probable that Samuel's apartment was near to Eli, or he could not
have so readily come to him, as it is plain he did. This circumstance is
also observed, to show that it was in the night, and before morning,
that the following vision was; and, as Kimchi thinks, about cock
crowing; and it may be from hence Strabo (q) had the notion, that Moses
ordered such to sleep (in the temple) for themselves, and others, who
were fit to receive good dreams, and who might expect from God a good
gift, who lived soberly and righteously; and because the tabernacle was
covered with skins, hence might spring the notion of others to sleep in
temples, for the above reason, under the skins of the sacrifices; see
Gill on , though they seem rather to have slept upon them, for the above
purposes, namely, to converse with their deities, and get knowledge from
them (r).

\(p\) Middot, c. 1. sect. 8. (q) Geograph. l. 16. p. 523. (r) Vid.
Virgil. Aeneid. 7. "huc dona Sacerdos", &c. ver. 86-95.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 3:4</span></span>

That the Lord called Samuel,.... By a voice which came forth from the
most holy place, from between the cherubim, the seat of the divine
Majesty:

and he answered, here am I; which was not intended to declare the place
where he was, but to express his readiness and cheerfulness to do any
thing that was required of him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 3:5</span></span>

And he ran unto Eli, and said here am I,.... He got out of his bed as
fast as he could, and put on his clothes, and ran with all haste to the
apartment where Eli lay, supposing he wanted some immediate assistance,
which he was there ready to give him to the utmost of his ability; and
he made the more haste, as knowing his age and infirmities, and being
desirous, out of affection to him, to help him as soon as possible:

for thou calledst me; he took it to be the voice of Eli, partly because
there was no other man in the tabernacle, it being in the middle of the
night, or early in the morning, before the doors were opened, or any of
the priests were come in to minister, and partly because the voice might
be very much like Eli's, and which was done to direct him to him:

and he said, I called not, lie down again; he signified he wanted
nothing, and so had no occasion to call him, nor had he, but bid him go
to bed again, and sleep quietly:

and he went and lay down; and very probably fell asleep again.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 3:6</span></span>

And the Lord called yet again, Samuel,.... Called him a second time by
his name, with a like audible voice as before:

and Samuel arose, and went to Eli; did not run as before, being perhaps
more thoughtful of this affair, that he should be called a second time,
and careful not to awake Eli, should he be mistaken again, and find him
asleep:

and said, here am I, for thou didst call me; perceiving that he was
awake, he desired to know what he wanted, and he was ready to help him;
for he was now certain of it that he did call him:

and he answered, I called not, my son, lie down again; by this
appellation, my son, he expresses his affection to him, and signifies he
took it kindly that he should show such readiness to do anything for him
and would not have him be discouraged and abashed, because he was
mistaken, but return to his bed and rest again.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 3:7</span></span>

Now Samuel did not yet know the Lord,.... He knew that Jehovah, the God
of Israel, was the true God; he had spiritual knowledge of him, and knew
somewhat of his word and worship, ways and ordinances, in which he had
been instructed by Eli; wherefore, though the Targum is,"Samuel had not
yet learned to know doctrine from the Lord;''it can only be understood,
that he had not learnt it perfectly; somewhat he knew of it, but in an
imperfect manner, being a child: but the sense of the word is, that as
yet he was ignorant that God had used to speak with ordinary and
familiar voice to men, as Maimonides says (s); he perhaps had never
heard of any such thing, and much less was experimentally acquainted
with it, that God ever did speak after such a manner to men, and could
not distinguish between the voice of God and the voice of Eli:

neither was the word of the Lord yet revealed unto him; what of the
written word that was in being he had, and read, as the law of Moses;
but the meaning is, that no word of prophecy of the Lord was revealed
unto him, as the Targum; he never had prophesied as yet, and knew not
the form and manner of prophecy, as the above writer observes, or what
methods God took to reveal himself, his mind and will, to men, at least
not this by an audible voice.

\(s\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 44.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 3:8</span></span>

And the Lord called Samuel again the third time,.... In the same manner
he had done before, expressing his name no doubt:

and he arose and went to Eli, and said, here am I, for thou didst call
me; as if he should say, it must certainly be so, I cannot be mistaken a
third time:

and Eli perceived that the Lord had called the child; he was satisfied
now that Samuel must have heard a voice, and he knew there was no man in
the tabernacle but himself, and therefore it must be the voice of the
Lord out of the most holy place; and he had formerly been acquainted
with such voices, and used to them, and now called them to mind; and
besides, as Aben Ezra observes, he was the rather confirmed in this,
that the Lord called Samuel, because Samuel heard the voice, and not
Eli, though Eli lay nearer the most holy place than Samuel did; which
showed that this must be the voice of prophecy the Lord makes whom he
pleases to hear; and that Eli might be fully persuaded of this, before
the matter of the prophecy was delivered to him, Samuel was so often
directed to him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 3:9</span></span>

Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, go, lie down,.... Once more:

and it shall be, if he call thee; the voice, or the Lord by it:

that thou shalt say, speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth; his meaning
is, that he should not rise and come to him, as he had done, but
continue on his bed, on hearing the voice again, but desire the Lord to
speak to him what he had to say, to which he was ready to attend:

so Samuel went and lay down in his place; which, as commonly understood,
was in the court of the Levites; see Gill on [Sa1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 3:10</span></span>

And the Lord came, and stood,.... At the place where Samuel lay; either
there was, as Kimchi, a form before his eyes in the vision of prophecy,
some visible corporeal shape assumed; or a bright splendour an
illustrious appearance of the glory of God; or it may be rather the
voice, which before seemed to be at some distance whereabout Eli lay; it
now seemed nearer, and was as the voice of one just by him, that sounded
in his ears:

and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel: repeating his name, in
order the more to excite his attention:

then Samuel answered, speak, for thy servant heareth; he leaves out the
word Lord, which Eli bid him use; for he might be afraid as yet to make
mention of the name of the Lord in the vision of prophecy, as Kimchi
speaks; or lest it should be the voice of another, as Jarchi; as yet he
might not be quite certain whether it was the voice of the Lord, or the
voice of a man; for that he should have any mistrust of its being the
voice of a demon or spectre, there is no reason to believe.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 3:11</span></span>

And the Lord said to Samuel,.... The voice of the Lord continued
speaking to him: behold:

I will do a thing in Israel; which may be particularly interpreted of
the taking of the ark, and the slaying of the two sons of Eli; and which
is elsewhere represented as the Lord's doing, for the sins of Eli's
family, [Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061).

at which both the ears of everyone that heareth it shall tingle; be
struck with horror and amazement, and quite stunned, and know not what
to think or say, like persons surprised with a violent clap of thunder,
which strikes their ears so strongly, that the noise of it is not soon
gone from them; this was verified in Eli, and in his daughter-in-law
particularly, who, at the news of the above things, the one fell
backwards and broke his neck, and the other fell into labour and died;
and all Israel were struck with astonishment at these things.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 3:12</span></span>

In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken
concerning his house,.... Or family, that is, by the man of God, [Sa1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027) as that he would cut off the
strength of it, that there should not be an old man in it; and such as
remained should be reduced to the utmost poverty and meanness; this
shows that that prophecy was antecedent to this, contrary to the sense
of some:

when I begin, I will also make an end; not immediately, and at once, but
by degrees; he began in the death of Hophni and Phinehas, and went on in
the slaughter of Abimelech, and the eighty five priests at Nob, in the
times of Saul, and finished in the thrusting out of Abiathar from the
priesthood, in the times of Solomon, whereby that family was brought to
disgrace and poverty.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 3:13</span></span>

For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever,.... That is,
bring his judgments upon them, which should continue on them to their
utter destruction; this, as to the substance, he said before by the man
of God:

for the iniquity which he knoweth; for the iniquity of his sons, which
he thoroughly informed of, and fully acquainted with by others; and
somewhat of which he must have been sensible of, and seen with his own
eyes, and therefore was inexcusable:

because his sons made themselves vile; mean and contemptible in the
sight of men, abhorred and accursed in the sight of God, by taking the
flesh of the sacrifices of the people, which did not belong to them, who
came to sacrifice, and by debauching the women that came to the door of
the tabernacle for religious service. It is said this clause was
originally written, "because his sons made light of me"; or cursed the
Lord, and is one of the eighteen places called the correction of the
Scribes, who corrected it as we have it; and it may be observed, the
Septuagint version is, "because his sons spake ill of God"; or cursed
him; however, this they did, they preferred their lusts, and the
indulging of them, to the honour and glory of God: this Eli knew:

and he restrained them not; from their evil practices; he did not make
use of his authority, neither as a father, and especially not as high
priest, and the judge of Israel, who ought not only to have sharply
reproved them, which he did not, but to have censured or punished them,
and turned them out of their office: "or did not frown upon them" (t),
as in the margin of our Bibles; he did not knit his brows, or wrinkle up
his face, and by his countenance show his displeasure at their
proceedings, but in an easy, smooth, gentle manner, expostulated with
them about them.

\(t\) "et non contraxit frontem", Osiander; "non contraxit rugas", Belg.
De Dieu.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 3:14</span></span>

And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli,.... Either had done
this before, which was signified to him by the man of God, or did swear
now for the confirmation of his threatenings, and to assure the certain
performance of them:

that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever: not even typically, which was all that legal
sacrifice could do; and not so that the priesthood should ever return to
the family again, as the office of high priesthood never did; or, as
Abarbinel interprets it, because of sacrifice and offering, that the
iniquity Eli's sons were guilty of in taking the flesh of the sacrifices
and offerings, which did not belong to them, and before the Lord had his
part, should never be expiated. (There are some sins that are not
covered in the atonement of Jesus Christ. This is one of them and the
sin against the Holy Ghost is another. [Mat
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031). Editor.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 3:15</span></span>

And Samuel lay until the morning,.... It is not said he slept; it can
hardly be thought he should, when it is considered what a new, strange,
and uncommon thing had befallen him; what honour had been conferred on
him a child, that the Lord should vouchsafe to speak and communicate his
mind to him, and what dreadful things were said of Eli's family; all
which must greatly affect his mind, and keep him waking: however, he lay
musing thereon until morning, and then arose:

and opened the doors of the house of the Lord; as he had used to do, and
which was the business of the Levites; though he had been so highly
honoured, he was not elated with it, nor thought himself above so low
and mean an employment in the house of God; nor did he run to Eli or
others, boasting of what he had met with that night, but modestly and
carefully attended to what was his common and constant employment every
morning:

and Samuel feared to show Eli the vision; the vision of prophecy, as the
Targum; what God had foretold should befall him and his family, lest he
should be grieved on more accounts than one; partly because he, an old
man, an high priest, and judge of Israel, was overlooked and neglected,
and the prophecy was delivered to a child, and not to him; and partly
because of the sad things that should come upon his family.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 3:16</span></span>

Then Eli called Samuel,.... Perceiving he was risen by the opening of
the doors of the tabernacle, which he might hear; and observing he did
not come to him as usual, to know whether he wanted anything, and being
impatient to hear what was said to him of the Lord:

and he said, Samuel, my son; called him by his name, and in a very
tender and affectionate manner, the more to engage him to hasten to him,
and thereby also putting him in mind of his filial duty to obey him:

and he answered, here am I; ready to attend and perform any service
enjoined him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 3:17</span></span>

And he said, what is the thing that the Lord hath said unto thee?....
The word "Lord" is not in the text, but it is "that it hath said"; the
voice that had so often called him in the night, and which yet Eli knew
was the voice of the Lord; and as it was, he was sensible there was
something of importance said, and he had great reason to believe it
respected him and his family; and the rather he might conclude this, by
what the man of God had lately said to him, whose words perhaps he had
too much slighted, questioning his authority; and therefore the Lord
took this way and method to assure him that what was said came from him;
for hereby Eli was fully convinced that this voice Samuel heard was of
the Lord, and so what was said must be from him, and this he was
impatient to know:

I pray thee, hide it not from me; and he not only beseeched and
entreated him, but adjured him, as in the next clause:

God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide anything from me of all
the things that said unto thee; it is the form of an oath or curse,
wishing that God would do some great evil to him, and more than he chose
to express, if he concealed anything from him that had been told him. So
Kimchi and Abarbinel take it to be an oath; and Josephus, (u) and
Procopius Gazaeus on the place say, that Eli obliged Samuel by oaths and
curses to declare what had been said to him.

\(u\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 10. sect. 4.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 3:18</span></span>

And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him,.... And so
approved himself to be a faithful prophet of God, and man of God, as he
is afterwards called; the whole counsel of God is to be declared by his
servants the prophets, and the ministers of his word; nothing is to be
concealed, which it is the will of God should be made known, whether it
be pleasing or displeasing to man:

and he said, it is the Lord; that has said it, and there is nothing to
be said against it, and that will do it; and there is no resisting him:
or "the Lord is he" (w); who has a sovereign right to all his creatures,
and may dispose of them as he pleases; he is all wise, and does all
things well; he is holy and righteous in all his ways and works, and
there is no unrighteousness in him; he is faithful to his word, whether
in a way of promise or threatening; and all he does to his people is in
love, mercy, and kindness:

let him do what seemeth him good; not what seems good to men, or is so
in their esteem, but what seems good to the Lord, who knows what is best
for his people, and can do nothing but what is good; all is good he
does; there is nothing but goodness in him, and nothing but goodness
comes from him; he does good, and nothing else, and even when he
afflicts his people; all he does is well done in creation, providence,
and grace: and Eli's desire is, that he would fulfil the good pleasure
of his will; he appears to be in an excellent temper, not surly and
morose, taking it ill that such a message should be sent him by a child;
nor was he unaffected with the case of his family, but humbly submitted
to the will of God, and acquiesces in it as good, and neither arraigns
his justice, nor murmurs at his providences.

\(w\) , Sept. "Dominus ipse", Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 3:19</span></span>

And Samuel grew,.... Not only in years and stature, but in grace and
goodness, in wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, both with respect to
things natural and spiritual, and in esteem, credit, and reputation
among men:

and the Lord was with him; he was not only in favour with men, but with
God; and had fresh and repeated tokens of the grace and good will of God
towards him; he indulged him with his presence, and assisted him in his
service, and prospered and succeeded him in all things in which he was
engaged. The Targum is,"the Word of the Lord was his help;''the
essential Word of God, the Messiah:

and did let none of his words fall to the ground (x); in allusion either
to water that falls to the ground, and becomes useless, or to an arrow
falling out of the bow, and to the ground, before it reaches the mark,
and so unsuccessful (y); or to any weapon of war, sword or spear,
falling out of the hand of the soldier, whereby he is disarmed and
rendered unserviceable: and these words, according to Kimchi, and in
which he is followed by Abarbinel, are to be understood, not only of the
words which he spake by the Holy Ghost under a spirit of prophecy, and
had their exact accomplishment; but his common words, which were spoken
by weight and measure, as the last expresses it, and which were
delivered out according to the rules of justice, probity, and truth; and
so he failed not of performing that which he had said, or of doing what
was right, whereby Israel knew he was fit, prepared, and designed to be
a prophet of the Lord, as in the following verse; but it seems rather to
have respect to the things predicted by him under a spirit of prophecy
concerning Eli and his house, which soon began to be fulfilled.

\(x\) , Pindar. Pythia, Ode 6. (y) Vid. Homer. Iliad. 17. ver. 633.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 3:20</span></span>

And all Israel, from Dan even unto Beersheba,.... That is, from the most
northern border of the land of Israel, on which Dan lay, to the utmost
border of it southward, where Beersheba was, the fame of Samuel for his
piety, prudence, and prophecy, was spread abroad; so that all

knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord; or that he
was faithful (z) to God and man, to be credited in what he said; and so
a fit man to be a prophet of the Lord, being eminently qualified with
gifts by him for that office; the Targum is,"that Samuel was faithful in
the words of the prophecy of the Lord,''in relating them.

\(z\) "fidelis", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 3:21</span></span>

And the Lord appeared again in Shiloh,.... In the tabernacle there; he
had appeared before to Samuel, when he called him, and declared to him
what he designed and resolved to do to Eli and his family, and now
appeared again to him in the same place before the battle of the
Israelites with the Philistines, of which there is an account in the
following chapter. Such appearances had not been usual in Shiloh for a
long time, but were now renewed and repeated:

for the Lord revealed himself to Samuel by the Word of the Lord; by
Christ, the Word of the Lord, who appeared to him, it is probable, in an
human form, as he was wont to do to the patriarchs and prophets, and by
whom the Lord revealed his mind and will unto them, being the Angel of
his presence, and the messenger of his covenant; or by giving him a word
of command to be delivered by him to the children of Israel, and which
is expressed and delivered, in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa1004)

</div>
