<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1023)  [Next](sa1025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 24

Saul being returned from following the Philistines, renews his pursuit
after David, [Sa1 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001); and they
meeting in a cave, where David had the opportunity of taking away the
life of Saul, which his men pressed him to, yet only cut off the skirt
of his robe, [Sa1 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003); which, calling
after him, he held up to him to convince him he had his life in his
hands, but spared it, [Sa1 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#009); upon
which he very pathetically reasons with him about the unreasonableness
and unrighteousness of his pursuit after him, to take away his life,
[Sa1 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011); which so affected Saul,
that he confessed he was more righteous than he, and owned that the
kingdom would be his, and only desired him to swear to him not to cut
off his offspring, which David did, and so they parted, [Sa1
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 24:1</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the
Philistines,.... Having, as it should seem, got the victory over them,
and driven them out of his country, and pursued them to their own:

that it was told him, saying, behold, David is in the wilderness of
Engedi; in the strong holds of it, the high rocks and mountains in it,
[Sa1 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#029).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 24:2</span></span>

Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel,.... Out of
his army, with which he had been pursuing the Philistines:

and went to seek David, and his men, upon the rocks of the wild goats;
which were in the wilderness of Engedi; those rocks were exceeding high
and terrible to look at, full of precipices, and so prominent, that to
travellers they seemed as if they would fall into the adjacent valleys,
that it even struck terror into them to look at them (x); called the
rocks of wild goats, because these creatures, called from hence
"rupicaprae", or rock goats, see [Job
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#001); delighted to be there; and are,
as Pliny (y) says, of such prodigious swiftness, that they will leap
from mountain to mountain, and back again at pleasure; these mountains
David and his men chose for safety, and the height and craggedness of
them did not deter Saul and his men from seeking him there.

\(x\) Adrichom Theatrum Terrae Sanct. p. 47. & Brocard. in ib. (y) Nat.
Hist. l. 8. c. 53.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 24:3</span></span>

And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave,.... For the
sheep to be led into at noon, to shelter them from the heat: such was
the cave of Polyphemus, observed by Bochart (z), in which sheep and
goats lay down and slept; See Gill on [Zep
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006),

and Saul went in to cover his feet; the Targum is, to do his
necessaries; and so Josephus (a); and the Jewish commentators generally
understand it of easing nature; and as the eastern people used to wear
long and loose garments, these, when they performed such an action, they
used in modesty to gather them close about them, that no part of the
body, their feet, and especially the parts of nature which should be
concealed, might be seen; but the Syriac and Arabic versions render it,
"and there he lay" or "slept"; which suggest, that his going into the
cave was in order to take some sleep and rest, when it was usual to
cover the feet, both to prevent taking cold, and the private parts of
the body being exposed to view; and this accounts better for Saul not
hearing David's men in the cave, and for his being insensible of David's
cuttings off the skirt of his garment, and best agrees with the use of
the phrase in [Jdg 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#024); the only
place besides this in which it is used; See Gill on [Jdg
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#024),

and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave; unseen and
unobserved by Saul, even six hundred of them; nor need this seem
strange, since in those parts of the world there were caves exceeding
large, made so either by nature or art. Vansleb (b) speaks of a cave in
Egypt so extraordinary large, that, without hyperbole, a thousand horses
might there draw up in battle array, and of another larger than that;
and Strabo says (c), that towards Arabia and Iturea are mountains
difficult to be passed, and in which are deep caves, one of which would
hold four thousand men: and as the mouths of these caves were generally
narrow, and the further parts of them large, and also dark, persons at
the entrance of them could be seen, when those in the more remote parts
could not; and this cave is said to be extremely dark (d); which
accounts for Saul's being seen when he came into the cave, whereas David
and his men could not be seen by him.

\(z\) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 45. col. 467, 468. (a) Antiqu. l. 6.
c. 13. sect. 4. (b) Relation of a Voyage, p. 227. (c) Geograph. l. 16.
p. 520. (d) Le Bruyn's Voyage to the Levant, ch. 51. p. 199.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 24:4</span></span>

And the men of David said unto him,.... Some of his principal men, who
were about him, and near him, such as Joab and Abishai:

behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee: now the time was come
that he spoke of to him by Samuel, or Gad, or to himself directly:

behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand; and such was Saul,
as appeared by his seeking to take away his life; and now he was in the
hand of David to take away his life, if he pleased:

that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee; an
opportunity of this kind now offered:

then David arose; from that part of the cave in which he was, the
further part of it:

and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe privily; unawares to him, and
unobserved by him, which might be easily done, if Saul was asleep, and
it is probable he was; and by the same way it may be accounted for that
he did not hear the discourse that passed between David and his men.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 24:5</span></span>

And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him,.... His
conscience accused him, and he repented of what he had done:

because he had cut off Saul's skirt; which though less than what his
servants put him upon, and he might have thoughts of doing, yet was
considered by him as a great indignity to his sovereign, and therefore
sat uneasy on his mind.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 24:6</span></span>

And he said unto his men,.... When he returned and brought the skirt of
Saul's garment in his hand; or else he said this before that, though
here mentioned, when they moved it to him to dispatch him, as he had a
fair opportunity of doing it:

God forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the Lord's
anointed; and which he could not think of but with detestation and
abhorrence, since he was his sovereign lord and master, and he a subject
of his, and was anointed by the order of God, and his person sacred:

to stretch forth my hand against him; to take away his life; to cut off
the skirt of his garment gave him uneasiness; but to slay him, the
thought of it was shocking to him:

seeing he is the anointed of the Lord; anointed by Samuel to be king,
[Sa1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001), by order of the Lord, [Sa1
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#017).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 24:7</span></span>

So David stayed his servants with these words,.... Or pacified them, as
the Targum, and made them quiet and easy in that he had not slain him,
and reconciled their minds to his conduct, and restrained them from
laying hands on him, by observing to them, that he was the anointed of
the Lord:

and suffered them not to rise against Saul; to take away his life; he
not only argued with them, but laid his commands on them that they
should not slay him:

but Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way; he rose from his
sleep, and went out of the cave unhurt, and proceeded on in the way he
came to the sheepcotes, and which led on further, [Sa1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 24:8</span></span>

David also arose afterward,.... After Saul was gone:

and went out of the cave; where he had been all the time that Saul had
been in it:

and cried after Saul: with a loud voice: my lord the king; by which
titles Saul would know that he was called unto:

and when Saul looked behind him; to see who it was that called unto him:

David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself: giving
reverence and honour to him as a king; See Gill on [Sa1
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 24:9</span></span>

And David said to Saul, wherefore hearest thou men's words,.... The
false charges and accusations, that some of Saul's courtiers brought
against David, as Doeg the Edomite, and such like sycophants and
flatterers, to whom Saul hearkened, and believed what they said, and
acted upon it. David chose rather to lay the blame on Saul's courtiers
than on himself; and he began with him in this way, the rather to
reconcile him to him, and cause him to listen to what he had to say: and
represents them as

saying to him:

behold, David seeketh thy hurt? seeks to take away thy life, and seize
upon thy crown and throne; than which nothing was more foreign from him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 24:10</span></span>

Behold, this day thine eyes have seen,.... Or may see; there is full
proof and evidence of it, and which will be presently shown:

how that the Lord had delivered thee today into mine hand in the cave;
from whence they were both just come:

and some bade me kill thee; some of the men that were with David, some
of his officers or principal friends put him upon it, having a fair
opportunity, and thinking it no evil, since he was his enemy, and sought
his life; or "it said, kill thee"; my heart prompted me to it, that said
so at first, as Ben Gersom interprets it; some refer it to God, who in
his providence said so, or so it might be understood by David, as if
Providence directed him to it, by giving film such an opportunity of
doing it:

but mine eye spared thee; had pity on him, and notwithstanding the
suggestions of friends, and of his own heart at first, or the seeming
direction of Providence, yet he had mercy on him, and forbore slaying
him:

and I said, I will not put forth my hand against my lord; and king,
whose subject I am:

for he is the Lord's anointed; the Lord has raised him to this dignity;
invested him with the office of a king, and as such I regard him, and
therefore have refrained mine hand from him, from hurting him,

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 24:11</span></span>

Moreover, my father,.... So he was in a natural sense, as having married
his daughter; and in a civil sense, as he was a king, and was, or ought
to have been, the father of his country, and to treat his subjects as
his children, and David among the rest:

see, yea see, the skirt of thy robe in my hand; look on it again and
again; view it with the eyes of thy body intently, that thou mayest be
satisfied of it, and behold with the eyes of thy mind and understanding,
and consider that I could as easily have had thine head in my hand as
the skirt of thy robe; and here see an instance and proof of the
integrity and sincerity of my heart, and cordial affections to thee, and
an evidence against all the charges and accusations of my enemies, and
that I have no ill design upon thy person and life, and am far from
seeking thy hurt, as they say:

for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not; not
only did that to show that he was in his power, but did not cut off his
head, as he could:

know thou, and see, that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine
hand; this might be a full conviction to him that he had no ill, neither
in his heart nor hand, to do unto him:

and I have not sinned against thee; done nothing to offend him, never
acted against his will, nor disobeyed any of his commands, or had been
guilty of one overt act of treason or rebellion, but all the reverse:

yet thou huntest my soul to take it; pursued him from place to place,
hunted him in the wildernesses of Ziph and Maon, and upon the rocks of
Engedi, as a partridge on the mountains, [Sa1
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#020); and lay in wait for him to kill
him, as the Targum: he may be thought to have penned the "seventh" psalm
at this time, or on this occasion; at least there are some passages in
it, which seem to refer to his present circumstances, [Psa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 24:12</span></span>

The Lord judge between me and thee,.... And make it appear who is in the
right, and who in the wrong:

and the Lord avenge me of thee; if he continued thus to persecute him:

but mine hand shall not be upon thee; to kill thee, though it may be in
my power again to do it, as it has been; but this I am determined upon,
let me suffer what I will, I will not lay hands on thee to do thee any
hurt, but leave thee with God to requite all the evil done to me by
thee.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 24:13</span></span>

As saith the proverb of the ancients,.... It is an old saying, has been
long in use, and may be applied to the present case; or the "proverb of
the ancient one"; of the oldest man, the first man Adam, and of all
others after him, so Kimchi; or of the Ancient One of the world, the
Ancient of days, the Lord himself; so in the Talmud (d):

wickedness proceedeth from the wicked; as is a man, so are his actions;
if he is a wicked man, he will do wicked things; a corrupt tree brings
forth evil fruits, an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
brings forth evil things; and as if David should say, if I had been the
wicked man as I am represented, I should have committed wickedness; I
should have made no conscience of taking away thy life when it was in my
power; but my heart would not suffer me to do it:

but, or "and"

my hand shall not be upon thee; as it has not been upon thee, because of
the fear of God in me, so neither shall it be hereafter: or the sense of
the proverb may be, the wickedness that comes from a wicked man, that
will kill him, or be the cause of his ruin, or he will be slain by
wicked men such as himself; and this may be thy case, O king, unless
thou repentest: but be that as it may, which I leave with the righteous
Judge, this I am determined on, "mine hand shall not be upon thee"; to
take away thy life.

\(d\) T. Bab. Maccot, fol. 10. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 24:14</span></span>

After whom is the king of Israel come out?.... From his court and
palace, with an army of men, and at the head of them:

after whom dost thou pursue? with such eagerness and fury:

after a dead dog; as David was in the opinion, and according to the
representation of his enemies, a dog, vile, mean, worthless, of no
account; a dead dog, whose name was made to stink through the calumnies
cast upon him; and if a dead dog, then as he was an useless person, and
could do no good, so neither could he do any hurt, not so much as bark,
much less bite; and therefore it was unworthy of so great a prince, a
lessening, a degrading of himself, as well as a vain and impertinent
thing, to pursue after such an one, that was not worthy of his notice,
and could do him neither good nor harm:

after a flea? a little contemptible animal, not easily caught, as it is
observed by some, and when caught good for nothing. David, by this
simile, fitly represents not only his weakness and impotence, his being
worthless, and of no account, and beneath the notice of such a prince as
Saul; but the circumstances he was in, being obliged to move from place
to place, as a flea leaps from one place to another, and is not easily
taken, and when it is, of no worth and value; signifying, that as it was
not worth his pains to seek after him, so it would be to no purpose, he
should not be able to take him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 24:15</span></span>

The Lord therefore be Judge, and judge between me and thee,....
Signifying he did not desire to be judge in his own cause, but leave it
with God to determine it for him in his providence:

and see, and plead my cause; look with pity upon him, take his cause in
his hand, plead it, and do him justice:

and deliver me out of thine hand: which was a prayer of faith, believing
he would do it in due time, see [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 24:16</span></span>

And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words
unto Saul,.... And wonderful it is that Saul, so full of wrath and fury,
and so eager of David's life, should stand still and hear him out, and
not fall upon him; this must be owing to the restraining providence of
God, and to the surprise Saul was in at the sight of David coming out of
the cave, whom he expected not; and especially what awed and quieted him
was the sight of the skirt of his robe in his hand, which was a sure
token he had his life in his hand, and spared it, which made him listen
attentively to all he said:

that Saul said, is this thy voice, my son David? he changes his
language; before, when he spoke of David, it was only the so of Jesse
now my son David, as he was by marriage to his daughter, and as appeared
by his filial affection to him; and though he was at such a distance
from him, that he was not able to discern his countenance, yet he knew
his voice, at least supposed it to be his, as his question implies, and
which he might conclude fro in the whole of his discourse:

and Saul lifted up his voice and wept; being affected with the kindness
of David to him, and with his deliverance from the danger he was in, and
yet without true repentance of his sins; for there may be many tears
shed where there is no real repentance, as in the case of Esau.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 24:17</span></span>

And he said to David, thou art more righteous than I,.... By which it
appears he thought himself righteous, though David was more so; the
righteousness of David was so glaring, that his enemy himself being
judge acknowledges it, but will not confess his own wickedness, having
no true sense of sin, nor real sorrow for it:

for thou hast rewarded me good; in times past, and now; heretofore in
killing Goliath, fighting his battles for him against the Philistines,
driving the evil spirit from him, by playing on the harp before him, and
now by sparing his life, only cutting off the skirt of his garment, when
he could with equal ease have cut off his head:

whereas I have rewarded thee evil: in seeking to take away his life at
various times, by casting a javelin at him more than once, sending
messengers to kill him, and hunting after him from place to place, to
take him and slay him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 24:18</span></span>

And thou hast showed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me,....
The cutting off of the skirt of his robe only, when his life was in his
hand, was a clear proof and full demonstration of his dealing well with
him, and might sufficiently convince him he had no ill design upon him:

forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou
killedst me not; this was a plain proof and evidence of his kindness to
him, which he owns, and also the providence of God in this affair, which
had delivered him into the hands of David; by which he might see the
Lord was for David, and against him, and might have deterred him from
seeking David's hurt hereafter; but it did not.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 24:19</span></span>

For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away?.... Or "in a
good way" (e), in peace and safety, without doing him any hurt; this is
not usual among men, and yet this was the present case; David had found
his enemy Saul, which Saul tacitly owns, and yet had let him go well
away from him, without hurting him:

wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this
day; he does not promise to reward him himself, but prays the Lord to
reward him; and had he been sincere in it, he could not have done better
for him. Some connect the former clause with this, after this manner,
"if a man find his enemy, and let him go away, the Lord will reward him,
the Lord reward thee", &c. so the Syriac and Arabic versions.

\(e\) "in via bona", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 24:20</span></span>

And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king,.... Not
merely by the common report, that he was anointed by Samuel, to which
yet he might give credit; but by the providence of God prospering and
preserving him, and by his princely spirit and behaviour, and by calling
to mind what Samuel had said to him, that his kingdom should be given to
a neighbour of his better than he, and so David was by his own
confession, [Sa1 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#017); and the
cutting off the skirt of his garment might put him in remembrance of the
rending of the skirt of Samuel's mantle, upon which he told Saul his
kingdom should be rent from him; though some think that was Saul's
skirt, and so now he knew thereby, when David cut off his skirt, that
the kingdom would be his; and it is a tradition of the Jews (f), that
Samuel said to him at that time, that he that cut off the skirt of his
garment should reign after him:

and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand; and
not be rent from him; and yet notwithstanding after this he sought to
destroy him.

\(f\) Midrash Tillim apud Abarbinel. in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 24:21</span></span>

Swear now therefore unto me by the Lord,.... By the Word of the Lord, as
the, Targum:

that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me; as was usually done in
despotic governments in the eastern countries, and is at this day, when
one is advanced to the throne of another, by whom issue is left, who may
be rivals and competitors with him:

and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's house; by
cutting off his seed, the same thing in different words repeated, for
the confirmation of it; children bear the names of their fathers, and by
them their memory is perpetuated, and cutting off them is destroying the
name of their parents.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 24:22</span></span>

And David sware unto Saul,.... That he would not cut, off his posterity;
which oath he religiously observed, in sparing Mephibosheth, [Sa2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#007), and in punishing the murderers
of Ishbosheth, [Sa2 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#012); and as for
the seven sons of Saul, delivered up to the Gibeonites, [Sa2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#006), it may be questioned whether
they were his genuine legitimate offspring; and if they were, it was by
the appointment and command of God, and according to his will and
pleasure they were executed, who is not bound by the oaths of men, and
to whom they must be submitted, [Sa2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001),

and Saul went home; to his palace in Gibeah:

but David and his men got them up unto the hold; in Engedi, [Sa1
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#029); not trusting to Saul, whose
inconstancy, perfidy, cruel hatred, and malice, David full well knew;
and therefore thought it not safe to return to his own house, nor to
dwell in the open country, but in the wilderness, and among the rocks,
and in the caves there, such as were in the wilderness of Engedi; and
here, and at this time, he penned the fifty seventh psalm, see [Psa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](sa1025)

</div>
