<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1010)  [Next](sa1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 11

This chapter relates the distress the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead were
in on account of the Ammonites, [Sa1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001) upon which they sent messengers
to Saul, whose spirit was immediately stirred up to help them, [Sa1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004), and prepared for it, and came up
soon enough for their relief, and slew their enemies, [Sa1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#007), which gained him much honour and
reputation among the people, and occasioned the renewal of the kingdom
to him, [Sa1 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#012).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 11:1</span></span>

Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabeshgilead,....
A month after, as in the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions, that is,
a month after Saul was chosen king; so Josephus (p): this prince was
preparing for war against Israel before, which they hearing of,
requested they might have a king to go before them in battle, [Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012) but now he actually marched from
his own country, and besieged Jabeshgilead, a city in the land of
Gilead, from whence it had its name, and lay in the half tribe of
Manasseh, on the other side Jordan, see [Jdg
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#008). It lay near to the Ammonites,
and was part of the country they laid claim to in the times of Jephthah,
which they now renewed, and attempted to gain it by force. This Nahash
was king of the Ammonites, as he is called in the Targum, and by
Josephus (q), and so in the Arabic version, see [Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012).

and all the men of Jabeshgilead said unto Nahash, make a covenant with
us; they desired to be his allies and confederates, live in peace and
friendship with him, and enjoy their religion and liberties on certain
conditions they were willing to come into; and this was the sense of
them all, or at least the greatest part, which showed a mean and abject
spirit in them, to make no defence of themselves, but as soon as
besieged to move for a capitulation. This doubtless arose from a sense
of their weakness, not being able to hold it out long, and from an
apprehension that their brethren the Israelites, on the other side
Jordan, could give them no assistance, being in an unsettled condition,
having chosen a king, and he scarcely on the throne, and the Philistines
having great power over them:

and we will serve thee; not as slaves, but as tributaries; they were
willing to pay a yearly tax to him.

\(p\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 1. (q) Ibid.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 11:2</span></span>

And Nahash the Ammonite answered them,.... In a very haughty and
scornful manner:

on this condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out
all your right eyes; some Jewish writers go into a mystical and
allegorical sense of these words, as that Nahash ordered the book of the
law to be brought, which was their right eye, that he might erase out of
it these words:

an Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the
Lord; others understand it of the sanhedrim, which were the eyes of
Israel; and others, which come a little nearer to the sense, of the
slingers and archers, the desire of the eyes of Israel; and who, by
having their right eyes thrust out, would be in a great measure spoiled
for taking aim; for the words are to be understood literally; the
intention of Nahash was to disable them for war, and that they might
become quite unfit for it, as Josephus observes (r); the left eye being
under the shield, as it usually was in war, and the right eye plucked
out, they would be as blind men: he did not choose to have both their
eyes thrust out, for then they could have been of no use and service to
him as slaves or tributaries:

and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel; that they did not come up to
the relief of their brethren, and defend them, and signifying that they
must all expect the same treatment from him.

\(r\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 11:3</span></span>

And the elders of Jabesh said,.... The magistrates and principal men of
the city:

give us seven days' respite, that we may send messengers to all the
coasts of Israel; that is, cease from besieging them, from throwing in
darts into the city, or any other missive weapons, and from attempting
to break open the gates, or break down the walls of it, and storm it;
such a space of time they desire, which was as little as could be
granted, to go and return in, and without this it would not be a
reproach to all Israel, if they were ill used by them, since they had no
knowledge of their case, nor time to come up for their assistance:

and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee; and
submit to be used at thy pleasure. And it seems that this was granted by
Nahash out of a bravado, and to reproach and insult all Israel, and bid
them defiance; with whom he sought to quarrel, having a design upon
their land, and knowing very well their condition, being awed by the
Philistines; and having just chosen a king, and he an inexperienced man
in the affairs of war, and had no army; nor was it likely that one could
be assembled in so short a time, and come to the relief of this people,
and therefore he thought himself safe enough in granting their request.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 11:4</span></span>

Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul,.... Where he was born, and
brought up, and now dwelt; and he being elected king, it brought an
honour to the place; and from hence had this name, to distinguish it
from the others, and this is the first time it was so called. Now the
messengers from Jabesh came hither directly, because they knew that
Saul, the chosen king, dwelt here, and the Benjaminites, of all the
tribes, had great reason to show regard to them, since it was from
thence they had four hundred wives, when they were reduced to six
hundred men only, in order to raise up their tribe:

and told the tidings in the ears of the people; Saul being not at home
in the city, but in the fields, they reported to them the hardships
their city was under, being besieged by the Ammonites, and threatened
that if not relieved in such a time, all their right eyes would be
plucked out:

and all the people lifted up their voices, and wept; moved with sympathy
to their brethren, and who by their intermarriage with them were nearly
related to them; and who might fear they would not stop there, but
having taken that place would march forward, and come to them, and use
them in like manner; the thought of which was very distressing to them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 11:5</span></span>

And, behold, Saul came after the herd out the field,.... Where he had
been to look after the and take care of them, and see what condition
they were in, and followed them on their return home; for though he was
elected king, he was not inaugurated, and did not take upon him any
state; and being despised by some, and no provision as yet made for his
support and maintenance as a king, and no business as such for him to
do, Samuel still acting in his office, he returned to his father's
house, and employed himself in rustic affairs, as he used to do: though
some think this was casual, that he had been in the field to recreate
himself, or to meditate on the affairs of government, and happened to
return just as the herd came out of the field, and so followed them;
thus Jarchi interprets it not of his coming after the herd, but of his
coming after the fixed and usual time of the herd's coming out of the
field; but Josephus (r) is clear for it, that he had been about some
rustic business, some part of husbandry in the field, and returned to
the city; nor has it been unusual for emperors and kings, and persons in
high offices among Greeks and Romans, and other nations, in times of
peace, to employ themselves in husbandry; so did the judges of Israel,
as Shamgar, and Gideon, and Boaz, [Jdg
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031) so Quinctius Cincinnatus being
taken from the plough and made dictator, after he had conquered his
enemies, returned to his husbandry (s):

and Saul said, what aileth the people, that they weep? he supposed some
evil had befallen them, and desired to know what it was, that, if it lay
in his power to help them, he might:

and they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh; the message they
brought, and the account they gave of the distressed case of their city.

\(r\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5.) sect. 2. (s) Flor. Hist. Roman. l.
1. c. 11. Aurel. Victor. de Vir. Illustr. c. 20. Alex. ab Alex. Genial.
Dier. l. 3. c. 11.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 11:6</span></span>

And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings,....
And filled him with pity and compassion to the inhabitants of Jabesh,
and with wisdom and prudence, and set his thoughts at work to contrive
ways and means for their relief, and with fortitude, courage, and
resolution, to attempt their deliverance; so the Targum,"the spirit of
fortitude from the Lord dwelt on Saul:''and his anger was kindled
greatly; against Nahash the Ammonite for insulting Israel, and
threatening to use the inhabitants of Jabesh in such a cruel manner.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 11:7</span></span>

And he took a yoke of oxen,.... Of his own or his father's, which he had
just followed out of the field, and for which chiefly that circumstance
is mentioned:

and hewed them in pieces; as the Levite did his concubine, [Jdg
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029)

and sent them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of
messengers; some carrying a piece one way, and some another, throughout
all the tribes; for to them all the government of Saul extended, and
which by this he let them know it did:

saying, whosoever cometh not after Saul and after Samuel; he names both,
because he himself, though chosen king, was not inaugurated into his
office, nor was Samuel put out of his; and because he knew he was
despised by some, who would not object to and refuse the authority of
Samuel, and therefore if they would not follow him, they would follow
Samuel; and he mentions himself first, because of his superior dignity:

so shall it be done unto his oxen; be cut to pieces as these were; he
does not threaten to cut them in pieces, but their oxen, lest he should
seem to exercise too much severity at his first coming to the throne:

and the fear of the Lord fell on the people; they feared, should they be
disobedient, the Lord would cut them to pieces, or in some way destroy
them, as well as Saul would cut their oxen to pieces; for their minds
were impressed with a sense of this affair being of the Lord:

and they came out with one consent; or "as one man" (t), as if they had
consulted together; being under a divine impulse, they set out from
different parts about much the same time, and met at a place of
rendezvous next mentioned.

\(t\) "tanquam vir unus", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 11:8</span></span>

And when he numbered them at Bezek,.... Which was the place appointed to
meet at, the same with that in [Jdg
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004); see Gill on [Jdg
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004) though some take the word to be an
appellative, and not, the proper name of a place, and render it, "with a
stone"; with which he numbered, taking a stone from each, and laying
them on a heap, and then telling them (u); so Bizakion signifies little
stones (w) with the Greeks: or "with a fragment"; either of an earthen
vessel, or of a stone, or of the branch of a tree they carried in their
hands, and so the king's servants numbered not the men, but the branches
(x):

and the children of Israel were three hundred thousand men; who came
together on this occasion; these were of the eight tribes and a half on
this side Jordan:

and the men of Judah thirty thousand; which tribe is mentioned
distinctly, because a noble and warlike tribe, which usually first went
up to battle; and though the number of them at this time assembled may
seem comparatively small, yet this may easily be accounted for; because
they bordered upon the Philistines, who watched every opportunity to
take an advantage of them, and therefore could not leave their tribe
destitute, but reserved a sufficient number to guard their coasts, and
yet were desirous to testify their obedience to Saul, though chosen king
out of another tribe, when they might have expected from prophecy that
the dominion belonged to them. Josephus (y) has made a gross mistake in
the numbers here, he makes the men of Israel to be 700,000, and the men
of Judah 70,000, contrary to the text, the Targum, Syriac and Arabic
versions; but the Septuagint comes pretty near him, which has 600,000 of
the men of Israel, 70,000 of the men of Judah.

\(u\) Vid. T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 22. 2. & Gloss. in ib. (w) Suidas in voce
(x) Vid. Sheringham. in Misn. Yoma, c. 2. sect. 1. p. 14. (y) Ut supra,
(Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5.) sect. 3.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 11:9</span></span>

And they said unto the messengers that came,.... From Jabeshgilead, that
is, Saul and Samuel said to them, as follows:

thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabeshgilead: when they returned unto
them, as they were now upon the departure:

tomorrow, by that time the sun be hot; when it smites with the greatest
heat, as at noon: this morrow seems not to be the next from their return
home, or going from Saul, but the morrow after they were got home, and
should deliver the message to those that sent them, [Sa1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#010) and so Josephus (z) says, it was
on the third day the assistance was promised them:

ye shall have help; Saul with his army by that time would come and raise
the siege: and the messengers came and showed it to the men of Jabesh;
what Saul had promised, and what a numerous army he had raised, and had
now upon the march for their relief, and tomorrow would be with them:

and they were glad; it was good news and glad tidings to them; it
cheered their hearts, and gave them spirit.

\(z\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5.) sect. 3.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 11:10</span></span>

Therefore the men of Jabesh said,.... To Nahash the Ammonite:

tomorrow we will come out unto you; meaning if they had no help, which
they were well assured they should have; but this condition they
expressed not, which they were not obliged to, but left him to conclude
they had no hope of any, the messengers being returned, and the next
being the last of the seven days' respite; and by this artifice the
Ammonites were secure, and not at all upon their guard against an
approaching enemy:

and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you; make shows of
them, pluck out their eyes, or put them to death, or do what they would
with them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 11:11</span></span>

And it was so on the morrow,.... After the messengers were returned, and
delivered their message, and the men of Jabeshgilead had given the
Ammonites reason to expect that they would come out to them according to
their agreement:

that Saul put the people into three companies; or "heads" (a), under so
many commanders, assigning to each their number, if equally, 110,000 in
each, as Gideon divided his three hundred into three companies, one
hundred in each, [Jdg 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016) and
Abimelech, [Jdg 9:43](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#043) it seems to have
been their way of fighting in those days:

and they came unto the midst of the host: that is, of the Ammonites:

in the morning watch; the third and last watch of the night, by break of
day, or before, however before the sun was up; so quick was Saul and his
men in their march, though on foot. Bunting (b) computes the distance
from Gibeah to Bezek forty miles, and from thence to Jabesh sixteen; it
is commonly reckoned that it was about sixty miles from Gibeah to
Jabesh. Josephus (c) says it was ten "schaeni", each of which contained
five or six miles:

and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day; that is, till noon, so
that from the morning watch till noon he was making slaughter of them:

and it came to pass, that they which remained were scattered; those that
were not cut off by the sword of Saul were broken and dispersed, they
could not stand their ground against him:

so that two of them were not left together; to flee together, but every
one shifted for himself, and fled alone.

\(a\) "capita", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (b) Travels of the Patriarchs,
&c. p. 126. (c) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 3.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 11:12</span></span>

And the people said unto Samuel,.... By which it seems that Samuel
accompanied Saul in this expedition; though it is somewhat difficult to
account for it, that a man of his years should be able to attend so
quick a march that Saul made; it may be, therefore, that he might follow
after him gently, and meet him quickly after the battle was fought, when
the people made the following speech to him:

who is he that said, shall Saul reign over us? is such a mean
inexperienced man fit to rule over us? who can bear his government, and
submit to it? what can be expected from him, that he should deliver and
save us out of the hands of our enemies? in this they had respect to the
sons of Belial, and what they said, [Sa1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027), but now it appeared he was
sufficiently qualified, and God had made him an instrument of salvation,
and was a proper person to be king over them:

bring the men, that we may put them to death; so transported were they
with affection to Saul, and indignation against those men.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 11:13</span></span>

And Saul said,.... Preventing Samuel from giving an answer, being ready
to forgive injuries; as it was in his power as a king, and him only, to
pardon those persons that treated him in so ill a manner, and it was
policy so to do, especially in the beginning of his reign; and it
plainly appears that this temper did not always continue with him;
though there is no reason to believe otherwise, that this was now owing
to his lenity as well as his prudence:

there shall not be a man put to death this day; who by their appearance
to his summons had testified their obedience, and by their courage and
valour had showed their attachment to him, and to the interest of their
country. Ben Gersom takes the sense to be, that it might be right after,
but not on this day to put them to death; or that this was an artifice
of Saul to deliver those men out of the hands of the Israelites,
suggesting as if it was his intention hereafter to put them to death,
though not now, for the following reason:

for today the Lord hath wrought salvation in Israel; he does not ascribe
the victory to the quick dispatch he made, to his wisdom and prudence in
forming the scheme he did, and to his valour and courage, and that of
his troops, but to the power and goodness of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 11:14</span></span>

Then said Samuel to the people,.... Agreeing to what Saul had said, and
in order to put them off from demanding the lives of the offenders, and
willing to take them while they were in a good disposition:

come, and let us go to Gilgal; which was the nearest place to them, on
the other side Jordan, from which they now were, and where the children
of Israel first encamped when they passed over Jordan, where the
tabernacle and ark first were, and an altar was built, and where
meetings used to be held on certain occasions; all which might be
reasons why Samuel proposed to go to this place. According to Bunting
(d), this place was thirty six miles from Jabeshgilead:

and renew the kingdom there; that is, recognize Saul, own and declare
him king of Israel.

\(d\) Ut supra. (Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 126.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 11:15</span></span>

And all the people went to Gilgal,.... Agreed to the motion, and marched
along with Saul and Samuel thither:

and there they made Saul king before the Lord in Gilgal; that is, they
declared him to be king there; he was inaugurated into, and invested
with his office, otherwise it was God only that made him king, who only
had the power of making one, see [Act
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036). Josephus says (e) that Samuel
anointed him with the holy oil; and so the Septuagint version here
renders it,"and Samuel anointed Saul there to be king;''and it is not
improbable, that as he privately anointed him, he did it publicly also;
if not at the election of him, then at this time; and it is observable,
that in the next chapter, and not before, he is called the Lord's
anointed. Now this was "before the Lord"; in this place; this being, as
Abarbinel observes, a sanctified place, where the tabernacle and ark of
God had been; and he supposes it probable that the ark was brought
hither; but it was enough that the people and congregation of the Lord
were here, and who, when assembled in his name, his presence was with
them:

and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings before the Lord;
where an altar was built, and on which they offered these peace
offerings by way of thanksgiving, partly for the victory obtained over
the Ammonites, and partly for the renewal of the kingdom to Saul, and
their unanimity in it, as well as to implore and obtain future peace and
prosperity:

and there Saul, and all the people of Israel, rejoiced greatly; they in
their king, and he in the good will of his people, and both in the great
salvation God had wrought for them.

\(e\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 5.) sect. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 12](sa1012)

</div>
