<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2018)  [Next](sa2020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 19:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 19

David indulging to too much grief for the death of his son, is rebuked
by Joab, and threatened with a revolt of the people from him, if he did
not change his conduct, which be accordingly did, [Sa2
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#001); upon which the men of Israel
were the first that moved for the bringing him back to Jerusalem, and
the men of Judah were solicited to join with them in it, which was
effected, [Sa2 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009); and at Jordan,
Shimei, that had cursed him, met him, and asked his pardon, and was
forgiven, [Sa2 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016); and when come to
Jerusalem, Mephibosheth excused so well his not going out with him, that
he had half his land restored to him, which had been given to his
servant, [Sa2 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#024); and Barzillai,
who had very liberally supplied the king, was allowed to return to his
own city, and Chimham his son was taken to court, [Sa2
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#031); and a contention arose between
the men of Israel and of Judah about the restoration of the king, which
issued in an insurrection, as the next chapter shows, [Sa2
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#041).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 19:1</span></span>

And it was told Joab,.... When returned to Mahanaim, or on his way to
it; perhaps by the messengers he sent; and this report he had before he
saw the king:

behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for Absalom; for the death of him,
instead of rejoicing at the victory obtained, and the deliverance from
his enemies.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 19:2</span></span>

And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto all the
people,.... They also mourned too, instead of expressing joy upon the
occasion:

for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son;
this report was spread among them, which damped their joy, and hindered
them from giving any tokens of it, as were usual at such times.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 19:3</span></span>

And the people got them by stealth that day into the city,.... Did not
march into it in companies, in a public and triumphant manner, as
conquerors used to do; but entered in a private manner, one by one, or a
very few together, not caring to be seen or known, at least by the king,
as fearing they had incurred his displeasure: but

as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle; as if they
had been conquered, and not conquerors; nay, had acted a cowardly part,
and ran away; and so cared not to be seen, lest they should be
reproached, or suffer for their cowardice.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 19:4</span></span>

But the king covered his face,.... And would not see his generals, and
thank them for their services: but wrapped himself in his mantle, after
the manner of mourners:

and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom! O Absalom, my
son, my son! and this was some time, perhaps some days after he had
received the news of his death, since Joab and the army were returned
from the battle; had it been a sudden start of passion, upon first
hearing thee news, and had continued a few hours, it would have been
more excusable; but to continue some days, as it is very probable it
did, was very unbecoming.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 19:5</span></span>

And Joab came into the house to the king,.... For by this time he was
removed from the chamber over the gate to his own dwelling house or
palace, where he continued the same doleful ditty as at first:

and said, thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants; they
cannot lift up their heads, and look any in the face, nor one another;
but behave as if they had committed some very great fault, in fighting
with the rebels, and beating them:

which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons, and of
thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy
concubines; which in all probability would have been taken away if the
victory had been on the side of Absalom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 19:6</span></span>

In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends,.... Which
though not strictly true, there was some appearance of it, which is here
greatly exaggerated; in that he expressed so much grief and sorrow for
Absalom his enemy, who had rebelled against him, and showed so little
regard to his friends, that had exposed their lives for him:

for thou hast declared this day: by his conduct and behaviour, mourning
for his rebellious son, and taking no notice of his faithful servants:

that thou regardest neither princes nor servants; neither the officers
of the army, the generals and captains, nor the common soldiers: since
neither the one were admitted into his presence privately, nor had the
other public thanks as they entered the city, as might have been
expected: or "that thou hast no princes and servants" (g); none that are
accounted of as such; they are nothing with thee, in no esteem at all,
as if thou hadst none:

for this day I perceive that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died
this day, then it had pleased thee well; this was carrying the matter
too far; for though it would have been agreeable to David if Absalom had
lived, and not been slain, yet not that his army should perish, or his
people be destroyed; it would have pleased him well if both had lived.

\(g\) "non tibi principes et servi", Pagninus, Montanus; "nihil tibi
sint principes et servi", Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 19:7</span></span>

Now therefore arise, go forth,.... Arise from his couch, he was watering
with his tears, and go forth from his house, where he had shut himself
up retired from all company, to the gate of the city, where the people
passed and repassed, and there was a concourse of them: this he said not
by way of command, but by way of advice; though all along he seems to
take too much upon him, and to speak unbecoming a subject, and not with
that decency as was necessary in, speaking to a king; but it may be
observed, that a general of an army had great power over princes in
those times; and presumed very much on their interest in the army, which
led them sometimes not to behave with that decorum as became them:

and speak comfortably unto thy servants; commend them for their courage
and faithfulness, thank them for their services, and reward them
suitably; at least give them assurance of it:

for I swear by the Lord; by the Word of the Lord, as the Targum; this he
said to arouse him, and make him bestir himself, and think what was
proper for him to do:

if thou go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night;
signifying that he would use his interest in the army to go off with it,
and set up another king; and did not doubt of success, as well knowing
what temper and humour the people were in through the king's conduct:

and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from
thy youth until now; for when he was persecuted by Saul he had a number
of friends that adhered close to him; and when Ishbosheth was set up
against him by Abner as king of Israel, the tribe of Judah cleaved to
him, anointed him their king, and abode by him; wherefore, should he now
be abandoned by his army, his case would be worse than ever it had been.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 19:8</span></span>

Than the king arose, and sat in the gate,.... Of the city, a public
place, where the inhabitants met on divers accounts at times, and where
there were always people passing and repassing:

and they told unto all the people; or it was reported to the soldiers
particularly:

saying, behold the king doth sit in the gate; has laid aside his
mourning, appears in public, and receives his friends, and attends to
business:

and all the people came before the king; to congratulate him on the
victory obtained, to receive his thanks and his favours:

for Israel had fled every man to his tent: or to his city, as the
Targum; that is, those that followed Absalom; which is observed not on
account of what goes before, but of what follows after; see [Sa2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 19:9</span></span>

And all the people were at strife through all the tribes of Israel,....
Excepting the tribe of Judah; they blamed and reproved one another for
taking part with Absalom in the rebellion, and especially for their
coldness and backwardness in bringing back David to Jerusalem:

saying, the king saved us out of the hand of our enemies; exposed his
life to danger, fought our battles for us, and gained us victory over
our enemies, and saved us from them, especially those next mentioned:

and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; in the times of
Saul, and since; which were benefits which ought to have endeared him to
them, and were aggravations of the crime of those who had been concerned
in the late rebellion; and were such as ought not to be buried in
oblivion, and were proper arguments to engage them to return to their
allegiance to him, and abide by it:

and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom; being obliged to quit
Jerusalem, and the land of Judea on this side Jordan, and to pass that
river; not from a spirit of cowardice, but from tenderness to his son,
he did not choose to fight against; and from a concern for his
metropolis Jerusalem, lest that should be hurt, as well as for the
safety of his person.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 19:10</span></span>

And Absalom, whom we anointed over us,.... To be king; which either was
really done by Absalom's party, or in effect by proclaiming and
appointing him king:

is dead in battle; which shows the thing was not of God, and by which
means they were released from their oath of allegiance to him:

now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back? nobody
speaks of it, gives the least hint of it, or shows any concern about it;
but the greatest coldness and indifference, as if it was a matter of no
importance.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 19:11</span></span>

And King David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests,.... Who were
at Jerusalem, and in his interest; perhaps by Ahimaaz and Jonathan their
sons:

saying, speak unto the elders of Judah; particularly those that were at
Jerusalem, with whom they had an interest:

saying, why are ye the last to bring back the king to his house? to his
palace at Jerusalem, since David was of their tribe, and was first
anointed their king: what might make them the more backward to it was
their being so deep in the rebellion, which was formed and cherished
among them, and brought to the height it was, through their connivance
and encouragement, both at Hebron and Jerusalem; and therefore they
might fear the resentment of David, and that he would not be easily
reconciled unto them:

seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house:
or he has received invitations from all the tribes of Israel to return
to his house or palace at Jerusalem; and so this was a part of the
message of David to the priests, to be told to the elders as an
aggravation of their backwardness, and as an argument to excite them to
their duty; though some think these are the words of the historian, to
be inserted in a parenthesis, as in our version.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 19:12</span></span>

Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh,.... Being of the same
tribe, and therefore he should deal gently with them, as if they were
parts of his body; and not be severe upon them, for the hand they had in
the conspiracy, as they might fear:

and wherefore then are ye the last to bring the king back? since they
were so nearly related to him, and he so ready to forgive them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 19:13</span></span>

And say ye to Amasa,.... Who was the general of Absalom's army, and who
might fear he should never be pardoned, whoever was, and looked upon his
case as desperate; who had led on the army with Absalom against the
king's threes, and fought them:

art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? nearly related to him, being
his sister's son:

God do so to me, and more also: than he had done to Absalom; or he
imprecates the greatest evil upon himself that could be thought of or
named:

if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of
Joab; signifying that he would not only pardon the treason he had been
guilty of, but raise him to the highest post in the army; and to assure
him of it, of which he might be doubtful, considering what he had done
to merit his displeasure, he makes this oath or imprecation. Joab had
got his ill will by many instances, as by the murder of Abner, and now
by slaying Absalom against his orders; and by his rude and insolent
behaviour to him when lamenting the death of his son; he wanted to be
rid of him, and now, having an opportunity of putting a valiant man into
his place, and thereby attaching him to his interest, he was determined
to make use of it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 19:14</span></span>

And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one
man,.... This the Jewish commentators generally understand of Amasa that
he used his interest with the men of Judah, and so wrought upon them,
that they agreed as one man to send for the king, and bring him back;
but it seems best to understand it of David, who by these gentle
methods, kind messages, and affectionate speeches, powerfully inclined
and engaged the hearts of the people towards him; so that they were
unanimously and affectionately agreed to restore him: in this way David
chose to return; he could have come without their leave, or any
invitation from them, as he was their lawful king, and a victorious one,
the rebellion being crushed; and had it in his power to chastise those
concerned in it, and use them with severity; but he chose rather to gain
the hearts of his people, and to come in a way peaceable to them, and
honourable to himself:

so that they sent this word unto the king, return thou and all thy
servants; perhaps by the same messengers that David sent; or it may be,
rather for honour's sake they deputed some of their principal men to
wait on David, and invite him to return to them with all his retinue and
army, promising allegiance and fidelity to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 19:15</span></span>

So the king returned, and came to Jordan,.... From Mahanaim thither,
which according to Bunting (i) was twenty eight miles:

and Judah came to Gilgal; that is, the elders, or principal men of the
tribe of Judah, came thither; which place, according to the same writer
(k), was twelve miles from Jerusalem, and four from Jordan; and was the
first place the Israelites came to when they passed that river in
Joshua's time; but it seems to be rather more; See Gill on [Jos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001) and See Gill on [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019),

to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan; but then they
must proceed further on, for Gilgal seems to be live or six miles on
this side Jordan.

\(i\) Travels, &c. p. 142. (k) Travels, &c. p. 142, 143.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 19:16</span></span>

And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim,.... Of
whom see [Sa2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005),

hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet King David: he took
the first opportunity to meet the king, and ask his pardon for his ill
treatment of him when he fled from Jerusalem; for, hearing: that Absalom
was slain, and the victory was on the side of David, who was returning
in triumph, he thought it advisable as soon as possible to make his
submission, and entreat forgiveness, lest he should fall a just
sacrifice to his vengeance; and a better opportunity he could not well
have than to go along with the men of Judah, who met the king first of
all.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 19:17</span></span>

And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him,.... Of which tribe
he was, and these were either a band of soldiers, of which he was the
chiliarch; or tenants of his, which showed him to be a great man; or his
neighbours, and persons of some figure, whom he prevailed upon to come
as intercessors for him:

and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul; who had imposed upon David,
and got his master's inheritance from him, knowing that David would be
undeceived by Mephibosheth his master, when he came to Jerusalem; and
therefore that he might be more tenderly dealt with, and come off the
better, he was thus forward to meet the king, and pay his respects to
him:

and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him: which made a
considerable appearance; see [Sa2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#010),

and they went over Jordan before the king: to meet him on the other
side, both Shimei and his a thousand men, and Ziba with his sons and
servants.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 19:18</span></span>

And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king's household,....
His wives and children, who could not so well ford the river on foot:
some will have this to be a bridge of boats, a pontoon; and Abarbinel
thinks it might be a company of men, who carried the women and children
on their shoulders, one after another:

and to do what he thought good; to carry over whatever else the king
pleased, besides his family:

and Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was come
over Jordan; or just as he was about to come over, when he came to
Jordan to take the boat in order to come over; for he went over Jordan
to meet him, and therefore would take the first opportunity of coming
into his presence, and fall down before him, and make his submission to
him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 19:19</span></span>

And said unto the king, let not my lord the king impute iniquity unto
me,.... That is, deal with him according to the desert of it, punish him
for it, but forgive it: for non-imputation of sin is in effect the
pardon of it:

neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day
my lord the king went out of Jerusalem: he desires that he would not
only forgive, but forget it; he owns it was a perverse action, and
aggravated by being done at the time when the king was in great trouble
and distress:

that the king should take it to his heart; and determine to avenge
himself on him for it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 19:20</span></span>

For thy servant doth know that I have sinned,.... He was sensible of it,
and sorry for it, and publicly acknowledged it before all the men he
brought with him, and before all the servants of David; and as a token
of the sincerity of his repentance, and as an earnest of his future
fidelity, he made this early submission:

therefore, behold, I am come the first this day of all the house of
Joseph, to go down to meet my lord the king; but why does he make
mention of the house of Joseph, when he was of the tribe of Benjamin?
Kimchi says that Benjamin, Ephraim, and Manasseh, were called the house
of Joseph; and it may be observed that it is sometimes used for all
Israel, as in [Psa 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001); and he was
the first of them that came, inasmuch as he came along with the men of
Judah, who came first of all to fetch the king back; or Joseph may stand
for the tribes of Israel, as distinct from Judah, and he was the first
of them; some of the Jewish writers think he makes mention of the name
of Joseph, because as the brethren of Joseph used him ill, and he
returned good to them; so though he had used David ill, he hoped he
would do as Joseph did, return good for evil; and others represent him
as suggesting hereby to David, that all Israel had used him ill, and he
worse than them all; and now he was come first, and they were all
waiting what he would do to him, that if he received him kindly, all
would come and make their peace with him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 19:21</span></span>

But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said,.... The same person
that would have taken off the head of Shimei at the time he cursed
David, if he would have given him leave, [Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009),

shall not Shimei be put to death for this? this humiliation and
acknowledgment he has made, shall he be forgiven on that account? shall
so small a matter as this atone for so great a crime he has been guilty
of, as that he shall not die?

because or "though" (l).

he cursed the Lord's anointed; is asking pardon sufficient to expiate so
foul an offence, for which according to the law he ought to die? or for
this action which he has done, as the Arabic version, in cursing the
Lord's anointed.

\(l\) "quamvis, vel cum tamen", Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 19:22</span></span>

And David said, what have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah?.... See
Gill on [Sa2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010),

that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? or a Satan unto me, as
the word is, by advising him to do what would be prejudicial to his
interest; see [Mat 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022); as to use
severity at such a time as this would have been; for had he immediately
ordered Shimei to be put to death, though he deserved it, who was the
first man that came to ask pardon, the Israelites in general, or all
however concerned in the rebellion, would have concluded they must share
the same fate, and so would not have submitted, but have raised a new
rebellion against him; and some think Joab and Abishai had this in view,
that they might keep their posts in the army:

shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? there shall not:
the glory of this day shall not be sullied by the death of any; nor the
joy of it be turned into sorrow in any family in Israel, as would, if
any was put to death for what had passed during the rebellion:

for do not I know that I am this day king over Israel? and can and will
do as I please; as he had been driven from his throne and palace, and
was now invited back again, and upon his return, it was as if he was
made king anew, and afresh inaugurated into his office; and therefore no
blood should be split on that day on which he was restored to his
kingdom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 19:23</span></span>

Therefore the king said unto Shimei, thou shalt not die,.... This day by
my hands, or order, or by the sword, [Kg1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008),

and the king sware unto him; that he should not die for that offence, or
for that only; but if he committed a new one, this oath was no longer
binding on him, and not at all upon his heir and successor.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 19:24</span></span>

And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king,.... Not
down to Jordan, but Jerusalem; when the king was come thither, he came
from his own dwelling to the king's palace; he is called the son of
Saul, though he was his grandson, and grandsons are sometimes called
sons; though in the Septuagint it is, the son's son of Saul; and the
Syriac and Arabic versions are, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul:

and had neither dressed his feet; had not cut his nails, as the
Septuagint adds, his toenails; or rather had not washed his feet, as the
Targum paraphrases it; which was frequently done in those countries,
partly for refreshment, and partly to remove the filth of them
contracted by walking barefooted, or only with sandals; as also because
of the ill smell of them, which was offensive:

nor trimmed his beard; or shaved his upper lip, and took no care that
the hair of his chin should be in any order; otherwise that was never
shaved, to do it would be contrary to the law in [Lev
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027),

nor washed his clothes; his linen clothes, his shirts, or any other that
used to be washed; or "whitened" them, as the Targum, he had not sent
them, his woollen clothes, to the fuller, to get out the spots, and
whiten them. All these were tokens of mourning, and showed him to be a
sincere mourner for the king's departure, and the trouble he was in,
since it was so long continued:

from the day the king departed, until the day he came again in peace;
which must be a considerable time, and therefore he must be in a most
sordid and rueful condition.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 19:25</span></span>

And it came to pass, when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king,....
Perhaps from the place where his estate was; or, as the Arabic version,
when he came from Jerusalem, from whence he went a little way to meet
the king, as he was coming thither; for it was said he abode at
Jerusalem, [Sa2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003),

that the king said unto him, wherefore wentest not thou with me,

Mephibosheth? when he departed from Jerusalem, being obliged to flee
from thence because of Absalom; it is very probable David would never
have asked him this question, knowing his lameness, had it not been for
the suggestion of Ziba his servant, that he stayed at Jerusalem, hoping
that the kingdom of his father would be restored to him, [Sa2
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 19:26</span></span>

And he answered, my lord, O king, my servant deceived me,.... His
servant Ziba, who, instead of saddling an ass for him by his order, went
off with that and another himself, [Sa2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001); for thy servant

said, I will saddle me an ass; he not only determined this in his own
mind, but gave orders to his servant to saddle one for him:

that I may ride thereon, and go to the king, because thy servant is
lame; and could not walk afoot, being lame of both his feet, [Sa2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#004).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 19:27</span></span>

And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king,.... By
suggesting that he stayed at Jerusalem with a view to the kingdom,
hoping that the quarrel between David and Absalom would issue in the
restoration of it to his father's family; which was a mere calumny, he
having had no such thought, nor was there any foundation for it:

but my lord the king is an angel of God; for understanding and wisdom,
to discern the falsehood of such suggestions:

do therefore what is good in thine eyes; condemn him or acquit him;
reject him or receive him into favour; he entirely submitted himself to
him, to do with him as seemed good in his sight.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 19:28</span></span>

For all of my, father's house were but dead men before my lord the
king,.... Or "men of death" (m); worthy of death, not on account of
Saul's persecution, for which his family did not deserve to suffer;
rather for the attempt of Ishbosheth to get the kingdom from him, which
might be deemed treason, and so the family was tainted for it; though
the sense may be only this, that their lives lay at his mercy, and that
if he had dealt with rigour and severity towards them, as was usual for
princes to do towards the family of their predecessors, who had any
claim to the kingdom, put them to death, this would have been their
case:

yet didst thou set thy servant among them that eat at thine own table;
which was showing him great kindness, and doing him great honour:

what right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the king? to ask
any favour of him, or make any complaint to him.

\(m\) "viris mortis", Montanus.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 19:29</span></span>

And the king said unto him, why speakest thou any more of thy
matters?.... Of his father's family, and the injuries done by them to
David, and of the benefits and favours which he had received from David,
or of his temporal affairs, of his estate, which David had given away to
Ziba:

I have said, thou and Ziba divide the land; revoking his last grant to
Ziba, which gave him all that belonged to Mephibosheth, [Sa2
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#004); he established his first decree,
that Ziba should have half the profit of the land for tilling it, and
the other half be given to Mephibosheth; he did not choose to punish
Ziba for slandering his master, being inclined to clemency and mercy,
and determined to show no severity at that time; and might be in some
fear of Ziba, being a considerable man, lest he should raise a new
insurrection, if he bore hard upon him; besides, he might have a large
share in his affection, having made a present to him in the time of his
distress, and was one of the first that came to meet him upon his
return, [Sa2 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#017).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 19:30</span></span>

And Mephibosheth said unto the king, yea, let him take all,.... The
whole estate, as David had given it to him; he was content that that
last grant should stand:

forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house;
his palace in Jerusalem; which was a strong expression of affection for
him, and loyalty to him. (Solomn used a similar test to determine which
woman's baby was alive. [Kg1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#016). He
purposed the baby be cut in two to reveal who the real mother was.
Likewise, David suggests the property should be divided between Ziba and
Miphibosheth to determine the true loyalty of the later. [Sa2
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#029) Editor.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 19:31</span></span>

And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim,.... The place of his
habitation, to Jordan, see [Sa2 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027),

and went over Jordan with the king to conduct him over Jordan; to
accompany him over the river, and then take his leave of him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 19:32</span></span>

Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old,.... Which
was ten years beyond the common term of man's life, and reckoned a very
great age in David's time, and has been ever since, and still is, see
[Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010),

and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim: had
supported him and his family, furnished him with provisions, and all the
necessaries of life, during his stay there:

for he was a very great man; in wealth and riches, and was a very
liberal man, and a man of great wisdom and good sense; and very probably
was a man of great grace, which taught him his duty to his prince, and
influenced him to show mercy to him in distress.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 19:33</span></span>

And the king said to Barzillai, come thou over with me,.... Over Jordan;
Barzillai came with an intent to accompany the king over Jordan; but the
king meant not only to go over Jordan, but when over to go further with
him, even to Jerusalem:

and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem; meaning, that he should dwell
with him in his palace, and eat at his table, in return for feeding him
at Mahanaim.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa2 19:34</span></span>

And Barzillai said unto the king,.... In answer to the grateful proposal
he made:

how long have I to live; that could not be said with exactness by any;
but it might be probably conjectured from the age he was of, and the
infirmities that attended him, that he could not live long; it was but a
short time he had to be in the world:

that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem? take so long a journey
as that, seeing he might die before he got thither; and if he did not,
since it could not be thought he should live long, he could not think of
it, or judge it advisable at such an age to take such a journey, change
his place of abode, and manner of living.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa2 19:35</span></span>

I am this day fourscore years old,.... Not that that day was precisely
his birthday, but that he was about such an age, very little under or
over; very probably he was full that age:

and can I discern between good and evil? signifying, either that his
intellectual powers were impaired, and could not distinguish what was
right and wrong, and so could be of no service to David in his privy
council, or any court of judicature, he was fit for no post or office
under him; or that his natural senses were not quick to distinguish
between good and bad, particularly between good and bad food, which he
could neither discern by smell nor taste, as follows:

can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? have any gust or
relish of, or take any delight or pleasure in eating and drinking; so
that the most delicious food, and richest wines, and all the dainties of
a king's table, would signify nothing to him:

can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? either
being so deaf that he could not hear them at all, or however not with
any delight; the evil days being come upon him, in which he could take
no pleasure in the diversions of a court:

wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king?
he could neither take any pleasure himself, nor be of any service to the
king, but on the contrary a burden to him; not only on account of his
sustenance, and being obliged to have servants to attend him, which
might be the least part of his burden, but his company would be
disagreeable and troublesome, through the infirmities of old age upon
him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa2 19:36</span></span>

Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king,.... That is,
go a little way after he was over Jordan with him, and then return to
his own city:

and why should the king recompense it with such a reward? the sense is,
why should the king recompense so trifling a thing as I have done, and
which was but my duty, with such a reward, as to maintain me in so grand
a manner at his court?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa2 19:37</span></span>

Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again,.... To his own city,
after he is gone ever Jordan, and seen the king a little way on his
journey:

that I may die in my own city: the city of Rogelim, where perhaps he was
born, and had lived all his days, and where it is natural for people to
desire to die, even in their native place:

and be buried by the grave of my father, and of my mother: or "in" their
grave, as Kimchi and Ben Melech, in the sepulchre of his fathers, where
men usually choose to be buried:

but behold, thy servant Chimham: who was his son; and so the Syriac and
Arabic versions express it, my son Chimham:

let him go over with my lord the king; not only over Jordan, but to
Jerusalem with him:

and do to him what shall seem good unto thee; advance him, and put him
into any post or office the king should think fit, or bestow a pension
upon him, or give him an estate to live upon, or whatever he pleased.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa2 19:38</span></span>

And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me,.... He admitted of
him instead of his father:

and I will do unto him that which shall seem good unto thee; he puts it
to Barzillai, and leaves it with him to ask what he would for his son,
and he would grant it. We nowhere read what it was that Barzillai asked,
or whether he asked anything; only this we read, that some hundreds of
years afterward there was a place called the habitation of Chimham near
Bethlehem, [Jer 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017); which makes it
probable that David gave him a paternal estate of his there, since
Bethlehem was his city; and the Targum on that place is expressly for
it; See Gill on [Jer 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017),

and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that will I do for thee;
whatever suit he should make to him, or whatever favour he should ask of
him hereafter, when returned to his own city, he would grant it to him,
if it could be possibly done; such a sense should he always retain of
his kindness to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa2 19:39</span></span>

And all the people went over Jordan,.... That were with David:

and when the king was come over; over Jordan, had got to the other side
of it, whither Barzillai accompanied him:

the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; took his leave of him with a
kiss, as friends were wont to do at parting, thanked him for all his
favours, wished him well, and prayed to God to bless him with all
blessings temporal and spiritual:

and he returned to his own place: his own city Rogelim, having crossed
over again the river Jordan.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa2 19:40</span></span>

Then the king went on to Gilgal,.... Which, according to Josephus (n),
was fifty furlongs from Jordan, six miles and a quarter:

and Chimham went on with him; after Barzillai had left them, and
accompanied the king to Jerusalem:

and all the people of Judah conducted the king; to Jerusalem; who came
to meet him, [Sa2 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#015),

and also half the people of Israel; or a part of them, as the word used
signifies, and not always an equal half, so Kimchi observes; even such
of Israel as went out with David at first, and the a thousand men of
Benjamin that came to meet him, [Sa2
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#017).

\(n\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 4.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">sa2 19:41</span></span>

And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king,.... A large number
of them, the other part that did not come over with David, some of their
principal men, who met him upon the road:

and said unto the king, why have our brethren, the men of Judah, stolen
thee away; secretly, privately, and unknown to them, and were bringing
him back to Jerusalem:

and have brought the king, and his household, and all David's men with
him, over Jordan? him, and his family, and soldiers.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">sa2 19:42</span></span>

And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel,.... Such of them as
went down to fetch the king back, replied to the men of Israel that now
met them, and objected to their conduct:

because the king is near of kin to us; being of their tribe, and his
palace was within their borders, and therefore they were proper persons
to bring him home:

wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? for bringing the king back,
and being the first in it; for who so proper as they, not only to do
their duty, but to show their affection to the king as early as
possible?

have we eaten at all of the king's cost? they had maintained themselves
at their own expense, going and returning; they had no self-interest or
selfish views to serve, but on the contrary had been at a considerable
charge to meet the king, and conduct him home:

or hath he given us any gift? no, he had not, nor did they expect any;
it was not with a view to any reward that they had taken this step, but
purely out of affection to the king, and for the good of their country.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">sa2 19:43</span></span>

And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said,.... They
replied to them, as follows:

we have ten parts in the king; being ten tribes, reckoning Simeon in the
tribe of Judah, within which it lay, [Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001),

and we have, also more right in David than ye; being more numerous than
they; or, according to the Targum, they had more affection and good will
towards David than the men of Judah, though he was of their tribe, and
dwelt among them; since the rebellion was begun, and was cherished and
carried on among them:

why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in
bringing back our king? they were as ready and as desirous as they to
fetch the king back; and since they were far the largest body of men,
and the far greater part of the nation, they thought they ought to have
been consulted in an affair of so much importance, and that doing it
without them was slighting them, and casting contempt upon them, and
insinuating as if they were enemies to the king; or, as the Targum
expresses it,"was not my word first to bring back my king?''the first
motion was from them, as appears from [Sa2
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#011); and therefore the thing should
not have been done without them; they should have been apprized of it,
that they might at least have joined them, and shared in the honour with
them of bringing the king back:

and the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men
of Israel; not those that are here recorded, but what followed, and are
not written, being so very warm and indecent; and David being silent in
this hot dispute between them, which was interpreted taking the part of
Judah, the men of Israel were incensed at it; and hence arose a new
rebellion, of which more in the next chapter how it began, and was
crushed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 20](sa2020)

</div>
