<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol005)  [Next](sol007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SONG OF SOLOMON 6

The discourse between the church and the daughters of Jerusalem is
continued in this chapter: they inquire whither her beloved was gone, in
order to seek him with her, [Sol 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001);
she tells them where he was gone, and for what purpose he went thither,
and what he was doing there; and claims and asserts her interest in him,
[Sol 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002); Then follows a commendation
of the church by Christ, who admires her beauty, and describes her by
her eyes, hair, &c. [Sol 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004); and
prefers her to all others; being a singular and choice one to him, and
the praise of others, [Sol 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008); and
next he gives an account of his going into his garden, and his design in
it, and of what happened to him there, [Sol
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011). And the chapter is concluded
with a charge to the Shulamite, to turn herself, that she might be
looked upon; which occasions a question, to which an answer is returned,
[Sol 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 6:1</span></span>

Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women?.... The title
is the same used by them, and by Christ before them, [Sol
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008); and here repeated, to assure her
that they were serious in asking this question, and that it was in great
respect to her they put it; and which, to the same sense, in other
words, is expressed,

whither is thy beloved turned aside? which way did he take? on what hand
did he turn, to the right or left, when he went from thy door? They ask
no longer who or what he was, being satisfied with the church's
description of him; by which they had gained some knowledge of him, and
had their affections drawn out unto him; and were desirous of knowing
more of him and of being better acquainted with him, and to enjoy his
company and presence; though as yet they had but little faith in him,
and therefore could not call him "their" beloved, only "her" beloved:
and this question is put and repeated in this manner, to show that they
were serious and in earnest; yea, were in haste, and impatient to know
which way he went; say they,

that we may seek him with thee; it was not mere speculation or curiosity
that led them to put the above questions; they were desirous to go into
practice, to join with the church in the search of Christ, to seek him
with her in the word and ordinances; upon which they were determined,
could they get any hint from her whither he was gone, and where it was
most likely to find him: for so the words may be rendered, "and we will
seek him with thee" (p); this they had resolved on among themselves, and
only wanted directions which way to steer their course, or a grant to go
along with the church in quest of her beloved.

\(p\) Sept. "quaeremus", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Marckius, &c.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 6:2</span></span>

My beloved is gone down into his garden,.... Which may be said by
Solomon, in allusion to what he himself was wont to do, as Josephus (q)
relates; who used to go very early in a morning in great pomp to Etham,
about two miles from Jerusalem, a pleasant place, abounding with gardens
and flows of water: or respect may be had to the king's gardens nearer
Jerusalem, which were at the descent of Mount Zion, and reached to the
lower pool (r); see [Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015); and
which lying lower than the king's palace, he might be said to go down to
it. And this may point at the low estate of the people of God on earth,
depressed with sorrows, afflictions, and persecutions; and the
condescension of Christ, in visiting them in their low estate, and
granting them his gracious presence: of the garden of Christ, and of his
coming into it; see Gill on [Sol 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012);
See Gill on [Sol 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016); See Gill on
[Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001); and the church might
remember what he said, "I am come into my garden", [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001); though she soon fell asleep and
forgot it, and now calls it to mind, and so could direct the daughters
where he was. She adds,

to the beds of spices; of odoriferous plants; to which particular
believers, planted regularly in the churches of Christ, may be compared,
for the excellency and fragrancy of their graces; and among whom Christ
delights to be; see [Sol 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013).
Gussetius (s) thinks the words, both here and in [Sol
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#013), should be rendered "rivers of
spices"; an hyperbolical expression, showing that a man walking by
rivers of waters, where aromatic plants and fragrant flowers grow,
perceives such a sweet odour, that, while he is refreshed with the
moisture of the waters, he seems to be walking by rivers of spices. The
end of her beloved's going thither is,

to feed in the gardens; to feed his flocks there: not on commons and in
fields, but in gardens, which is unusual: and by which are meant
particular churches, where Christ feeds his people, by his Spirit and by
his ministers, word and ordinances, with himself, the bread of life;
with the discoveries of his love, better than wine; and with the
doctrines and promises of the Gospel: or to feed himself, or that "he
himself might be fed" (t) there; by beholding with pleasure how the
plants grow, and the spices flow out; by tasting the pleasant fruits of
the garden; and by observing with delight the graces of the Spirit in
his people in lively exercise;

and to gather lilies; to crop them with the hand (u); lilies are liable
to be cropped, hence Horace (w) calls the lily "breve lilium", the short
lived lily: to these saints may be compared, for the glory, splendour,
and beauty, they receive from Christ; see [Sol
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002); there was a gathering of these at
the death of Christ, [Eph 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010); and
there is a gathering of them in effectual calling, and into a church
state, and into nearer communion with Christ; but here it seems to
signify a gathering them by death, when fully ripe, to enjoy everlasting
fellowship with him.

\(q\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 7. s. 3. (r) See Lightfoot's Chorograph. Inquiry
on John, c. 5. s. 4. p. 509. (s) Ebr. Comment. p. 642. (t) "ut ubi
pascatur", V. L. Munster, Mercerus. (u) , Theocrit. Idyll. 19. v. 32.
(w) Carmin. l. 1. Ode 36, v. 16.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 6:3</span></span>

I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine,.... Expressive of interest in
Christ, and union to him, and of her faith therein; which still
continued, notwithstanding her unbecoming behavior toward Christ, and
her many infirmities, [Sol 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002). Aben
Ezra connects the words with the preceding, "my beloved is gone", &c.
but though he is, and I am left alone, I know I am his, and he is mine;
which throws a beauty upon the words, and declares the excellency and
strength of her faith; for herein lies the glory and excellency of
faith, to believe in an unseen Christ: though it may be the Shechinah
was with her, as the Targum has it; or Christ had now appeared to her,
and was found by her, and therefore, like Thomas, says, "my Lord and my
God";

he feedeth among the lilies; See Gill on [Sol
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 6:4</span></span>

Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah,.... These are the words of
Christ, who had been absent for some time, and till now silent; but,
like another Joseph, could not refrain any longer, but makes himself
known to his church, and bursts out in strong expressions of love to
her, and in high commendations of her; for, notwithstanding her behavior
toward him, she was his love still, and as "beautiful" and as comely in
his sight as ever: and for which he compares her here to Tirzah; which
is either the name of some beautiful woman, well known in those times;
so one of the daughters of Zelophehad is called by this name, [Num
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001); but whether from her beauty is
nowhere said: or rather a city of this name is here meant, since, in the
next clause, the church is compared to the city of Jerusalem for the
same reason. There was a city in the land of Canaan, called Tirzah,
formerly the seat of one of the ancient kings of Canaan, and, in later
times, of Jeroboam and some of his successors; and which, no doubt, was
a very pleasant and delightful place, as its name imports, either from
its situation or buildings, [Jos
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#024). Adrichomius (x) says, it was an
heroic city, situated on a high mountain. In some of the Greek versions,
it is read as an appellative, and tendered, as "good will" or "good
pleasure" (y), and so may respect the sweetness of her temper and
disposition; which is heightened by using the abstract, she was all good
nature and good will; not only sweet, as the Vulgate Latin version, but
"sweetness" itself, as she says of him, [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016); and this may be said of her, as
she was the object of God's good will and pleasure in election, of
Christ's in redemption, and of the Spirit's in effectual calling; and as
she was the subject of good will, bearing one to God, to Christ, to his
people, word, worship, ways, and ordinances. The word comes from a root
which signifies to be "grateful and accepted": and so Jarchi interprets
the word here "acceptable": and so some ancient writings of the Jews
(z): and may denote the acceptableness of the church in Christ, with
whom God is well pleased in him for his righteousness's sake, in which
she appears exceeding fair and lovely. And for the same reason is said
to be

comely as Jerusalem; the metropolis of Judea, and seat of the kings of
it; and, as Pliny (a) says, was far the most famous of any of the cities
of the east; it was a city well built and compact together, beautiful
for situation, very rich in Solomon's time, the place of divine worship,
and was strongly fortified by nature and art: and hence the church of
God often bears this name, both in the Old and New Testament, [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002), being the city of the great
King, built on Christ, the Rock; consisting of saints, fitly and closely
united together; rich with the unsearchable riches of Christ; where the
several parts of spiritual and evangelic worship are performed;
possessed of many privileges, and well secured by the power and
salvation of God. Yet

terrible as an army with banners; to her enemies, though so lovely to
Christ. This shows that not a single person is meant all along, who
could not with propriety be compared to an army; but a collective body,
as the church is: and that the church on earth is militant, and, like a
well disciplined army, in good order, and provided with proper officers
and suitable armour, and in a posture of defence, and ready to fight
when attacked; and so "terrible" to her enemies, Satan and his
principalities, wicked men and false teachers; who are terrified by
their having such a General at the head of them as Christ, and being
under such banners as his, and provided with such good weapons of
warfare, as are mighty through God; by their close union to one another;
and by the constancy, undauntedness, and invincibleness of their faith;
and are awed by their pious conversation and good examples. Perhaps some
respect may be had by Christ to the church's courage and constancy in
seeking after him; the force of whose faith and love he felt, which he
could not withstand, and therefore says as follows:

\(x\) Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, p. 74. (y) , Sept. Symmachus. (z) Siphri
in Jarchi, & Shir Hashirim Rabba in loc. (a) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 14.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 6:5</span></span>

Turn away thine eyes from me,.... Her eyes of faith and love; not
through dislike of them, but as ravished with them; his passions were so
struck by them, and his heart pierced with them, that he could stand it
out no longer against her; see [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009). Some render the words, "turn
about thine eyes over against me" (b); this being the first time of
meeting, after her ungrateful treatment of him, she might be filled with
shame and confusion for it, and therefore hung down her head, or looked
on one side; wherefore he encourages her to look him full in the face,
with a holy confidence; for such looks of faith are very agreeable to
Christ; see [Sol 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014);

for they have overcome me; that is, her eyes, they had made a conquest
of his heart; which does not imply weakness in Christ, but condescending
grace, that he should suffer himself, as it were, to be overpowered by
the faith and love of his people, who has conquered them and all their
enemies. This clause is very differently rendered: by some, "they have
strengthened me" (c); his desire towards his church, and the enjoyment
of her company: by others, the reverse, "are stronger than me", or "have
taken away my strength" (d); so that he was spiritless, and as one dead,
or in an ecstasy: by others, "they have made me fly away" (e); that is,
out of himself; so that he was not master of himself, could not bear the
force and brightness of her eyes: by others, "they have lifted me up"
(f); revived, cheered, and comforted him, through sympathy with her, in
virtue of their near union: by others, "they have made me proud", or
"prouder" (g); see [Isa 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#005). Christ
has a kind of pride as well as pleasure in his church; he is proud of
the beauty he has put upon her, of the graces he has wrought in her; and
especially of her faith, when in exercise; see [Mat
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010); and by others, "they have made
me fiercer" (h); not with anger and indignation, but with love; there is
a force, a fierceness in love, as well as in wrath: "love is strong as
death, and jealousy is cruel as the grave", [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006); it is so in the church, much more
in Christ. All which shows the power of faith, to which mighty things
are ascribed, [Heb 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001); and here the
conquest of Christ himself;

thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead; from Mount
Gilead; see Gill on [Sol 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001).

\(b\) , Sept. "ex adverso mei"; Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Marckius;
so Montanus and Ainsworth. (c) "corroborant me", Marckius; so Kimchi,
and Ben Melech. (d) "Fortiores fuerunt me", Pagninus; so Aben Ezra. (e)
So the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions. (f) Mercerus, Ainsworth.
(g) Tigurine version, Piscator; so Jarchi. (h) Montanus, Cocceius.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 6:6</span></span>

Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof
everyone beareth twins, and there is not one barren among them. See Gill
on [Sol 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 6:7</span></span>

As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks. The same
descriptions are given in [Sol 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003);
See Gill on [Sol 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003); and these are
repeated, to show the reality of the church's beauty, and for the sake
of confirmation; and that it still continued the same, notwithstanding
her failings and infirmities; and that Christ had the same esteem of
her, and love to her, he ever had. That part of the description,
respecting the church's lips and speech, in [Sol
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003); is here omitted, though added at
the end of [Sol 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#006); by the
Septuagint; but is not in the Hebrew copies, nor taken notice of in the
Targum; yea, the Masorah, on [Sol 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002),
remarks some words as only used in that place, and therefore could not
be repeated here in the copies then in use.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 6:8</span></span>

There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins
without number. In this verse and [Sol
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009) the church is commended as she
stood related to others; and is compared with them, and preferred to
them. The words may be considered either as an assertion, "there are",
&c. or as a supposition, "though there be", &c. yet Christ's church is
but one, and excels them all. "Queens" are principal and lawful wives of
kings; "concubines", secondary or half wives, as the word (i) signifies;
who were admitted to the bed, but their children did not inherit:
"virgins", unmarried persons, maids of honour, who waited on the queen.
The allusion is to the custom of kings and great personages, who had
many wives, and more concubines, and a large number of virgins to wait
on them; see [Kg1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003); or to a
nuptial solemnity, and the ceremony of introducing the bride to the
bridegroom, attended with a large number of persons of distinction; and
so Theocritus (k) speaks of four times sixty virgins attending the
nuptials of Menelaus and Helena; see [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009). By all which may be meant either
the kingdoms and nations of the world; by "queens", the more large, rich
and flourishing kingdoms; by "concubines", inferior states; and by
"virgins without number", the vast multitudes of inhabitants that fill
them; but all, put together, are not equal to the church; see [Sol
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002); or else false churches; by
"queens", such who boast of their riches and number, as the church of
Rome, [Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007); by "concubines", such
as are inferior in those things, but equally corrupt, as Arians,
Socinians, &c. and by "virgins without number", the multitudes of poor,
weak, ignorant people, seduced by them; and what figure soever these
make, or pretensions to be the true churches of Christ, they are none of
his, his spouse is preferred to them all. Or rather true believers in
Christ, of different degrees, are here meant; queens, those that have
the greatest share of gifts grace, most nearness to Christ, and
communion with him; by "concubines", believers of a lower class, and of
a more servile spirit, and yet sometimes are favoured with, fellowship
with Christ; and by "virgins", young converts, who have not so large an
experience as the former; and this distribution agrees with [Jo1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013); and the rather this may be the
sense, since each of these are said to praise the church in [Sol
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009), who is preferable to them, and
includes them all.

\(i\) "secundariae uxores", Michaelis. (k) Idyll. 18. v. 24.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 6:9</span></span>

My dove, my undefiled, is but one,.... Of these titles, see [Sol
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014). Christ's church is called one,
in distinction from the many before mentioned; and either designs her
small number, in comparison of the nations of the world, and of false
churches, like one to sixty or eighty, and even to an innumerable
company; see [Ecc 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#014), [Luk
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032); or else her unity in herself,
being but one general assembly and church of the firstborn, made up of
various particular congregated churches; and "one body", consisting of
various members, united together in affection, and partakers of the same
grace, blessings, and privileges; actuated by "one Spirit", the Spirit
of God, [Eph 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004); and having but "one
Head", Christ Jesus, [Eph 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015), and it
may signify that the church is the spouse of Christ; that though other
princes may have sixty queens, and eighty concubines, and virgins
without number, to wait on them, [Sol
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008); Christ had but one, and was well
pleased with her, and desired no other;

she is the only one of her mother; the Jerusalem above, the mother of us
all: or the sense is, she was to Christ as a mother's only child, most
tenderly beloved by him;

she is the choice one of her that bare her; esteemed and loved best of
all her mother's children. The word may be rendered, "the pure" or
"clean one" (l); so the church is, as clothed in "clean" linen, the
righteousness of Christ; cleansed from sin in his blood; sprinkled with
the clean water of the covenant, and of an unspotted conversation.

The daughters saw her, and blessed her; yea, the queens and the
concubines, and they praised her: it may seem strange that concubines
should praise a queen; but it was not unusual in the eastern countries;
with the Persians, as the queen admitted of many concubines by the order
of her lord the king, so the queen was had in great veneration, and even
adored by the concubines (m): which may respect either the great esteem
the church had, or should have, in the world, even from the great men of
it, as she will have in the latter day, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023); or which young converts have
for her; who may more especially be meant by the "daughters" and
"virgins", who, in [Sol 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001), call the
church the "fairest among women": these blessed her, and pronounced her
happy, and wished all happiness to her; they "praised her", spoke well
of her, and commended her for her beauty; which was pleasing to Christ,
and therefore observed by him.

\(l\) "munda", Montanus, Mercerus; "pura", Vatablus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Marckius, Michaelis. (m) Dinon in
Persicis apud Athenaei Deipnosoph. l. 13. c. 1. p. 556.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 6:10</span></span>

Who is she that looketh forth as the morning?.... These words may be
connected with the preceding, by a supplement of the word "saying"; and
so may express what the daughters said, when they blessed and praised
the church, wondering at her beauty, it being like the rising morning;
so Helena is said to show her beautiful face, as the morning, when it
springs forth (n): there was a city in the tribe of Reuben, called
Zarethshahar, the beauty or splendour of the morning, [Jos
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#019). Homer often describes the
morning by her rosy fingers (o), and as clothed with a saffron garment
(p), and as beautiful and divine (q), and fair haired (r); and as on a
golden throne and beautiful (s). And as these words describe the
progressive gradations of light, so they may set forth the state and
condition of the church in the several ages of the world; its first
state in this clause, which may reach from the first dawn of light to
Adam, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); increasing in the
times of the patriarchs, Noah, Abraham, and Jacob, and in which and to
whom were various displays of Gospel light and grace; to the time of the
giving of the law by Moses, when the church might be said to be

fair as the moon; which, though it receives its light from the sun, yet
splendour and brightness are ascribed to it, [Job
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026); and, by other writers (t), is
represented as fair and beautiful; and the beautiful form of persons is
expressed by it (u): and very fitly is the state of the church under the
law signified by the moon, by which the ceremonial law seems intended,
in [Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001); that lying much in the
observation of new moons, by the which the several festivals under the
law were regulated; and which law gave light in the night of Jewish
darkness, into the person, offices, and grace of Christ; and though it
was imperfect, variable, waxed old, and at length vanished away, yet the
church under it was "fair"; there being a beauty and amiableness in the
worship of that dispensation, [Psa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004). The next clause, "clear as the
sun", may describe the church under the Gospel dispensation; when the
"sun of righteousness" arose, and made the famous Gospel day; when the
shadows of the old law fled away, Christ, the substance, being come;
when there were more light and knowledge, and a clear discerning of
spiritual and evangelic things: and, in all those periods, the church
was "terrible as an army with banners"; to her enemies, being in a
militant state; See Gill on [Sol 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004).
The whole of this may be applied to particular believers; who, at first
conversion, "look forth as the morning", their light being small, but
increasing; and, as to their sanctification, are "fair as the moon",
having their spots and imperfections, and deriving all their light,
grace, and holiness, from Christ; and, as to their justification,

clear as the sun, being clothed with Christ, the sun of righteousness,
[Rev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001); and so all fair and without
spot;

and terrible as an army with banners, fighting the good fight of faith,
under the banners of Christ, against all spiritual enemies.

\(n\) Theocrit. Idyll. 18. v. 26. (o) , Iliad. 1. v. 477. & passim. (p)
, Iliad. 8, v. 1. & 19. v. 1. (q) Iliad. 18. v. 255. (r) Odyss. 5. v.
390. (s) Odyss. 15. v. 56, 250. (t) "Tanto formosis, formosior omnibus
illa est", Ovid. Leander Heroni, v. 73. "Pulchrior tanto tua forma
lucet", Senecae Hippolylus, Act. 2. chorus, v. 740. (u) Vid. Barthii
Animadv. ad Claudian. de Nupt. Honor. v. 243.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 6:11</span></span>

I went down into the garden of nuts,.... This is very properly taken
notice of in this song of love; it being usual for newly married persons
to get nuts, and throw them among children, to make pastime; to signify,
among other things, that they now renounced childish things (u). These
are the words of Christ, declaring to the church where he went, and what
he employed himself about, when he departed from her; see [Sol
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002). Of the garden, as it intends the
church; see Gill on [Sol 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#012); into
which he was invited to come, and did, as here; see [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016); here it is called a "garden of
nuts", which may design a spot in it destined for this fruit; by which
some understand "nutmegs", which is not very likely, since such grew not
in those parts: rather "walnuts", which the Arabs call "gauz" or "geuz",
which is the same word that is here used; Pistacia nuts were well known
in Syria (w), which joined to Judea. And by "nuts", which grew in the
garden, the church, true believers, may be designed; who, like them,
have a mean outward appearance, but are valuable within, having the true
grace of God in them; and because of their divers coverings, their
outward conversation garments, the robe of Christ's righteousness, and
the internal sanctification of the Spirit, which answer to the husk and
shell, and the thin inward skin over the nut; and because of their
hardiness in enduring afflictions and troubles, the shell may represent;
and because of their best and most excellent parts being hidden, even
grace, the hidden man of the heart, signified by the kernel, and which
will not fully appear until the shell or tabernacle of the body is
broken down; and because of their safety from harm and pollution, amidst
the storms of afflictions, persecutions, and temptations, and pollutions
of the world, the principle of grace, like the kernel, remains unhurt
and undefiled; and because of the multitude of believers, united and
cleaving together, which is delightful to behold, like clusters of nuts
in a nut garden. Some render it, "the pruned garden", or "garden of
pruning" (x); whose plants, trees, and vines, are pruned and kept in
good order, by Christ's father, the husbandman and vinedresser; see [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012). The ends of Christ in going into
it were,

to see the fruits of the valley; to observe the graces of his Spirit;
the actings, exercise, and growth of them in humble souls, among whom he
delights to be, [Isa 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015); the
Septuagint version is, "the shoots of the brook" or "river": and may
denote the fertile soil in which believers are planted, even by the
river of divine love; with which being watered, they flourish, [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003);

and to see whether the vine flourished; particular churches, or
believers, compared to vines; who may be said to flourish, when they
increase in numbers, and are fruitful in grace and good works; see [Sol
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013);

and the pomegranates budded; of which, see [Sol
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013); the budding, of them may design
the beginnings, or first putting, forth, of grace in the saints; which
Christ takes much notice of, and is highly pleased with.

\(u\) Vid. Chartarium de Imag. Deorum, p. 89. & Kipping. Antiqu. Rom. l.
4. c. 2. p. 697. "Sparge marite nuces", &c. Virgil. Bucolic. Eclog. 8.
v. 30. "Da nuces pueris", Catuili Juliae Epithal. Ep. 59, v. 131. (w)
Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 5. Athenaei Deipnosophist. l. 14. c. 17. p.
649. (x) "hortos putatos", Junius & Tremellius; Heb. "tonsionis",
Piscator; "hortum putationis", Marckius.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 6:12</span></span>

Or ever one was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadib.
These are either the words of the church or of Christ, saying, "I know
not" (y) as the first clause may be rendered: if the words of the
church, the sense may be, that though she knew not where her beloved was
gone, when he went from her, yet she ran about in search of him as
swiftly as the chariots of Amminadib; and when she did know that he was
gone down into the garden, immediately, on a sudden, at an unawares,
such was the strength of her love and affection to him, the she moved as
swiftly after him as if she had been in one of those chariots; and this
may signify also her courage and resolution, that, notwithstanding all
difficulties and discouragements she met with, she drove on as briskly
and as courageously after him as ever Amminadib did, in one of his
chariots, in the field of battle: or, "I know not"; whether in the body
or out of the body; such was the rapture and ecstasy she was in, when
she heard her beloved say, "I went down into the garden of nuts", &c.
or, when she heard the daughters' commendations of her, she did not
think that such belonged to her, and therefore said, "I know not";
however, this caused her to make the greater haste to answer such
characters, and to enjoy the company of her beloved. But rather they are
the words of Christ, who was now in his garden, observing the condition
it was in, and says, "I know not", or do not perceive (z), that it was
in a fruitful and flourishing case, and therefore took all the speedy
methods he could to bring it into a better; or being in a transport of
love to his church, it caused him speedily to return unto her, and grant
her his presence; offer all necessary assistance, and be as chariots to
her, to carry her through difficulties, and to protect and defend her
from all enemies: and this his soul caused him to do, not her worth and
worthiness, love and loveliness, but his own good will and pleasure, and
cordial affection for her. Many take Amminadib to be the proper name of
a person, who was one of Solomon's chariot drivers, that understood his
business well, and drove swiftly, and with success, to whom Christ
compares himself, when returning to his church with haste: but I rather
think, with Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and others, that it is an appellative,
consisting of two words, "ammi", my people, and "nadib", willing or
princely, and may be rendered, "the chariots of my willing" or "princely
people" (a); meaning, not angels, nor ministers, but the people of
Christ themselves, to whom he is as chariots; for so I should choose to
translate the words, "my soul made me as chariots to my willing" or
"princely people"; and so describes the persons who share in this
instance of his grace; they are such who are made willing by Christ, in
the day of his power on them, to be saved by him, and serve him, [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003); and who are of a free,
princely, and munificent spirit, [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012); being princes, and the sons and
daughters of a prince, [Sol 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001); to
these Christ makes himself as chariots, as he now was to the church, and
took her up along with him to enjoy his presence, she had sought for and
desired. Wherefore the daughters of Jerusalem, who had accompanied her
hitherto in search of him, perceiving she was going from then, say what
follows.

\(y\) , Sept. "nescivi", V. L. "non novi", Montanus. (z) "Nondum
percipientem haec", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (a) "populi mei
spontanei", Pagninus; "voluntari", Piscator, Cocceius, Marchius,
Michaelis.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 6:13</span></span>

Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return,.... By whom the church is
meant, so called from her being the spouse of Christ, the true Solomon;
it being common for the wife to have the same name with her husband;
thus, with the Romans, if the man's name was Caius, the woman's name was
Caia: is the name of Christ Solomon? the church's name is Shulamite; see
[Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006). The word from which this is
derived signifies both perfection and peace; and the church may be
called the Shulamite from her perfection, not in herself, but in Christ,
in whom she is complete, and perfectly comely through his righteousness;
and is also denominated from the peace which she has from Christ, and he
has made for her through his blood, and he gives unto her by his Spirit;
and from what she does or should enjoy in her members, and from what she
will be possessed of to all eternity. Now the church, the Shulamite, is
very importunately desired by the daughters of Jerusalem to return;
which is said no less than four times, which shows how vehemently
desirous they were of her company: and perceiving she was about to go
from them, most earnestly press her to return, or to "turn" (b); to turn
herself, that her beauty and comeliness might be more plainly seen; for
this is the end proposed by them,

that we may look upon thee; that they might still have more opportunity
of viewing her, and more narrowly to examine her beauty, for which she
was so much commended; and that they might enjoy more of her company and
conversation, which had been, and they might hope would be, more useful
and instructive to them. A question upon this follows,

What will ye see in the Shulamite? which question is put, either by the
daughters among themselves; some wishing for her return, and others
asking what they expected to see in her, should she return: or rather it
is put by the church herself; who asks the daughters, what they expected
to see in her, a poor, mean, unworthy creature, not fit to be looked on,
having nothing extraordinary, nor indeed valuable or of worth, in seeing
of her? Which question is thus answered,

As it were the company of two armies: either by the daughters, declaring
what they expected to see in the church; either such a glorious and
joyful meeting between Christ and her, as is often between great
persons, attended with singing and dancing; so the word for company is
rendered by the Septuagint (c) "choroi", a "company" of those that dance
and sing; see [Psa 68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024); or such an
appearance as an army makes at the reception of their prince, when it is
divided into two bands, for the sake of greater honour and majesty. Or
rather this answer is returned by the church herself; signifying that
nothing was to be seen in her but two armies, flesh and Spirit, sin and
grace, continually warring against each other; which surely, she
thought, could be no desirable and pleasing sight to them; see [Rom
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023).

\(b\) Sept. "convertere", Sanctius, Marckius. (c) , Sept. "sicut
chorus", Vatablus, Marckius, Michaelis, & alii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](sol007)

</div>
