<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](ecc012)  [Next](sol001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE SONG OF SOLOMON

This book is entitled, in the Hebrew copies, "Shir Hashirim", the Song
of Songs. The Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions call it, "the Song";
and the title of it in the Syriac version, is,

"the Wisdom of Wisdoms of the same Solomon;''

that is, the same who wrote the two preceding books. It has always been
received and esteemed by the ancient Jews as a valuable part of the
sacred writings, calling it "the Holy of Holies" (a); forbidding their
children to read it, because of the sublimity and mysteriousness of it,
until they were at years to understand it: nor was there ever any
controversy among them about the authenticity of it; but all their
writers (b), ancient and more modern, agree that it was written by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. The ancient Christian fathers and
councils have held it as a part of the holy Scriptures, and have
continued it in the canon of them; and it has been received as canonical
by Christians in all ages, except a very few, as Theodore of Mopsuest,
condemned calling it in question by the second council at
Constantinople, in 553; and Castalio, in later times, who for the same
was censured and exiled by the senate at Geneva; and Mr. Whiston, in our
age, whose objections to it I have attempted to answer, in my larger
Commentary on this book, published in 1728, and since republished: and I
am very sorry I am obliged to take notice of an objection to the
antiquity of it, and to its being Solomon's, made by a learned (c) man,
very lately; who observes, that the word David, from its first
appearance in Ruth, where it is written without the "yod", continues to
be so written through the books of Samuel, Kings, Psalms, Proverbs,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel; but appears with a "yod", in the books of
Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah and Zechariah; wherefore he suggests, that if
it was customary to write this word without a "yod" till the captivity,
and with one after it; then he thinks a strong argument may be drawn
from hence against the antiquity of the Canticles, and its being made by
Solomon, since this name is written with a "yod" in [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004); the only place in it in which it
is used: but in answer to this it must be said, that it is not fact that
the word is invariably without a "yod" in the books mentioned,
particularly the book of Kings: for the authors of the Masorah have
observed, on [Kg1 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#014), that it is
five times written in that book full, as they call it, that is, with a
"yod", three of the places I have traced out, [Kg1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#014); and have found it so written in
all the printed copies I have seen; and so it is read by the eastern
Jews, in [Eze 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024). This learned man
is aware that it is so written, once in Hosea, and twice in Amos, books
written two hundred years before the captivity; but then he observes,
that in the two last places, in Bomberg's edition, it has a little
circle (o) to mark it for an error, or a faulty word, though none over
the word in Hosea: but it should be known, that that circle, in hundreds
of places, is not used to point out anything faulty in the copy; but is
only a mark referring to the margin, and what is observed there; and be
it that it does point out an error, or a faulty word, the same circle is
over the word in Canticles, and consequently shows it to be faulty
there, and to be corrected and read without the "yod", as it was
originally without it there; which observation destroys the argument
from it: and so it is read in that place in the Talmud (d) without it,
and in the ancient book of Zohar (e); and indeed it seems as if it was
read without the "yod" in the copies seen by the authors of the Little
Masorah; since in their note on [Kg1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#014); besides the five places in the
Kings, where it is written full, or with the "yod", they say, it is so
written throughout the Chronicles, the twelve minor prophets, and Ezra,
which includes Nehemiah; but make no mention of Solomon's Song, which,
one would think, they would have done, had it been so written there in
the copies before them: so that, upon the whole, the argument, if it has
any force in it, turns out for, and not against, the antiquity of
Solomon's Song. This book of Canticles has plain marks of a divine
original, and proofs of its being of divine inspiration: it was written
by, one that was inspired of God, as appears by the books of Proverbs
and Ecclesiastes, written by him; the greatness of the matter contained
in it, the dignity, sublimity, and majesty of its style, show it to be
no human composure; the power and efficacy which it has had over the
hearts of men, in reading it, and hearing it explained, is another
evidence of its being the word of God, which is quick and powerful; the
impartiality of it, the bride, who is introduced speaking in it,
confessing and proclaiming her own failings and infirmities, is no
inconsiderable proof of the same; to which may be added the agreement
between this and other portions of Scripture, as particularly [Psa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001); and there seem to be many
allusions and references to various passages of this book in the New
Testament; see [Mat 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013), &c. [Joh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008) [Col
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017); compared with [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003) [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001). In what time of Solomon's life
this book was written is not agreed on: some of the Jewish writers say
the book of Proverbs was written first, then the Song of Songs, and last
of all Ecclesiastes; others, that the Song was written first, then
Proverbs, and then Ecclesiastes (f); though their chronologer (g) says
they were all written in his old age, as indeed the last book seems to
be; but the Song rather seems to have been written in the middle part of
his life, when in the most flourishing circumstances as to body, mind,
and estate. Dr. Lightfoot (h) is of opinion it might be written in the
thirtieth year of his reign, about ten years before his death, after he
had built his summer house in Lebanon, to which he supposes respect is
had in [Sol 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008); and upon his bringing
Pharaoh's daughter to the house prepared for her, [Kg1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#024); but be this at it may, it was
not a celebration of the amours between Solomon and her, since the
literal sense, in many places, would be monstrous and absurd; and
besides it must be written twenty years at least after that, if the
house of the forest of Lebanon is referred to in the above places; nor
does it set forth their amours, and the marriage between them, as
typical of the inexpressible love and marriage union between Christ and
his church; though there is a resemblance between natural and spiritual
marriage, and the love of persons in such a relation to one another, and
to which there may be an allusion in some passages. Nor is this book
historical and prophetic, expressing either the state of the people of
Israel, from the times of Abraham to Solomon, and so to the Messiah; in
which way go many Jewish interpreters, as the Targum, Jarchi, Aben Ezra,
and others: nor is it to be considered as describing the state of the
church: of God, whether legal, from the times of David and Solomon, and
before, in and after the captivity, to the birth and death of Christ; or
the Gospel church, in its beginning, progress, various changes, and
consummation, as Brightman and Cotton nor as setting forth the several
ages and periods of the Christian church, in agreement with the seven
churches of Asia, as Cocceius, and those that follow him, Horchius,
Hofman, and Heunischius; which latter, particularly, makes this
distribution of them:

\(1\) The Ephesian church, [Sol 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005);
from the ascension of Christ to heaven, A. C. 33, to 370. (2) The
Smyrnaean church, [Sol 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001); from A. C.
371, to 707; (3) The church at Pergamos, [Sol
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001); from A. C. 708, to 1045. (4) The
Thyatirian church, [Sol 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001), from A.
C. 1046, to 1383. (5) The Sardian church, [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002), from A. C. 1384, to 1721. (6) The
church at Philadelphia, [Sol 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009), from
A. C. 1722, to 2059. (7) The Laodicean church, [Sol
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001), from A. C. 2060, and onwards.

But these senses are very arbitrary, uncertain, and precarious, and
limit the several parts of it to certain periods; whereas it is
applicable to believers in all ages of time. The whole is figurative and
allegorical; expressing, in a variety of lively metaphors, the love,
union, and communion, between Christ and his church; setting forth the
several different frames, cases, and circumstances of believers, in this
life; so that they can be in no case and condition spiritual whatever,
but there is something in this Song suitable to them; and which serves
much to recommend it, and shows the excellency of it; and that it justly
claims the title it bears, the Song of Songs, the most excellent. M.
Bossuet (i) is of opinion, that whereas the nuptial feast with the
Hebrews was kept seven days, this Song is to be distributed into seven
parts, a part to be sung, one each day, during the celebration: The
first day, [Sol 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001). The second day,
[Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007). The third day, [Sol
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001). The fourth day, [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002). The fifth day, [Sol
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010). The sixth day, [Sol
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012). The seventh day, [Sol
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#004). The thought is ingenious, but
seems too fanciful, and without foundation.

\(a\) Misnah Yadaim, c. 3. s. 5. Shir Hashirim Rabba, fol. 2. 4.
Abarbinel in 1. Reg. iii. 12. fol. 209. 2. (b) Zohar in Exod. fol. 59.
3. Shir Hashirim Rabba, fol. 2. 4. Targum, Jarchi, & Aben Ezra in loc.
(c) Dr. Kennicott's Dissert. 1. p. 20, &c. (d) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 30.
1. (e) In Gen. fol. 114. 3. (f) Shir Hashirim Rabba, fol. 3. 3. Yalkut
Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 28. 3. (g) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 15. so Shir
Hashirim Rabba, fol. 3. 3. (h) See his Works, vol. 1. p. 76. (i) Vid.
Lowth de Sacr. Poesi Heb. Praelect. 30. p. 393, 394. & Not. Michaelis in
ibid. p. 156-159.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](sol001)

</div>
