<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](col004)  [Next](th1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 THESSALONIANS

Thessalonica was a very large, populous, and flourishing city, it was
"liberae conditionis", as Pliny says (a), a free city, and the
metropolis of Macedonia; it was formerly called Halis (b), and had the
name of Thessalonica given it by Philip king of Macedon, on account of
his conquest of Thessalia, which this name signifies; and some say he
gave this name to a daughter of his on that occasion, who was afterwards
the wife of Cassander; who, others say, called this place by his wife's
name (c), which before was Therme: its name with the Italians is
Salonichi, and is now in the hands of the Turks, as all Greece is: here
the Apostle Paul came after he had been at Philippi, and stayed about
three weeks, and preached every sabbath day, and his ministry was
blessed to the conversion of some Jews, a multitude of devout Greeks,
and many of the chief women of the place, which laid the foundation of a
Gospel church; to which the apostle wrote this epistle, and is the first
of all the epistles he wrote: the occasion of it was this; the
unbelieving Jews, vexed to see the apostle's success, raised a mob of
the baser sort of people, and assaulted the house of Jason, where the
apostle and his companions were; but Paul and Silas were sent away by
night to Berea, which the rabble understanding, followed them thither;
when Paul was sent as if he was going to the sea, but was conducted by
the brethren to Athens, who gave orders that Silas and Timothy should
come to him with all speed, as they did; and Timothy was sent back to
Thessalonica to establish and comfort the young converts there; and
returning with good news of their faith, and charity, to the apostle at
Corinth, he sent them from thence this epistle, and not from Athens, as
some have thought: the design of which is to encourage them under their
afflictions and sufferings; to exhort them to stand fast in the Lord, to
abide by his truths and ordinances, and to live an holy life and
conversation, and to regard the several duties of religion, towards God
and one another, and those that were set over them; and in it he
instructs them concerning the resurrection of the dead, and the coming
of Christ, articles of very great importance and concern: the writing of
this epistle is placed by Dr. Lightfoot in the 51st year of Christ, and
in the 11th of Claudius Caesar.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th1001)

</div>
