<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2002)  [Next](ti1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 THESSALONIANS 3

In this chapter the apostle requests of the Thessalonians, that they
would pray for him, and other Gospel ministers; and he puts up prayers
for them, gives them rules about dealing with disorderly persons, and
concludes the epistle with his usual salutation. The request to pray for
ministers is in [Th2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001) the petitions
to be made for them are, that their ministry might be succeeded, and
their persons preserved and delivered from evil minded men, destitute of
faith in Christ, [Th2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001) and, for the
consolation of the saints, observes the faithfulness of God engaged in
their behalf to establish them in the faith they had, and to preserve
them from everything and person that is evil, [Th2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003) and expresses his confidence in
them with respect to their walk and conversation, [Th2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#004) and then prays for them that their
hearts might be directed into the love of God, and patience of Christ,
[Th2 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#005). And next follows an order to
withdraw from every disorderly walker, particularly idle and slothful
persons, [Th2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006) and from such a lazy
idle life the apostle dissuades by his own example, who behaved not
disorderly, nor ate the bread of others, but wrought with his own hands,
though he had a right to a maintenance without it, but did this to set
an example to them, [Th2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007). He puts
them in mind of a precept of his when among them, that such who would
not work should not eat, [Th2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010) and
the order he now gave, and the precept he reminds them of, were not
without reason; seeing there were disorderly idle persons, and busy
bodies, among them, whom the apostle exhorts and beseeches, in the name
of Christ, to be industrious, and eat their own bread, as the fruit of
their labours, [Th2 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011) and as for
the other members of the church, he exhorts them to diligence and
constancy in well doing, and to mark those that were incorrigible, and
have no conversation with them, yet dealing with them not as enemies,
but admonishing them as brethren, [Th2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013). And closes all with prayers,
that the Lord would give them peace, and grant his presence to them, and
with his usual salutation, written with his own hand, as a token of this
being a genuine epistle of his, and by which every epistle of his might
be known, [Th2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016).

[2 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 3:1</span></span>

Finally, brethren, pray for us,.... The apostle now proceeds to the last
and closing part of the epistle, which respects church discipline, and
the removing of disorderly persons from their communion; and introduces
it with a request to pray for him, and the rest of his fellow ministers,
particularly Silvanus and Timothy, who joined with him in this epistle:
he signifies that nothing more remained; this was the last he had to
say, that they, "the brethren", not the preachers of the word only, but
the members of the church, would be solicitous for them at the throne of
grace; as it becomes all the churches, and the several members of them,
to pray for their ministers: with respect to their private studies, that
they might be directed to suitable subjects; that their understandings
might be opened to understand the Scriptures; that their gifts might be
increased, and they be more and more fitted for public service: and with
respect to their public ministrations, that they be brought forth in the
fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ; that they have a door
of utterance given them to preach the Gospel freely and boldly, as it
ought to be spoken; and that their ministry be blessed to saints and
sinners: and with respect to the world, and their conduct in it, that
they be kept from the evil of it, and so behave as to give none offence,
that the ministry be not blamed; and that they be not allured by the
flatteries, nor intimidated by the frowns of the world, but endure
hardness as good soldiers of Christ: and with respect to their persons
and state, that their souls may prosper, and that they may have much of
the presence of God, and much spiritual joy, peace, comfort, and
strength of faith; and that they may enjoy bodily health, and their
lives be spared for further usefulness. This request is frequently urged
by the apostle; which shows his sense of the importance of the work of
the ministry, the insufficiency of men for it, the necessity of fresh
supplies of grace, and the great usefulness of prayer. The particular
petitions he would have put up follow,

that the word of the Lord may have free course. By "the word of the
Lord", or "of God", as the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions read, is
meant the Gospel; which is of God, and not of man, comes by the Lord
Jesus Christ, and is concerning him, his person and offices, and
concerning peace, pardon, righteousness, life, and salvation by him, as
the subject matter of it: and the request is, that this might "have free
course": or "might run": be propagated and spread far and near: the
ministry of the word is a course or race, and ministers are runners in
it, having their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace;
which is the message they are sent with, and the errand they run upon:
which comes from heaven, and is to be carried into all the world, and
spread: Satan and his emissaries do all they can to hinder the progress
of it; God only can remove all obstructions and impediments; when he
works none can let; all mountains become a plain before Zerubbabel.
Wherefore the apostle directs to pray to him for it, with what follows,

and be glorified, even as it is with you; the Gospel is glorified when
it is attended upon by large numbers, and is heard with a becoming
reverence; when it is received in the love of it, is greatly prized and
highly esteemed; when it is cordially embraced, and cheerfully obeyed.
It is glorified when sinners are converted by it, and the lives of the
professors of it are agreeably to it; and thus it was glorified in these
several instances at Thessalonica; and therefore the apostle puts them
upon praying, that it might be so elsewhere, as there; even
"everywhere", as the Syriac version adds.

[2 Thessalonians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th2 3:2</span></span>

And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men,....
Either from the unbelieving Jews, see [Rom
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030) who were the avowed enemies of
the Gospel, and did all they could to hinder the spread of it; and who
were the implacable and constant adversaries of the apostle; who often
lay in wait for him, and opposed him, and gave him trouble in all
places, stirring up the people against him: or from the false teachers,
and those of their party, who are the false brethren by whom he often
was in perils; who were enemies of the cross of Christ, and great
hindrances to the spread of the Gospel; being men of absurd principles,
and of wicked lives and conversations, whereby they perverted the Gospel
of Christ, brought a reproach upon it, stumbled some, and overthrew the
faith of others; and from these the apostle desires to be delivered:

for all men have not faith: no man has faith of himself, it is the gift
of God, and the operation of his Spirit; and it is only given to the
elect of God, who are ordained unto eternal life, and therefore it is
called the faith of God's elect; all mankind have it not, none but
Christ's sheep; and the reason why others have it not is, because they
are not of his sheep. This is a truth; but rather the true sense of the
words is, that all that are professors of religion, and members of
churches, and even all that are preachers of the word, have not faith.
They may have an historical and temporary faith and the faith of
miracles, and even all faith but the true faith; they may profess to
believe, and yet not believe, as Simon Magus, and his followers seem to
be intended here; for this is given as a reason why the apostle desired
to be delivered from the above men. The Jews say (o), that

"he that studies not in the law, , "there is no faith in him"--and it is
forbidden to come near him, or to trade with him, or to walk with him,
"because there is no faith in him".''

The apostle seems to allude to this custom.

\(o\) Zohar in Lev. fol. 33. 2.

[2 Thessalonians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 3:3</span></span>

But the Lord is faithful,.... Or "God" as the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions read, as do also the Alexandrian and Claromontane copies. This
is said for the comfort of the saints, lest they should be discouraged
upon hearing that all professors of faith in Christ had it not, who
might be ready to take it to themselves, and fear, that either they had
it not, or if they had, that they might lose it, and fall from it.
Wherefore the apostle observes to them the comfortable attribute of
God's faithfulness, which he will not suffer to fail. He has promised
many things, and he is faithful that has promised, who also will do
them, nor will any good thing he has promised ever fail.

Who shall stablish you: in the doctrines of the Gospel, so as not to be
moved away from them, or be finally and totally seduced by those
unreasonable and wicked men; and also in the grace of faith, which
though it may be weakened, and there may be a falling from a degree of
the steadfastness of it, as to its act and exercise, yet it shall never
finally and totally fail, he who is the author will be the finisher of
it; and likewise in the profession both of the doctrine and grace of
faith, which true believers shall hold fast unto the end; for God will
not suffer the righteous to be moved, or to depart from him; he has
promised them perseverance, and he is faithful to give it to them.

And keep you from evil: from the evil of sin; not from the being and
commission of it entirely, which is not to be expected in this life; but
from the dominion of it, at least from its reigning unto death, and from
the damning power of it: and also from that evil one Satan; from his
snares and temptations, so as to be entangled and overcome by them; for
God is faithful, who will not suffer his to be tempted beyond their
strength, but will enable them to bear it, and make way for their
escape, and deliver out of it; and likewise from evil men, unreasonable
and wicked men, so as not to be drawn aside by them, by their principles
and practices, by their frowns or flatteries.

[2 Thessalonians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th2 3:4</span></span>

And we have confidence in the Lord touching you,.... The ground of
confidence concerning them was not in themselves, in their grace, and
strength, and wisdom, and conduct, and good behaviour; but in the Lord,
in his grace and strength, and in the power of his might, without whom
they could do nothing, but through him strengthening them, could do all
things.

That ye both do, and will do the things which we command you; referring
both to the commandments, which they had already given them by Christ,
and they had showed, and continued to show a proper regard unto, see
[Th1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#001) and also to what would be
observed to them, as in [Th2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006).

[2 Thessalonians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 3:5</span></span>

And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God,.... By which may
be meant either the love with which God is loved. This is the sum and
substance of the first and chief commandment in the law, and is what
every man in a state of nature is destitute of; it is implanted in the
heart in regeneration, and is a fruit of the Spirit of God; and where it
is it oftentimes grows cold, and needs to be stirred up and reinflamed,
by the Spirit of God, which may be intended, by a directing of the heart
into it, that is, to a lively exercise of it: or else the love with
which God loves his people is designed, which is free, sovereign,
unchangeable, and from everlasting to everlasting; and to have the heart
directed into this, is to be led into it directly; or by a straight
line, as the word signifies, and not in a round about way, by works and
duties, as the causes or conditions of it; and to be led further into
it, so as to wade into these waters of the sanctuary, from the ankles to
the knees, and from thence to the loins, and from thence till they
become a broad river to swim in; or so as to comprehend the height, and
depth, and length, and breadth of this love, and to be rooted and
grounded in it, and firmly persuaded of interest in it; and that nothing
shall separate from it; and so as to have the heart sensibly affected
with it. The phrase of directing the heart to God, and to seek him, is
used in the Septuagint, in [Ch2 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#003).
And this is not to be done by a believer himself, nor by the ministers
of the Gospel: the apostle could not do it, and therefore he prays "the
Lord" to do it; by whom is meant the Spirit of God, since he is
distinguished from God the Father, into whose love the heart is to be
directed, and from Christ, a patient waiting for whom it is also desired
the heart may be directed into; and since it is his work to shed abroad
the love of God in the heart, and to lead unto it, and make application
of it; and which is a proof of his deity, for none has the direction,
management, and government of the heart, but God, [Pro
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#001), and in this passage of Scripture
appear all the three Persons; for here is the love of the Father,
patient waiting for Christ, the Spirit and the Lord. For it follows, as
another branch of the petition,

and into the patient waiting for Christ; or "patience of Christ", as the
Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions render it; and may intend either that
patience, of which Christ was the subject; and which appeared in his
quiet submission to all that outward meanness he did in his state of
humiliation; in bearing the insults and reproaches of men, and the
frowardness of his own disciples, in suffering himself to be tempted by
Satan; and in bearing the sins of his people, the wrath of God, and
strokes of justice in the manner he did: and for the saints to have
their hearts directed into this patience of Christ, is of great use unto
them, to endear Christ unto, them; to lead them into the greatness of
his love, and also of his person; and to make them more patient under
the cross, when they consider him, and have him for an example. Or else
it may respect the grace of patience, which he is the author of, for all
grace comes from him; and he from hence may be called the God of
patience, as his word, which is the means of it, is the word of his
patience; and it is by his strength that saints are strengthened unto
all patience, and longsuffering: and to be directed into this, or to the
exercise of it, is of great use under afflictions from the hand of God,
and under the reproaches and persecutions of men, and under divine
desertions, and want of an answer of prayer, and under the temptations
of Satan, and in an expectation of the heavenly glory. And the heart is
never more in the exercise of this, than when it is directed into the
love of God; see [Rom 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#002). Or this may
refer to that patience of which Christ is the object, and be understood,
either of a patient bearing the cross for his sake; for every believer
has a cross to take up and bear for Christ, and which is to be borne
constantly, cheerfully, and patiently; and nothing more strongly
animates to such a patient bearing of it, than a sense of the love of
God; so that a being directed into that, leads also to this: or as our
version points out the sense, it may be understood of a patient waiting
for the second coming of Christ. Christ will certainly come a second
time, though when he will come is uncertain; and his coming will be very
glorious in itself, and of great advantage to the saints: hence it
becomes them, not only to believe it, hope for it, love it, and look for
it, but to wait patiently for it; which being directed to by the Spirit
of God, is of great use unto them in the present state of things.

[2 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 3:6</span></span>

Now we command you, brethren,.... The apostle is now come to the main
thing itself he has in view in this part of the epistle, which is to
encourage a regard to the discipline of God's house; and to exhort this
church to excommunicate, or remove from communion, all disorderly
persons; and those who are to do this he points out, and calls upon, and
even commands; and these are the fraternity, the "brethren", the society
of believers, all the members of the church; for to them to whom belongs
the power of receiving members, to them only belongs the power of
excluding offenders: the executive power lies in the hands of the elders
or pastors of churches; they are the persons by whom the church receives
or casts out members; but the power of judgment, or of determining who
shall be received into, or who shall be removed from communion, lies in
the church, and not in the pastors and elders only; whoever therefore
take upon them to receive, or refuse, or cast out members of themselves,
and at their own pleasure, act the part of Diotrephes, [Jo3
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009). The authority for removing
disorderly persons from communion is an apostolical command, "we command
you"; who are the apostles of Christ, immediately sent by him, who had
their mission and commission from him, and which were confirmed by
miracles; these had a greater power and authority than the ordinary
ministers of the word; they were the ambassadors of Christ, stood in his
stead, represented him, and acted in his name; what they said, he spake
by them; and it was all one as if he had spoke it himself: and that this
might appear not to be of them, but of him, it is added,

in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, by his power and
authority, if they had any regard to that, or to his honour and glory:

that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly;
by a brother is meant, not one in a natural or civil sense, who is so by
blood, or by neighbourhood, by being of the same country, or of the same
human species, since all are of one blood; but one in an ecclesiastical
sense, a church member, who is called a brother, though he may not be
really a child of God, one of the brethren of Christ, or born of the
Spirit; yet being a fellow citizen with the saints, and of the household
of God externally, he bears this character; and such an one only is
cognizable by a church, who have nothing to do to judge them that are
without, only them that are within: and "every brother" in this sense
falls under their notice; everyone that is a member, whether male or
female, for this word includes both; and as the sisters, as well as the
brethren, stand in the same relation, are in the same church state,
partake of the same ordinances, and enjoy the same privileges, they are
obliged to regard the same rules of the Gospel, and duties of religion,
and, in case of disorder, to be withdrawn from: and this also regards
every brother, of whatsoever state or condition, bond or free, high or
low, rich or poor; no partiality is to be used, no preference to be
given to one above the other; a poor member in a disorder is not to be
bore hard upon, while a rich one is winked and connived at: and it also
respects the brethren, whether private members, or officers of the
church; for not only the former, but also the latter, when they walk
disorderly, whether in the discharge of their office, or in any other
part of their conduct, are liable to the notice and censure of the
church: and which is only to be done when any of them "walk disorderly";
not for every disorder they are guilty of; there is no man lives without
sin; and church members have their infirmities, and will have, as long
as they are in the flesh, or in the body; and they are not to be made
offenders for a word, or for a single disorder, or for the common
infirmities of life; nor are the just to be set aside for a thing of
nought, or a small offence, and that not continued in: it is one thing
to be guilty of a disorder, and another thing to walk disorderly; which
denotes a way, a course, a series of disorder, and proceeding on in it,
a going from evil to evil, an increasing to more ungodliness; for
walking is a progressive action, and disorderly persons do not stop, but
grow worse and worse; for they take pleasure in their disorders; they
choose their own ways, and delight in their abominations; the paths of
sin are pleasant paths to them: and they are disorderly walkers, who
pertinaciously and stubbornly continue in their disorders,
notwithstanding the admonitions of private persons, and of the whole
church; and of this sort there are such that walk disorderly in the
world, in the commission of notorious and scandalous sins, such as
uncleanness, intemperance, covetousness, &c. and that walk disorderly in
families; as husbands that are not affectionate to their wives, and
provide not for their household; and wives that are not in subjection to
their husbands; parents that provoke their children to wrath; and
children that are disobedient to their parents; masters who give not
that which is fit and equal to their servants; and servants that despise
their masters because they are brethren, when they should serve them the
more cheerfully, because faithful and beloved: and also that walk
disorderly in churches, that fill not up their places, but neglect
attendance with the church, on the word and ordinances; and who are
contentious and quarrelsome, and will not submit to the sentiments of
those who are superior to them in number and sense; and likewise such
who entertain bad notions and principles, derogatory to the grace of
God, the person and offices of Christ, and the operations of the Spirit;
who walk, not in the truth, nor according to the standard of the word of
God; and especially such are designed here, who are busy bodies, and
idle persons, who work not at all, but live at the tables, and upon the
substance of others, as appears from [Th2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011). These act contrary to the order
and decorum of nations, towns, and families, and to that which God has
fixed among mankind; and to the example of God, and Christ as God, who
work hither to and jointly together in Providence, and in the government
of the world; and to the example which Christ, as man, has set, and to
the example of the apostles, and to their commands: wherefore it
follows,

and not after the tradition which he received of us; meaning either the
Gospel of Christ, which being, preached was received, but the walk and
conversation of some was not agreeably to it; or the ordinances of the
Gospel, and the precepts of religion which the apostles delivered, and
were received, and yet due attendance to them was not given; See Gill on
[Th2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015), or rather that particular
injunction concerning quietness, and doing their own business, and
working with their own hands, [Th1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011). The Vulgate Latin version reads,
"which they received of us": the sense is the same; and the Ethiopic
version, "and not according to the constitution we appointed them". Now
what is commanded to be done to such disorderly persons, by the church,
even the whole fraternity, is to "withdraw" themselves from them; by
which is meant, not only to distinguish themselves from them by an
orderly and regular conversation, and a strict observance of Gospel
discipline, which to do is very right; nor barely to curb and restrain
the affections towards such persons, lest by carrying it as heretofore,
in a kind, tender, and affectionate manner, they should take
encouragement from hence to continue in their disorders, as tender
parents keep in their affections, and from showing them to their
children, when in disorder, and under their corrections, that they might
not seem to countenance them in that which is evil, though this is also
very proper; nor also merely to contract or shut up the hand to such
persons, and refuse to distribute to then, living such an idle life, and
in such a disorderly way, though this is what ought to be done; nor does
this phrase only intend a forbidding such persons their houses and their
tables, not suffering them to sit at the one, nor even to come into the
other, not allowing any company and conversation with them, that they
may have no opportunity of indulging their laziness and tale bearing,
though so to serve them is highly just and reasonable; nor does it
design only a suspension, or a debarring of them from the Lord's table,
which ought not to be done to any persons, while they continue in
relation to the church, and members of it; but a removal of them from
church communion, or an excommunication of them; which is sometimes
expressed by rejecting persons, casting them out of the church, and
putting them away, and here by withdrawing from them; which are all
synonymous phrases, and intend exclusion from the communion of the
church. And so the Ethiopic version here renders it, "that ye remove
every brother", &c. From this passage we learn who they are that are to
be excommunicated or removed from the communion of churches, all
disorderly walkers; what the act of excommunication is, it is a
withdrawing from them, a separating them from the church, and its
communion; and who they are that have the power to do it, the whole
fraternity or body of the church; and also the authority for it, an
apostolical command, in the name of Christ.

[2 Thessalonians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th2 3:7</span></span>

For yourselves know how ye ought to follow us,.... The apostle goes on
to dissuade from that which denominates persons disorderly walkers, and
exposes them to the censure of the church, and that partly by the
example of the apostles, and partly by their command. He appeals to
them, to their knowledge and judgment, it being a thing well known to
them, that they ought to walk as they had the apostles for ensamples;
for who should they follow but their spiritual fathers, shepherds, and
guides? and especially so far as they were followers of Christ, as they
were, in the case referred unto, working with their own hands:

for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you; they could appeal to
them as witnesses, and God also, how holily, justly, and unblamably they
walked among them; see [Th1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010) and
particularly, that they did not live an idle and inactive life among
them.

[2 Thessalonians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th2 3:8</span></span>

Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought.... Or freely, at free
cost, without paying for it; he signifies, that what they ate, they
bought with their own money, and lived on no man, without giving him a
valuable consideration for what they had; though if they had not paid in
money for their food, they would not have ate it for nought, since they
laboured among them in preaching the Gospel to them; and such labourers
are worthy of their maintenance, [Luk
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007) though the former sense is the
apostle's here:

but wrought with labour and travail night and day: not only laboriously
preaching the Gospel to them, as often as they could have opportunity,
but working very hard and incessantly with their hands, at the
occupations and trades they had been brought up to; and that of the
Apostle Paul's was a tentmaker, at which he sometimes wrought, thereby
ministering to his own, and the necessities of others, [Act
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003), nor was this inconsistent with
his learning and liberal education. It was usual with the Jewish doctors
to learn a trade, or follow some business and calling of life; See Gill
on [Mar 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003). The apostle's end in this
was,

that we might not be chargeable to any of you; or burdensome to them,
they being for the most part poor; and the apostles being able partly by
their own hand labour, and partly by what they received from Philippi,
[Phi 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016) to support themselves, chose
to that they might not lie heavy upon them, and any ways hinder the
spread of the Gospel among them, at its first coming to them. And so
Maimonides says the ancient Jewish doctors behaved, and with a like
view: wherefore, says he (p),

"if a man is a wise man, and an honourable man, and poor, let him employ
himself in some handicraft business, even though a mean one, and not
distress men (or be burdensome to them); it is better to strip the skins
of beasts that have been torn, than to say to the people, I am a
considerable wise (or learned) man, I am a priest, take care of me, and
maintain me; and so the wise men have ordered: and some of the greatest
doctors have been hewers of wood, and carriers of timber, and drawers of
water for the gardens, and have wrought in iron and coals, and have not
required anything of the congregation; nor would they take anything of
them, when they would have given to them.''

\(p\) Hilchot Mattanot Anayim, c. 10. sect. 18.

[2 Thessalonians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th2 3:9</span></span>

Not because we have not power,.... To forbear working, or require a
maintenance from the churches to whom we minister, since Christ has
ordained, that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel;
see [Co1 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#004). This the apostle says to
preserve their right of claim, when and where they should think fit to
make use of it; and lest other ministers of the word, who could not
support themselves as they did, should be hurt by such an example; and
lest covetous men should make use of it to indulge their sin, and
improve it against the maintenance of Gospel ministers: wherefore the
apostle observes to them, that they did not do this, as conscious that
they had no right to demand a supply from them,

but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to follow us; for it seems
there were many idle lazy persons among them, who either had no callings
or trades, or did not attend to them; wherefore the apostles wrought
with their own hands, to set an example, who could not for shame but
work, when they saw persons in so high an office, and of such a
character, working with labour and travail, night and day, among them.

[2 Thessalonians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th2 3:10</span></span>

For even when we were with you,.... At Thessalonica in person, and first
preached the Gospel to them,

we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat; the
Ethiopic version reads in the singular number, "when I was with you, I
commanded you"; using the above words, which were a sort of a proverb
with the Jews, and is frequently used by them, , or , "that if a man
would not work, he should not eat" (q). And again (r),

"he that labours on the evening of the sabbath (or on weekdays), he
shall eat on the sabbath day; and he who does not labour on the evening
of the sabbath, from whence shall he eat (or what right and authority
has he to eat) on the sabbath day?''

Not he that could not work through weakness, bodily diseases, or old
age, the necessities of such are to be distributed to, and they are to
be taken care of, and provided with the necessaries of life by the
officers of the church; but those that can work, and will not, ought to
starve, for any assistance that should be given them by the members of
the church, or the officers of it.

\(q\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 14. fol. 13. 1. Echa Rabbati, fol. 48. 4. &
Midrash Koholet, fol. 65. 4. (r) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 3. 1.

[2 Thessalonians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 3:11</span></span>

For we hear that there are some,.... This is the reason of the order or
command given in [Th2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006) for
withdrawing from disorderly persons. When the apostle was with them, he
observed that there were idle persons among them, and therefore gave
orders then, that if they would not work, they should not eat; and in
his former epistle, having intelligence that there were still such
persons among them, he exhorts them to their duty, and puts the church
upon admonishing them; and still information is given him, that there
were some such persons yet among them; for as the apostle had the care
of all the churches upon him, so he kept a correspondence with them, and
by one means or another, by sending messengers to them, or by receiving
letters from those he corresponded with, he learned the state of them;
and his information was generally good, and what might be depended upon;
see [Co1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011) as it was in this case
relating to some persons: which walk among you disorderly; and who they
were, and which also explains [Th2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006), are immediately observed: working
not at all; at their callings, trades, and businesses in which they were
brought up, but lived an idle and lazy life: and this was walking
disorderly indeed, even contrary to the order of things before the fall,
when man was in a state of innocence; for before sin entered into the
world, Adam was put into the garden of Eden to keep and dress it; man
was created an active creature, and made for work and business; and to
live without, is contrary to the order of creation, as well as to the
order of civil societies, and of religious ones, or churches, and even
what irrational creatures do not.

But are busy bodies; though they work not at all at their own business,
yet are very busy in other men's matters, and have the affairs of
kingdoms, and cities, and towns, and neighbourhoods, and churches, and
families, upon their hands; which they thrust themselves into, and
intermeddle with, though they have no business at all with them: these
wander from house to house, and curiously inquire into personal and
family affairs, are tattlers, full of prate and talk, and, like the
Athenians, spend all their time in telling or hearing new things; and
they also speak things which they should not; they carry tales from one
to another, and privately whisper things to the disadvantage of their
fellow creatures and Christians, and backbite and slander them. These
are the pests of nations and neighbourhoods, the plagues of churches,
and the scandal of human nature; see [Ti1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013).

[2 Thessalonians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th2 3:12</span></span>

Now them that are such,.... For this was not the case and character of
them all. Did such practices generally obtain, no community, civil or
religious, could subsist. And the apostle wisely distinguishes them from
others, that the innocent might not be involved in the charge.

We command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ; using both authority and
entreaty; taking every way to reclaim them, commanding in the name of
Christ and beseeching for the sake of Christ

that with quietness they work: with their own hands, at their proper
callings, and so support themselves, provide for their families, and
have something to give to them that are in need; by which means they
will live peaceable and quiet lives, in godliness and honesty, and not
disturb the peace of neighbourhoods, churches, and families:

and eat their own bread; got by their own labour, and bought with their
money, and not the bread of others, or that of idleness.

[2 Thessalonians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th2 3:13</span></span>

But ye, brethren,.... The rest of the members of the church, who were
diligent and industrious in their callings, minded their own business,
and did not trouble themselves with other men's matters, took care of
themselves, and their families, and were beneficent to others:

be not weary in well doing; which may be understood generally of all
well doing, or of doing of every good work; which is well done when done
according to the will of God, in faith, and from a principle of love,
and in the name and strength of Christ, and with a view to the glory of
God: or particularly of acts of beneficence to the poor; for though the
idle and lazy should not be relieved, yet the helpless poor should not
be neglected. This the apostle observes, lest covetous persons should
make an handle of this, and withhold their hands from distributing to
any, under a notion of their being idle and disorderly; or lest the
saints should be tired, and become weary of doing acts of charity
through the ingratitude, moroseness, and ill manners of poor people; see
[Gal 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009).

[2 Thessalonians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">th2 3:14</span></span>

And if any man obey not our word,.... Of command, to work quietly, and
eat his own bread, now signified "by this epistle", particularly in [Th2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012),

note that man; some read this clause in connection with the preceding
phrase, "by this epistle", or by an epistle; and so the Ethiopic
version, "show", or "signify him by an epistle"; that is, give us notice
of it by an epistle, that we may take him under our cognizance, and
severely chastise him, according to the power and authority given us by
Christ; but that phrase rather belongs to the preceding words: and the
clause here respects the notice the church should take of such a person;
not in a private way, or merely by way of admonition and reproof, such
as is given before rejection from communion; but by the black mark of
excommunication; lay him under censure, exclude him from your communion,
put a brand upon him as a scabbed sheep, and separate him from the
flock; and so the Syriac version renders it, "let him be separated from
you" and this sense is confirmed by what follows,

and have no company with him; as little as can be in common and civil
conversation, lest he should take encouragement from thence to continue
in his sin, and lest others should think it is connived at; and much
less at the Lord's table, or in a sacred and religious conversation, or
in a way of church fellowship and communion:

that he may be ashamed; that he may have his eyes turned in him, as the
word signifies, and he may be brought to a sight and sense of his sin,
and be filled with shame for it, and loath it, and himself on the
account of it, and truly repent of it, and forsake it; and this is the
end of excommunication, at least one end, and a principal end of it, to
recover persons out of the snare of the devil, and return them from the
error of their ways: so the Jews say (s),

"in matters of heaven (of God or religion), if a man does not return
privately, they "put him to shame" publicly; and publish his sin, and
reproach him to his face, and despise and set him at nought until he
returns to do well.''

\(s\) Maimon, Hilch. Deyot, c. 6. sect. 8.

[2 Thessalonians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th2 3:15</span></span>

Yet count him not as an enemy,.... As an enemy of Christ, and the
Christian religion, as the Jews and Pagans were; or as an enemy of all
righteousness, as Elymas the sorcerer was; as one that has an implacable
hatred to good men, and a persecutor of them, and has an utter aversion
to them and their principles; nor deal with him in an hostile, fierce,
furious, and passionate manner, as if you were seeking his destruction,
and not his restoration. This seems to be levelled against the Jews, who
allowed of hatred to incorrigible persons: they say (t),

"an hater that is spoken of in the law, is not of the nations of the
world, but of Israel; but how shall an Israelite hate an Israelite? does
not the Scripture say, "thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart?"
the wise men say, when a man sees him alone, who has committed a
transgression, and he admonishes him, and he does not return, lo, it is
, "a commandment to hate him" until he repents and turns from his
wickedness.''

But admonish, or "reprove" him

as a brother; as one that has been called a brother, and a member of the
church, and who, though criminal, has no bitterness in him against the
church, or against the name of Christ, and the doctrines of Christ; and
therefore should not be treated in a virulent manner, but with a
brotherly affection, meekness, compassion, and tenderness; and who
indeed is to be reckoned as a brother, while the censure is passing, and
the sentence of excommunication is executing on him; for till it is
finished he stands in such a relation: though this also may have
respect, as to the manner of excommunicating persons, so to the conduct
of the church to such afterwards; who are not to neglect them, and much
less to treat them as enemies, in a cruel and uncompassionate manner;
but should inquire, and diligently observe, what effect the ordinance of
excommunication has upon them, and renew their admonitions and friendly
reproofs, if possible, to recover them.

\(t\) Maimon. Hilchot Rotzeach, c. 13. sect. 14.

[2 Thessalonians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 3:16</span></span>

Now the Lord of peace himself,.... The Prince of peace, who is peaceable
himself, and the author of peace in all his churches, and who requires
peace, calls for it, and encourages it:

give you peace always by all means; both a conscience peace, through the
blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of Christ, and faith in them, which
passes all understanding, and which, when he gives, none can take away;
and a church peace, being freed from all such disorderly persons and
their abettors, the disturbers of it: and indeed, the way to have true
peace and prosperity in churches is to keep up the discipline of God's
house. The apostle prays for it in faith, upon an observance of the
rules he had given; he prays for constant and perpetual peace, which is
greatly to be desired; and that it might be had by all means, and in
every way through praying, preaching, administering the ordinances,
laying on censures, when necessary, and Christian conversation. Some
copies, and the Vulgate Latin version, read "in every place"; as well as
at Thessalonica.

The Lord be with you all; by his presence, to comfort and refresh; by
his power, to keep and preserve; by his grace, to assist; and by his
Spirit, to counsel, advise, and direct.

[2 Thessalonians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th2 3:17</span></span>

The salutation of Paul with mine own hand,.... In writing his epistles,
the body and substance of them he used an amanuensis, but the salutation
he wrote with his own hand:

which is the token in every epistle; by which they might be known to be
true and genuine, and be distinguished from counterfeit ones: and the
rather he mentions this, that they might be troubled neither by word,
nor by spirit, nor by epistle, as from them, as they had been, [Th2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002) for it seems that this wicked
practice of counterfeiting the epistles of the apostles, or carrying
about spurious ones, under their name, began so early; to prevent which,
the apostle took this method,

so I write, as follows:

[2 Thessalonians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">th2 3:18</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. This was the
sign or token; See Gill on [Rom 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020)
The subscription to this epistle is, "The Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians was written from Athens"; though it seems rather to be
written from Corinth. In the Syriac version it is said,

"the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, which is written from Laodicea
of Pisidia, and sent by the hands of Tychicus.''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Introduction](ti1000)

</div>
