<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1002)  [Next](ti1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 TIMOTHY 3

In this chapter the apostle treats of the qualifications of officers of
churches, bishops and deacons, and of their wives; and points at the
principal reason of writing this epistle to Timothy: and first, he
commends the office of a bishop, as a good and desirable one; and
asserts it to be such in the strongest manner, [Ti1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001) and then follow the qualifications
for it, some of which are of the economical or domestic kind, and regard
him as an husband and parent, and the head of the family; others of a
moral nature, and relate to sobriety, hospitality, temperance, patience,
and liberality; and others of the ecclesiastical sort, as aptness to
teach, and that he should not be a novice in religion; and in general,
that he should be a man of a blameless life, and of good report in the
world, [Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002), next an account is
given of the qualifications of deacons; some which concern their moral
character; others their soundness in the faith; and others their
domestic affairs, and their conduct in their families; about which they
should be first examined, before they were put into their office; the
characters of their wives are also given; and for their encouragement in
the faithful performance of their office, it is observed, that they
hereby obtain a good degree of honour and boldness in the faith of
Christ, [Ti1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008). And the end of the
apostle's writing this epistle, and particularly of giving Timothy this
account of the qualifications of the officers of the church of God, is,
that he might know whom to appoint over it, and how to conduct himself
in it; which he commends from its being the house of God, the church of
the living God, and the pillar and ground of truth, [Ti1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014). Of which truth he gives a
summary, in several particulars of it, which open the great mystery of
godliness, [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016).

[1 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 3:1</span></span>

This is a true saying,.... Some think this clause belongs to the last
verse of the preceding chapter; and then the sense is, this is a
doctrine that is true, and to be believed, that there is salvation
through the birth of a Son, or through the incarnate Son of God, for men
and women that believe in him, and continue in the faith of him, and
love to him, joined with works of righteousness and holiness. And so the
same phrase seems to belong to what goes before in [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008). Though it regards what follows in
[Ti1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015) and so it seems that it
should be considered here; and is used to excite attention, and suggests
that what was about to be said was of moment and importance, and what
was without controversy, and unquestionably true. The apostle, having
denied to women the work and office of teaching, proceeds to observe,
that though this belonged to men, yet not to every man; and therefore he
gives the qualifications of such; which might serve as a direction to
churches, in the choice of them; as well as be a means of stirring up
persons in such an office, to a proper regard to themselves and their
work:

if a man desire the office of a bishop; which is the same with that of a
pastor or elder; and so here the Syriac version renders it, "if a man
desires presbytery, or eldership"; and it lies in preaching the word,
administering the ordinances of the Gospel, and taking care of the
discipline of the church, and in the visiting, inspection, and oversight
of it; as the word "episcopacy", here used, signifies; and this work and
office may be lawfully and laudably desired, with a view to the glory of
God, and the good of immortal souls. Nor should any undertake it, but
such who find in themselves an hearty desire, and inclination to it, on
such principles, and a real delight and pleasure in it; and such an one

he desireth a good work: the office of a bishop, elder, or pastor of a
church, "is a work", and a very laborious one; wherefore such are called
labourers in the word and doctrine: it is not a mere title of honour,
and a place of profit, but it is a business of labour and care; yet a
good one, a famous and excellent one; it being an employment in things
of the greatest excellency in themselves, and of the greatest usefulness
for the good of men, and the honour of God; as the doctrines,
ordinances, and discipline of the Gospel; and so must be excellently,
honestly, pleasantly, and profitably a good work.

[1 Timothy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 3:2</span></span>

A bishop then must be blameless,.... Or "an elder", as the Syriac
version renders it; not that it can be expected that such an one should
be entirely free from sin, or be blameless in the sight of God; but that
he should be one, who is so before men, and has not been guilty of any
notorious and flagitious crime; and particularly, is not chargeable with
the vices hereafter mentioned or hinted at. So the priests under the law
were to be without blemish, even in their bodies, [Lev
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017) to which the apostle may here
allude.

The husband of one wife; which is not to be understood in a mystical and
allegorical sense of his being the pastor of one church, since the
apostle afterwards speaks of his house and children, that are to be
ruled and kept in good order by him, in distinction from the church of
God; but in a literal sense of his conjugal estate; though this rule
does not make it necessary that he should have a wife; or that he should
not marry, or not have married a second wife, after the death of the
first; only if he marries or is married, that he should have but one
wife at a time; so that this rule excludes all such persons from being
elders, or pastors, or overseers of churches, that were "polygamists";
who had more wives than one at a time, or had divorced their wives, and
not for adultery, and had married others. Now polygamy and divorces had
very much obtained among the Jews; nor could the believing Jews be
easily and at once brought off of them. And though they were not lawful
nor to be allowed of in any; yet they were especially unbecoming and
scandalous in officers of churches. So the high priest among the Jews,
even when polygamy was in use, might not marry, or have two wives, at
once; if he did, he could not minister in his office until he divorced
one of them (u). For it is written, [Lev
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013), "he shall take a wife", , "one,
and not two" (w). And the same that is said of the high priest, is said
of all other priests; see [Eze 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#022),
likewise the Egyptian priests might not marry more wives than one,
though others might have as many as they pleased (x): and so the
Flamines among the Romans (y). An elder or pastor must also be one that
is

vigilant; or wakeful and watchful, who is diligent in his business, and
attends to his care and charge; is watchful over himself, his words, and
actions; and watches for the souls of men, to do them all the good he
can; and is sober in body, is temperate, and uses moderation in eating
and drinking; and in mind, is modest, humble, and prudent; and so the
Vulgate Latin Version renders the word "prudent": and the Ethiopic
version, "a wise man", one of a sound judgment, a good understanding,
and prudent conduct; is not wise above what is written, but thinks
soberly of himself, as he ought. The Syriac and Arabic versions render
it, "chaste", as free from intemperance, so from uncleanness: and

of good behaviour: neat and decent in his apparel; modest in his whole
deportment and conduct, and affable and courteous to all; beautiful in
his life and conversation, being adorned with every thing that is
graceful and comely:

given to hospitality: to the love of strangers, and to the entertainment
of them; and especially the saints and fellow ministers, who are exiled,
or are travelling for the sake of spreading the Gospel, or upon some
lawful and laudable account. These he is to assist by his advice and
counsel, and with the necessaries of life, according to his abilities.
Abraham and Lot are noted instances of this virtue.

Apt to teach; who has a considerable store of knowledge; is capable of
interpreting the Scripture to the edification of others; is able to
explain, lay open, and illustrate the truths of the Gospel, and defend
them, and refute error; and who is not only able, but ready and willing,
to communicate to others what he knows; and who likewise has utterance
of speech, the gift of elocution and can convey his ideas of things in
plain and easy language, in apt and acceptable words; for otherwise it
signifies not what a man knows, unless he has a faculty of communicating
it to others, to their understanding and advantage.

\(u\) Maimon. lssurc Bia, c. 7. sect. 13. & Cele Hamikdash. c. 5. sect.
10. (w) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 59. 1. (x) Diodor. Sicul. l. 1. p. 51.
vide Tertull. de monogamia, c. 17. & Exhort. castitat. c. 13. (y) Alex.
ab. Alex. Genial Dier. l. 6. c. 12.

[1 Timothy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 3:3</span></span>

Not given to wine,.... One that does not sit at it, or is continually
drinking it, and is intemperate in the use of it; otherwise it is lawful
for persons in such an office to drink wine, and sometimes absolutely
necessary; see [Ti1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023) it signifies
one that is not given to much wine, as in [Ti1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008) is not addicted to it, or a
follower of it; the Syriac version renders it, "who does not transgress
over wine", or go beyond due bounds in the use of it, who is not
immoderate in it; the Arabic version renders it, "not insolent through
wine", as one that is heated with it is fierce and furious, and
wrangling and quarrelsome, and often very mischievous and injurious; and
this sense is followed by some.

No striker; either with his hands, so the Syriac version, "whose hand is
not swift to strike"; not one who is nimble and ready at it, who no
sooner is abused or injured, but he lifts up his hands and strikes; is
but a word and a blow: or with his tongue; so the Arabic version, "not
wounding with his tongue"; being too sharp and severe in the admonitions
and reproofs of weak brethren, or fallen believers; and especially, he
ought not to use scurrilous, reproachful, and contumelious language to
any; see [Jer 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018).

Not greedy of filthy lucre; not covetous of getting money, of amassing
wealth and riches together; or desirous of popular applause and glory
from men. This clause is not in the Alexandrian copy, nor in five of
Beza's manuscripts and other copies, nor is it in the Vulgate Latin
version, nor in any of the Oriental versions; it seems to be transcribed
from [Tit 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007). And indeed it is
unnecessary here; since the same is expressed by the word "covetous", at
the end of the verse, and makes that a tautology; and moreover, by
leaving out this clause, the opposition appears more manifest, between
"no striker" and what follows,

but patient; one who patiently bears all reproaches and injuries, puts
up with affronts, and gives up what is his right and due, rather than
contend, quarrel, and strike; who is patient towards all men, and does
not bear hard on those that have offended, but is moderate and mild, and
gentle in his censures, reproofs, and admonitions:

not a brawler; not a quarrelsome litigious person, given to fighting,
either with the fist or sword, or any other weapon:

not covetous; or a lover of money in an immoderate way, greedy of
worldly substance and riches, and insatiable in his desires after them;
niggardly, sordid, and illiberal; acting a mercenary part; seeking his
own things, and not the things of Christ; his gain from his quarter, and
not the good of souls; and withholding from himself, from his family,
and the poor, what ought to be enjoyed by them. Whereas, on the other
hand, he ought to be generous and liberal, hospitable and charitable,
and ready to communicate on all occasions, according to his abilities.

[1 Timothy 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 3:4</span></span>

One that ruleth well his own house,.... His family, wife, children, and
servants; and is not to be understood of his body, and of keeping of
that under, and of preserving it chaste and temperate, as appears from
what follows:

having his children in subjection with all gravity; keeping a good
decorum in his family; obliging his children to observe his orders, and
especially the rules of God's word; and not as Eli, who did not use his
authority, or lay his commands upon his sons, nor restrain them from
evil, or severely reprove them for their sins, but neglected them, and
was too mild and gentle with them;

1Sa 2:23 3:13 but like Abraham, who not only taught, but commanded his
children and his household, to keep the way of the Lord; [Gen
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019) and so should those act who are
in such an office as is here treated of; and should not only rule well
in their families, preside over them, go before them, and set an example
to them, and keep their children in obedience and subjection; but this
should be "with all gravity": not only in the master of the family, but
in the children; who as their father is, or should be, should be brought
up in, and used to gravity in words and in dress; and in the whole of
their deportment and conversation. This may he observed against the
Papists, who forbid marriage to the ministers of the Gospel.

[1 Timothy 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 3:5</span></span>

For if a man know not how to rule his own house,.... Which is an affair
of less importance, and more easy to be done; not requiring so much
resolution, prudence, care, and thought:

how shall he take care of the church of God? preside over it, rule in
it, provide for it, and see that everything is in its proper place, and
done according to the will of God. The argument is from the lesser to
the greater.

[1 Timothy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 3:6</span></span>

Not a novice,.... Or one newly planted, the Arabic version adds, "in the
faith"; meaning not a young man, for so was Timothy himself; but a young
professor and church member; one that is lately come to the knowledge of
the truth, and has just embraced and professed it, and become a member
of a church, a new plant there: so the Hebrew word "a plant", is by the
Septuagint in [Job 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#009) rendered by
this very word. The reason why such a person should not be a bishop,
elder, or pastor of a church, is,

lest being lifted up with pride; through the dignity of the office he is
advanced to, and the high opinion of men he stands in, and the great
gifts qualifying him for such a place, he is supposed to have: for pride
on account of these is apt to creep in, and swell and elate the minds of
young professors especially; so that there is danger

that he fall into the condemnation of the devil; or "of the slanderer",
as the word is rendered in [Ti1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)
and the sense then is, lest he should be censured and condemned by such
who are given to calumny and detraction, and are glad of any opportunity
to reproach and vilify the ministers of the word: but it is better to
understand it of Satan; and then the meaning is, either lest such an one
fall under the censure and condemnation of the accuser of the brethren;
or rather lest he fall into the same condemnation and punishment the
devil is fallen into, their crimes being alike. For it seems from hence,
that pride was the first sin of the devil, and the cause of his apostasy
from God; being elated with his own knowledge, strength, and dignity;
and not being able to bear it, that the human nature should be advanced
above that of angels.

[1 Timothy 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 3:7</span></span>

Moreover, he must have a good report of them which are without, That is,
"without the church", as the Arabic version reads; for wicked men,
though they dislike the principles and profession of godly ministers,
and despise their office, yet cannot but speak well of their becoming
life and conversation. And this part of their character is necessary to
invite persons to hear them, and to recommend their ministry to them, as
well as for the reasons that follow:

lest he fall into reproach; into the reproach of men; not only of the
world, but of professors of religion; who may be apt to upbraid him with
his past sins; especially such that may fall under his censures,
admonitions, and reproofs, which hereby will become in a great measure
useless and ineffectual:

and the snare of the devil; lest Satan should take encouragement from
hence to tempt him to other and greater sins; or lest finding himself
slighted and despised by the people of God, because of his former sins,
he should break out into anger and revenge against them; or into
despondency and despair in himself; or should be negligent of his duty,
and timorous of exhorting and reproving others, lest they should retort
upon him, and reproach him with his former crimes. The Jews have a
regard to the wisdom, prudence, gravity, and manners, of a man they
appoint as a minister of a congregation. Their rule is this (z):

"they do not appoint a messenger or minister of a congregation, but he
who is the greatest in the congregation for wisdom and works; and if he
is an elderly man, it is the better; and they take care that the
messenger or minister of the congregation be a man whose voice is
pleasant, and he is used to read: but he whose beard is not full grown,
though he is a very considerable man, he may not be a minister of the
congregation, because of the honour of the congregation.''

\(z\) Maimon. Hilchot Tephilla, c. 8. sect. 11.

[1 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 3:8</span></span>

Likewise must the deacons be grave,.... The apostle proceeds to give the
qualifications, and so the rules for choosing another sort of officers
in the church, deacons; whose work and business is, not to preach the
Gospel, and administer ordinances; but to take care of the secular
affairs of the church, and particularly to serve tables; to provide the
bread and wine for the Lord's table, to attend at it, and distribute the
elements from the minister to the people, to collect for it, defray the
charges of it, and divide what remains among the poor; and they are to
take care of the minister's table, that he is provided for in a
comfortable way, and to stir up the members to their duty in this
respect; and to take care of the poor's table, and distribute what the
church collects for them, with simplicity and cheerfulness; and are to
be helps to the pastor, in observing the walk of members, in composing
differences between them, in visiting the sick and poor, and in
preparing matters for church meetings. Their characters are, that they
be "grave"; in their speech, gesture, and dress; honest, and of good
report among men; and chaste in their words and actions; all which may
be signified by the word here used; and the latter may be rather hinted
at, because of Nicholas, one of the first deacons, who was charged with
uncleanness:

not doubletongued; whose hearts and tongues do not agree together; and
who, being a sort of middle persons between the pastor and the members
of the church, say one thing to one, and another to the other; which to
do is of bad consequence: or who speak well to the poor when they apply
to them, and promise them to do them all the service they can, and when
it comes to the upshot speak against them:

not given to much wine; which impairs the health, stupefies the mind,
and so renders unfit for any such office, as well as wastes the temporal
estate; and may lead them to embezzle and consume the church's stock:

not greedy of filthy lucre; for such would withhold from the poor that
which is meet for them, and make use of money in their hands, to their
own advantage.

[1 Timothy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 3:9</span></span>

Holding the mystery of the faith,.... The doctrine of the Gospel, called
the "faith", because it contains things to be believed; proposes Christ
the object of faith; is the means by which faith comes, and is
unprofitable without it: it is called "the mystery", because it is of
divine revelation, and could have never been discovered by human reason;
and now it is revealed, the modus of many things contained in it remains
a mystery; several of the doctrines of it are mysterious ones,
particularly the doctrine of the Trinity; and which the ancient Jews
call by this very name, (a) , "the mystery of faith"; the incarnation of
the Son of God, the union of the saints to Christ, and their communion
with him, and the resurrection of the dead, with others. Now this
mysterious doctrine of faith is to be held by deacons; they are to
profess it, and to hold fast the profession of it and that

in a pure conscience; with a conscience sprinkled by the blood of
Christ; with a conscience void of offence both towards God and man; with
a suitable life and conversation; a conversation becoming the Gospel of
Christ, and by which it is adorned: and this part of their character is
necessary, that such may be able to instruct and establish those who are
weak in the faith, and oppose and refute the erroneous, and also
recommend the Gospel by their own example; otherwise should their
principles or practices be bad, their influence on others might be very
pernicious and fatal.

\(a\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 12. 4. & 13. 1, 2. & in Exod. fol. 66. 3.

[1 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 3:10</span></span>

And let these also first be proved,.... Not that they should be tried in
any part of the deacon's office, to see how capable they are of
performing it; but their internal and external characters are to be
looked into and examined, and if they appear, to be right, then they are
to be approved of, chosen and called unto, and invested with the office:

then let them use the office of a deacon; let them be employed and
minister in the several parts and branches of that office:

being found blameless; not without sin, but free from any gross and
enormous one; not before God, but in the sight of men; See Gill on [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

[1 Timothy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 3:11</span></span>

Even so must their wives be grave,.... Some instead of "wives" read
"women", and understand them of deaconesses, such as were in the
primitive churches; whose business it was to visit the poor and sick
sisters of the church, and take care of things belonging to them; but it
is better to interpret the words of the wives of the deacons, who must
be as their husbands, "grave" in speech, gesture, and dress, of an
honest report, a good behaviour, and chaste conversation; which will
reflect honour and credit to their husbands:

not slanderers; or accusers, and so act like devils, as the word is
sometimes rendered; for should they act such a part, and accuse either
the poor, or any of the members of the church wrongfully, or on any
trifling occasion, as persons addicted to this vice are wont to do, it
would be of bad consequence: and they also should be

sober, temperate, not given to wine; excessive drinking is very
scandalous in the female sex; and is the rather mentioned here, because
women in the eastern countries were too frequently addicted to it:

faithful in all things; as in the marriage bed, so with whatsoever else
they are intrusted with in the family, and civil concerns of their
husbands; and this is the rather observed, because the wives of deacons
may be sometimes intrusted with the church's stock in their husband's
absence, to impart to the poor.

[1 Timothy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 3:12</span></span>

Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife,.... See Gill on [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002).

ruling their children and their own houses well. These qualifications
are the same with those of the bishop or elder; See Gill on [Ti1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004).

[1 Timothy 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 3:13</span></span>

For they that have used the office of a deacon well,.... With diligence
and faithfulness, with simplicity and cheerfulness; taking good care of
the minister and poor, and of the discipline of God's house:

purchase to themselves a good degree; not an higher office, as that of
presbytery or episcopacy, which is a sense calculated to serve a
hierarchy; nor a degree in glory and happiness hereafter; but rather an
increase of gifts and grace; or a degree of respect and honour in the
church: or the sense is, they possess and enjoy, which is the meaning of
the word rendered "purchase", a very honourable office in the church;
and which is so to them, they using it well, and discharging it in an
honourable manner; unless the apostle should design what the Jews called
, "a degree of faith": (b) but that is expressed in the next clause:

and great boldness in the faith, which is in Christ Jesus: either in the
exercise of the grace of faith at the throne of grace; or in asserting
the doctrine of faith before men; and in reproving either for error or
immorality: all which may be boldly done by those who use this office
well.

\(b\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 36. 3.

[1 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 3:14</span></span>

These things write I unto thee,.... Concerning the offices of bishops
and deacons, their several qualifications, and the rules of judging of
persons fit for such service:

hoping to come unto thee shortly; at Ephesus. He could not tell whether
he could come or not, and therefore makes no promise, but hoped he
should; and since it was uncertain, he thought fit to write the above
things for his instruction and use.

[1 Timothy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 3:15</span></span>

But if I tarry long,.... Or should long delay coming, defer it longer
than may be expected; let it be observed that these things are written,

that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house
of God; that is, the church of God, as it is afterwards explained;
called a house, in allusion either to an edifice, it being a spiritual
house built of lively stories, or true believers, upon the foundation
Jesus Christ, and who also is the door into it; the pillars of it are
the ministers of the Gospel; and the windows are the ordinances, and
which also are the entertainment in it: or else to a family, as this is
sometimes called the household of God, and of faith; the family named of
Christ, of which he is the master; and in which are fathers, young men
and children; in which ministers are stewards; and which is regulated by
good and wholesome laws: and it is called the house of God, because as
an edifice, it is of his building and repairing, and in which he dwells;
and as a family, is what he provides for. Now the above things were
written to Timothy, that he might know bow to order and manage things in
this house and family; what became him to do himself, in the character
he was; and what persons to direct in the choice of to be officers in
it. And of this house it is said,

which is the church of the living God; in opposition to, and distinction
from the houses and temples of idols, which are inanimate and senseless
creatures; whereas the true God is the living God, has life in himself,
essentially, originally, and independently, and is the author and giver
of life to others. It is added,

the pillar and ground of the truth; which holds forth the truth to be
seen and read of all, as pillars that bear inscriptions; and which
supports and maintains truth, as every true church of Christ does so
long as it remains so; though truth is the pillar and ground of the
church; for if once truth is gone, a church is no more so: rather
therefore Timothy himself is here designed; and the sense is, that what
was written to him was with this view, that he might the better know how
to conduct himself in the church of God, as a pillar and ground of
truth, to hold it forth and to secure it: ministers of the Gospel are
called pillars, [Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009) and that with
greater propriety than the church itself, which is before called an
house: though it may be best of all to understand it of Christ as
incarnate, the great mystery of godliness; who as he is the ground and
foundation of the church, and all believers, so he is the foundation of
all true doctrine; and particularly the doctrine of his person, as truly
God and truly man, is the pillar and ground which supports all other
truths, and without which they fall to the ground: and so this clause
may be read in connection with the following words, thus; "the pillar
and ground of the truth, and without controversy, is the great mystery
of godliness, &c". And this way of speaking is used by the Jews, both of
persons and things; so Zebulun is said (c) to be , "the pillar of the
law"; and it is said (d) of

"the great sanhedrim in Jerusalem, they are the root of the oral law;
and they are , "the pillars of doctrine"; and from them go forth the
statutes and judgments unto Israel;''

and the same is said of things as of persons. Maimonides says (e),

"the foundation of foundations and the pillar of wisdom, is to know that
there is a first Being, that gives being to all beings;''

and R. Sangari, another of their writers, says, (f).

"there are two things which are , "the pillars of the law"; the one is,
that the law is from God; the other is, that it is received with a
faithful (or sincere) heart, from the congregation:''

to which may be added, that it is said (g) that

"the mystery of faith is "amwyqw arqe, "the root and ground" of the
world";''

all which may serve to illustrate this passage.

\(c\) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 152. 1. (d) Maimon. Hilchot Memarim, c. 1.
sect. 1. (e) Hilchot Yesode Hattora, c. 1. sect. 1. (f) Cosri, par. 3.
sect. 23. fol. 159. 2. (g) Zohar in Gen. fol. 124. 1.

[1 Timothy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 3:16</span></span>

And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness,.... What
follows is so, the incarnation of Christ, his birth of a virgin, the
union of the two natures, divine and human, in his person; this is a
mystery, which though revealed, and so to be believed, is not to be
discerned nor accounted for, nor the modus of it to be comprehended by
reason: and it is a great one, next, if not equal, to the doctrine of a
trinity of persons in the divine essence; and is a mystery of godliness,
which tends to encourage internal and external religion, powerful and
practical godliness in all the parts and branches of it; and is so
beyond all dispute and doubt.

God was manifest in the flesh; not God essentially considered, or Deity
in the abstract, but personally; and not the first nor the third Person;
for of neither of them can this or the following things be said; but the
second Person, the Word, or Son of God; see [Jo1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008) who existed as a divine Person,
and as a distinct one from the Father and Spirit, before his
incarnation; and which is a proof of his true and proper deity: the Son
of God in his divine nature is equally invisible as the Father, but
became manifest by the assumption of human nature in a corporeal way, so
as to be seen, heard, and felt: and by "flesh" is meant, not that part
of the body only, which bears that name, nor the whole body only, but
the whole human nature, consisting of a true body and a reasonable soul;
so called, partly to denote the frailty of it, and to show that it was
not a person, but a nature, Christ assumed; and the clause is added, not
so much to distinguish this manifestation of Christ from a spiritual
manifestation of him to his people, as in distinction from all other
manifestations of him in the Old Testament, in an human form for a time,
and in the cloud, both in the tabernacle and temple. This clause is a
very apt and full interpretation of the word "Moriah", the name of the
mount in which Jehovah would manifest himself, and be seen, [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002).

Justified in the Spirit; either by the Spirit of God, making his human
nature pure and holy, and preserving it from original sin and taint; and
by descending on him at his baptism, thereby testifying that he was the
Son of God; and by the miracles wrought by his power, which proved Jesus
to be the Messiah against those that rejected him; and by his coming
down upon the apostles at Pentecost; and who in their ministry
vindicated him from all the aspersions cast upon him: or else it is to
be understood of the divine nature of Christ, in distinction from his
flesh or human nature; in the one he was manifest and put to death for
the sins of his people, which were put upon him, and bore by him; and by
the other he was quickened and declared to be the Son of God; and being
raised from the dead, he was justified and acquitted from all the sins
of his people, and they were justified in him; he having made full
satisfaction to justice for them.

Seen of angels; meaning not ministers of the Gospel, and pastors of
churches, who are sometimes so called; but the blessed spirits, the
inhabitants of heaven: by these he was seen at his birth, who then
descended and sung praise to God on that account; and in the wilderness,
after he had been tempted by Satan, when they ministered unto him; and
in the garden upon his agony and sweat there, when one appeared and
strengthened him; and at his resurrection from the dead, who rolled away
the stone from the sepulchre, and told the women he was risen from the
dead; as also at his ascension to heaven, when they attended him thither
in triumph; and now in heaven, where they wait upon him, and worship
him, and are ministering spirits, sent forth by him to do his pleasure;
and he is seen by them the ministry of the Gospel; into the truths of
which they look with pleasure, and gaze upon with unutterable delight
and admiration; especially those which respect the person and offices of
Christ. Some copies read, "seen of men", but that is implied in the
first clause:

preached unto the Gentiles; the worst of men, and that by the express
orders of Christ himself; and which was foretold in the prophecies of
the Old Testament, and yet was a mystery, hid from ages and generations
past:

believed on in the world; among the Jews, and in the nations of the
world, so that he was preached with success; and faith in Christ is the
end of preaching; though this is not of a man's self, but is the gift of
God, and the operation of his power: and it was a marvellous thing,
considering the reproach and ignominy Christ lay under, through the
scandal of the cross, that he should be believed on as he was. This can
be ascribed to nothing else but to the power of God, which went along
with the ministry of the word.

Received up into glory; he was raised from the dead, and had a glory put
upon his risen body; he ascended in a glorious manner to heaven, in a
cloud, and in chariots of angels, and was received there with a welcome
by his Father; and is set down at his right hand, and crowned with glory
and honour, and glorified with the glory he had with him before the
world was.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 4](ti1004)

</div>
