<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1001)  [Next](ti1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 TIMOTHY 2

In this chapter the apostle exhorts to prayer for all sorts of men,
gives rules and directions about the dress of women, and their
subjection to their husbands; and concludes with some comfort to them.
The apostle exhorts to prayer in the first place, directs to the several
parts and branches of prayer, and points to the persons to be prayed
for, and what should be prayed for on their account, [Ti1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001). And next follow the reasons or
arguments engaging to it, which are taken from the agreeableness of it
in the sight of God; from the will of God, that all men should be saved:
from there being but one God of all, and one Mediator between God and
men; from Christ's giving himself a ransom price for all; and from the
apostle being a preacher of the Gospel to the Gentiles, as well as Jews,
[Ti1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#003) wherefore he concludes and
determines, according to his apostolical power and authority, that
prayer be made in any place, provided there were faith and purity, and
wrath and doubting were laid aside, [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008). Also, he exhorts women to appear,
especially in public service, in a modest and becoming dress, and to
adorn themselves with good works, [Ti1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009), and that they should be silent
learners, and not teachers, and be in subjection to their husbands, [Ti1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011). The reasons of which subjection
are taken from the formation of Adam before Eve, and from Eve's being
deceived, and not Adam, [Ti1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#013).
However, for the comfort of women, it is observed, that though in sorrow
they bring forth children, yet through the birth of a Son, the promised
Messiah, they shall be saved, who continue in faith, charity, and
holiness, with sobriety, [Ti1 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015).

[1 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 2:1</span></span>

I exhort therefore, that first of all,.... The two principal parts of
public worship, being the ministry of the word and prayer; and the
apostle having insisted on the former, in the preceding chapter, in
which he orders Timothy to charge some that they teach no other doctrine
than that of the Gospel, gives an account of his own ministry, and call
to it, and of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, which was
committed to his trust, and stirs up Timothy to the faithful and
diligent discharge of his work and office; now proceeds to the latter,
to prayer, and exhorts unto it; either Timothy in particular, for so
read the Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, "I exhort thee", or
"desire thee"; or else the church in general; unless it should rather be
thought to be a charge to Timothy to exhort, and so Beza's Claromontane
copy reads, "exhort thou therefore": but it is commonly considered as an
exhortation of the apostle's, which he was very urgent in: it was what
lay much upon his mind, and he was greatly desirous that it should be
attended unto; for so the words may be read, "I exhort first of all", or
before all things; of all things he had to say, this was the chief, or
it was what he would have principally and chiefly done by others: for
this does not so much regard the order of time, that prayer should be
made early in the morning, in the first place, before anything else is
done, and particularly before preaching, which seems to have been the
custom of the primitive saints, [Act
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031) but the pre-eminence and superior
excellency of it; though the words may be rendered, "I exhort, that
first, the supplications of all be made": and so may regard public
prayer, the prayer of the whole church, in distinction from private
prayer, or the prayer of a single person; which is expressed by
different words,

supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks: the first
of these, "supplications", signifies such petitions for things that are
wanted by men, either by themselves or others; and that either for their
bodies or souls, as food and raiment for the one, and discoveries of
pardoning love, supplies of grace, spiritual peace, comfort, &c. for the
other: and the second word, "prayers", signifies good wishes and
desires, directed and expressed to God for things that are in themselves
to be wished for, and desired of God, either for ourselves or others:
and the next word, "intercessions", intends either complaints exhibited
in prayer against others that have done injuries; or prayers put up for
others, either for the averting of evil from them, or for the bestowing
some good thing on them: and the last word, "thanksgivings", with which
requests should always be made known to God, designs that branch of
prayer in which thanks are given to God for mercies received, whether
temporal or spiritual: and these are to

be made for all men; not only for all the saints, for all the churches
of Christ, and, ministers of the Gospel; nor only for near relations and
friends, according to the flesh; but for all the inhabitants of the
country and city in which men dwell, the peace and prosperity of which
are to be prayed for; yea, for enemies, and such as reproach, persecute,
and despitefully use the saints, even for all sorts of men, Jews and
Gentiles, rich and poor, high and low, bond and free, good men and bad
men: for it cannot be understood of every individual that has been, is,
or shall be in the world; millions of men are dead and gone, for whom
prayer is not to be made; many in hell, to whom it would be of no
service; and many in heaven, who stand in no need of it; nor is prayer
to be made for such who have sinned the sin unto death, [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016) besides, giving of thanks, as
well as prayers, are to be made for all men; but certainly the meaning
is not, that thanks should be given for wicked men, for persecutors, and
particularly for a persecuting Nero, or for heretics, and false
teachers, such as Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom the apostle had
delivered to Satan. But the words must be understood of men of all
sorts, of every rank and quality, as the following verse shows.

[1 Timothy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 2:2</span></span>

For kings, and for all that are in authority,.... For supreme governors,
as the emperor of Rome, and kings of particular nations; and for all
sub-governors, or inferior magistrates, as procurators or governors of
provinces, and proconsuls, and the like; all that were in high places,
and acted under the authority of those that were supreme; these are
particularly mentioned, the then governors, whether supreme or
subordinate, who were avowed enemies, and violent persecutors of the
saints; and it might be a scruple with some of them, whether they should
pray for them, and therefore the apostle enjoins it; and this in
opposition to the notions and practices of the Jews, who used to curse
the Heathens, and pray for none but for themselves, and those of their
own nation:

that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty; which does not merely design the end of civil government by
kings and magistrates, which is to preserve the peace and quiet of the
commonwealth; to protect the persons and properties of men, that they
may possess their own undisturbed; and to secure to them their civil and
religious rights and liberties, that they may have the free use and
exercise of religion, signified by "all godliness"; and to encourage
morality and virtue, expressed by "honesty"; and so is an argument for
prayer, taken from the advantage of civil government: nor does this
clause only point out the duty of saints to live peaceably under the
government they are, and not disturb it; to mind only their religious
exercises among themselves, and behave honestly and morally among men,
as they generally speaking are, the quiet in the land; but also
expresses the thing to be prayed for; and the sense is, that since the
hearts of kings are in the hands of the Lord, and he can turn them as he
pleases, prayer should be made to him for them, that he would either
convert them, and bring them to the knowledge of the truth, they now
persecuted; or at least so dispose their hearts and minds, that they
might stop the persecution, and so saints might live peaceably under
them, enjoy their religious liberty, and be encouraged in their moral
conversation. The Arabic version renders it, "that they may be
preserved": that is, kings, and all in authority. It is a saying of R.
Hananiah, or Ananias, the sagan of the priests (s),

"pray for the peace or safety of the kingdom (one of their commentators
on it adds (t), even of the nations of the world, which is remarkable,
and agrees with the exhortation of the apostle); for if there was no
fear of that, men would devour one another alive.''

\(s\) Pirke Abot, c. 3. sect. 2. (t) Bartenora in Pirke Abot, c. 3.
sect. 2.

[1 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 2:3</span></span>

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour. Not
only to live peaceably and quietly under the government men are, since
that is the ordination of God, and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly, which his grace teaches; but to pray for all sorts of men, and
for those who are set in the highest place of government, even though
enemies and persecutors: this is good in itself, and in the sight of an
omniscient God, who sees not as man seeth; and it is acceptable unto him
through Jesus Christ, by whom every sacrifice of prayer or praise is so;
for by God our Saviour is meant God the Father, who is the Saviour of
all men, in a way of providence, and the Saviour of all the elect in a
way of special grace; See Gill on [Ti1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001).

[1 Timothy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 2:4</span></span>

Who will have all men to be saved,.... The salvation which God wills
that all men should enjoy, is not a mere possibility of salvation, or a
mere putting them into a salvable state; or an offer of salvation to
them; or a proposal of sufficient means of it to all in his word; but a
real, certain, and actual salvation, which he has determined they shall
have; and is sure from his own appointment, from the provision of Christ
as a Saviour for them, from the covenant of grace, in which everything
is secured necessary for it, and from the mission of Christ to effect
it, and from its being effected by him: wherefore the will of God, that
all men should be saved, is not a conditional will, or what depends on
the will of man, or on anything to be performed by him, for then none
might be saved; and if any should, it would be of him that willeth,
contrary to the express words of Scripture; but it is an absolute and
unconditional will respecting their salvation, and which infallibly
secures it: nor is it such a will as is distinguishable into antecedent
and consequent; with the former of which it is said, God wills the
salvation of all men, as they are his creatures, and the work of his
hands; and with the latter he wills, or not wills it, according to their
future conduct and behaviour; but the will of God concerning man's
salvation is entirely one, invariable, unalterable, and unchangeable:
nor is it merely his will of approbation or complacency, which expresses
only what would be grateful and well pleasing, should it be, and which
is not always fulfilled; but it is his ordaining, purposing, and
determining will, which is never resisted, so as to be frustrated, but
is always accomplished: the will of God, the sovereign and unfrustrable
will of God, has the governing sway and influence in the salvation of
men; it rises from it, and is according to it; and all who are saved God
wills they should be saved; nor are any saved, but whom he wills they
should be saved: hence by all men, whom God would have saved, cannot be
meant every individual of mankind, since it is not his will that all
men, in this large sense, should be saved, unless there are two contrary
wills in God; for there are some who were before ordained by him unto
condemnation, and are vessels of wrath fitted for destruction; and it is
his will concerning some, that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned; nor is it fact that all are saved, as they would be, if
it was his will they should; for who hath resisted his will? but there
is a world of ungodly men that will be condemned, and who will go into
everlasting punishment: rather therefore all sorts of men, agreeably to
the use of the phrase in [Ti1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001) are
here intended, kings and peasants, rich and poor, bond and free, male
and female, young and old, greater and lesser sinners; and therefore all
are to be prayed for, even all sorts of men, because God will have all
men, or all sorts of men, saved; and particularly the Gentiles may be
designed, who are sometimes called the world, the whole world, and every
creature; whom God would have saved, as well as the Jews, and therefore
Heathens, and Heathen magistrates, were to be prayed for as well as
Jewish ones. Moreover, the same persons God would have saved, he would
have also

come to the knowledge of the truth: of Christ, who is the truth, and to
faith in him, and of all the truth of the Gospel, as it is in Jesus; not
merely to a notional knowledge of it, which persons may arrive unto, and
not be saved, but a spiritual and experimental knowledge of it; and all
that are saved are brought to such a knowledge, which is owing to the
sovereign will and good pleasure of God, who hides the knowledge of
Gospel truths from the wise and prudent, and reveals them to babes:
whence it appears, that it is not his will with respect to every
individual of mankind; that they should thus come to the knowledge of
the truth; for was it his will they should, he would, no doubt, give to
every man the means of it, which he has not, nor does he; he suffered
all nations to walk in their own ways, and overlooked their times of
ignorance, and sent no message nor messenger to inform them of his will;
he gave his word to Jacob, and his statutes unto Israel only; and the
Gospel is now sent into one part of the world, and not another; and
where it does come, it is hid to the most; many are given up to strong
delusions to believe a lie, and few are savingly and experimentally
acquainted with the truths of the Gospel; though all that are saved are
brought to the knowledge of such truths as are necessary to salvation;
for they are chosen to it through sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth.

[1 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 2:5</span></span>

For there is one God,.... This does not so much regard the unity of God,
with respect to himself, or his divine essence, though that is a truth;
but does not carry in it any apparent and forcible reason why all men
should be prayed for, for which it is produced; but the unity of God
with respect to men, as that there is but one God, who is the Creator of
all men, and who, in a providential way, is the Saviour of all men; and
in a way of special grace is the one God, the one covenant God of all
sorts of men, of Jews and Gentiles; for he has taken of the latter into
the covenant of his grace, as well as the former, and has loved them
with a special and distinguishing love, has chosen them in Christ to
salvation, and has sent his Son to redeem them; and of these he calls by
his grace, regenerates, sanctifies, adopts, pardons, and justifies; see
[Rom 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029) and therefore all sorts of
men, Gentiles as well as Jews, are to be prayed for: another argument
follows,

and one Mediator between God and men; a Mediator is of more than one,
and has to do with two parties; and these at variance among themselves,
between whom he stands as a middle person; his business is to bring them
together, and make peace between them; and such an one is Christ: the
two parties are God and his elect, who in their natural state are at a
distance from God, and at enmity to him, and who have broken his law,
and affronted his justice; Christ stands as a middle person, a daysman
between them, and lays his hands upon them both; has to do with things
pertaining to the glory of God, and makes reconciliation for the sins of
the people; brings them that were afar off nigh to God, and makes peace
for them by the blood of his cross, by fulfilling the law, and
satisfying justice for them; in consequence of this he appears for them
in the court of heaven, intercedes and pleads for them, is their
advocate, and sees that all covenant blessings, of which he is the
Mediator, are applied unto them, and preserves their persons, which are
committed to his care and charge, safe to everlasting happiness; and
this Mediator is

the man Christ Jesus; not that he is a mere man, for he is truly and
properly God; or that he is a Mediator only according to the human
nature: it was proper indeed that he should be man, that he might have
something to offer, and that he might be capable of obeying, suffering,
and dying, and so of making satisfaction in the nature that had sinned;
but then, had he not been God, he could not have drawn nigh to God on
the behalf of men, and undertook for them, and much less have performed;
nor would his blood, righteousness, and sacrifice, have been available
to cleanse from sin, to procure the pardon of it, justify from it, make
atonement for it, or make peace with God: the reason why he is
particularly mentioned as man, is, with a view to the argument in hand,
praying for all men; since he who is the Mediator between God and man,
has assumed a nature which is common to them all: and this Mediator is
said to be one, not so much in opposition to other mediators, angels or
saints departed, though it is a truth, and stands full against them, but
with respect to men; there is but one Mediator between God and all sorts
of men, through whom both Jews and Gentiles have an access to God, and
peace with him; and therefore prayer through this Mediator should be
made for all. So the Jews say of the Messiah (u), that he is , "a
Mediator, God", a middle person between God and men. And they call him ,
"the Pillar of mediation" (w) or the middle Pillar; that is, the
Mediator or Reconciler. And Philo (x) the Jew speaks of the word, as a
"middle" person, and standing in the middle between the dead and the
living, and between God and men. The Ethiopic version here renders it,
"there is one elect of God"; which is one of the characters of the
Messiah, [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001).

\(u\) R. Albo, Sepher Ikkarim, orat 2. c. 28. (w) Sepher Jetzira, p.
126. (x) Quis rerum divin. Hares, p. 508, 509, 510.

[1 Timothy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 2:6</span></span>

Who gave himself a ransom for all,.... What the Mediator gave as a
ransom for men is "himself", his body and his soul, which were both made
an offering for sin; and his life, which is the result of union between
soul and body; his whole human nature as in union with his divine
person, and so might be truly said to be himself: this he gave into the
hands of men, of justice and of death; and that voluntarily, which shows
his great love to his people; and also as a "ransom", or a ransom price
for them, in their room and stead; to ransom them from the slavery of
sin, and damnation by it, from the captivity of Satan, and the bondage
of the law, and from the grave, death, hell, ruin, and destruction: and
this ransom was given for "all"; not for every individual of mankind,
for then all would be delivered, freed, and saved, whereas they are not;
or else the ransom price is paid in vain, or God is unjust to receive a
sufficient ransom price from Christ, and yet not free the captive, but
punish the person for whom he has received satisfaction; neither of
which can be said. But the meaning is, either that he gave himself a
ransom for many, as in [Mat 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028) for
the Hebrew word to which this answers, signifies sometimes many, a
multitude, and sometimes only a part of a multitude, as Kimchi observes
(y): or rather it intends that Christ gave himself a ransom for all
sorts of men, for men of every rank and quality, of every state and
condition, of every age and sex, and for all sorts of sinners, and for
some out of every kindred, tongue, people, and nation, for both Jews and
Gentiles; which latter may more especially be designed by all, as they
are sometimes by the world, and the whole world; and so contains another
argument why all sorts of men are to be prayed for, since the same
ransom price is given for them; as that for the children of Israel was
the same, for the rich as for the poor. We (z) read, that when the
people of Israel comforted the high priest upon the death of his wife,
or any relation, they used to say to him, , "we are thy atonement",
expiation, or ransom; that is, as the commentators (a) explain it, by us
thou shalt be atoned, for we will be in thy room and stead, with respect
to all things that shall come upon thee; but here the High priest and
Mediator is the atonement and ransom for the people:

to be testified in due time; or "a testimony in his own times"; that is,
the sum and substance of what is before said is the Gospel, which is a
testimony concerning the person, office, and grace of Christ, exhibited
in the times of the Messiah, or the Gospel dispensation. Some copies
read, "the mystery", which is another word often used for the Gospel;
for that that is intended, appears by what follows.

\(y\) Sepher Shorash. rad. (z) Misna Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 1. (a)
Jarchi & Bartenona in ib.

[1 Timothy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 2:7</span></span>

Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle,.... He was ordained
or appointed to be a preacher of the Gospel from all eternity, and was
separated or set apart unto it in time, and was put into the ministry of
it by Christ himself, and was not a common or ordinary preacher of the
word, but an apostle, an extraordinary officer in the Gospel church.

I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not; which are a sort of an oath,
or an appeal to Christ the omniscient God, for the truth of what he
said, concerning his ordination to the Gospel; see a like phrase in [Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001). The phrase, "in Christ", is left
out in the Alexandrian copy, and in three of Beza's ancient copies, and
in some others, and in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic
versions;

a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity; the Gospel of the
uncircumcision, or which was to be preached to the uncircumcised
Gentiles, was committed to this apostle; and his work and ministry lay
among them, and therefore he is called the apostle of the Gentiles: and
so he was in faith and verity; which may regard the subject matter of
his teachings and ministry; it was the faith and truth of the Gospel,
even the whole of it, the faith which was once delivered to the saints,
and the truth as it is in Jesus; or else the character of the apostle,
as a teacher, that he was a true and faithful one, who with all
integrity and veracity, fully and faithfully preached the Gospel; and
since he was appointed a teacher of it to the Gentiles, this is another
argument why they, as well as the Jews, should be prayed for.

[1 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 2:8</span></span>

I will therefore that men pray everywhere,.... In this declaration of
the apostle's will concerning prayer, he only takes notice of "men"; not
but that it is both the duty and privilege of women, as well as men, to
pray in their houses and closets; but because he is speaking of public
prayer in the church, which only belongs to men, he speaks only of them;
and his will is, that prayer should be performed by them everywhere, or
in any place, in any part of the world where they lived. Now was the
prophecy in [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011) fulfilled, and
now was the time come our Lord refers to, [Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021). This seems to be said in
opposition to a Jewish notion, that the temple at Jerusalem was the only
place for prayer, and that prayer made elsewhere ought to be directed
towards that. The Jews say (b), that

"there is no way for the prayer of the nations of the world to ascend,
seeing the gates of heaven are only opened in the land of Israel.--And
again, that the prayers without the land have no way to go up before the
Lord, but the Israelites send them without the land opposite Jerusalem;
and when they come to Jerusalem, from thence they remove and ascend
above.--No prayer ascends above from that place in which it is made,
till it come to the land of Israel, and from thence to Jerusalem, and
from thence to the sanctuary, and then it ascends above.''

They have also many rules concerning places of private prayer, as that
care should be taken that it be not in a place where there is any filth;
or any bad scent (c).

Lifting up holy hands; lifting up of hands was a prayer gesture among
the Heathens (d), and so it was among the Jews (e). R. Simeon lift up
his hands in prayer to the blessed God, and prayed his prayer. Yea, they
(f) say,

"it is forbidden a man to lift up his hands above, except in prayer, and
in blessings to his Lord, and supplications, as it is said, [Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022) which is interpreted of lifting
up of hands in prayer.''

And this was an emblem of the elevation of the heart in prayer to God,
without which the former would be of little avail. It is an observation
of the Jews (g), we have found prayer without lifting up of hands, but
we never found lifting up of hands without prayer. And these hands must
be holy and pure; there must be purity of heart, and cleanness of hands,
or a freedom from any governing sin, which renders prayer unacceptable
unto God; see [Isa 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015). The apostle
alludes to a custom of the Jews, who always used to wash their hands
before prayer;

"Then Holofernes commanded his guard that they should not stay her: thus
she abode in the camp three days, and went out in the night into the
valley of Bethulia, and washed herself in a fountain of water by the
camp. And when she came out, she besought the Lord God of Israel to
direct her way to the raising up of the children of her people.''
(Judith 12:7,8)

So it is said (h) of the Septuagint interpreters, that after the Jewish
manner they washed their hands and prayed. The account Maimonides gives
(i), is this:

"cleanness of hands, how is it done? a man must wash his hands up to the
elbow, and after that pray; if a man is on a journey, and the time of
prayer is come, and he has no water, if there is between him and water
four miles, which are eight thousand cubits, he may go to the place of
water, and wash, and after that pray. If there is between him more than
that, he may rub his hands, and pray. But if the place of water is
behind him, he is not obliged to go back but a mile; but if he has
passed from the water more than that, he is not obliged to return, but
he rubs his hands and prays; they do not make clean for prayer but the
hands only, in the rest of prayers, except the morning prayer; but
before the morning prayer a man washes his face, his hands and feet, and
after that prays.''

But, alas! what does all this washing signify? Unless, as Philo the Jew
(k), expresses it, a man lifts up pure, and, as one may say, virgin
hands, to heaven, and so prays.

Without wrath and doubting; or reasoning, or disputation in a
contentious way: the former of these, some think, has reference to
"murmuring", as the Ethiopic version renders it, impatience and
complaint against God in prayer, and the other to doubt and diffidence
about being heard, and having the petitions answered; for prayer ought
to be with praise to God, and faith in him: or rather "wrath" may intend
an angry and unforgiving temper towards men, with whom prayer is made,
which is very unbecoming; see [Mat
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023) and both that and doubting, or
disputation, may have regard to those heats and contentions that were
between the Jews and Gentiles, which the apostle would have laid aside,
and they join together in prayer, and in other parts of public worship,
in love and peace. Maimonides (l) says,

"men may not stand praying, either with laughter, or with levity, nor
with confabulation, "nor with contention, nor with anger", but with the
words of the law.''

And it is a saving of R. Chanina,

"in a day of "wrath", a man may not pray (m).''

\(b\) Shaare Ors, fol. 24. 2, 3. (c) Maimon. Hilchot Tephilla, c. 4.
sect. 8, 9. (d) Apuleius de Mundo, p. 276. (e) Zohar in Exod. fol 4. 2.
(f) lb. in Numb. fol. 79. 1. (g) T. Hieros. Taaniot, fol. 67. 2. (h)
Arist. Hist. 70. p. 98. (i) Hilch. Tephilla, c. 4. sect. 2, 3. (k) De
Charitate, p. 698. Vid. ib. de Victim. Offerent. p. 848. (l) Hilch.
Tephilla, c. 4. sect. 18. (m) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 65. 1.

[1 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 2:9</span></span>

In like manner also,.... Let the women pray likewise; though they are
not to lead in prayer, or be the mouth of the church, which would be
indecent, yet they are to join with the church in public prayer; see
[Act 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014) and in like manner as the
men, with purity of heart and hand, without murmuring and impatience
towards God, and without wrath and anger towards others, and in faith,
without doubting and distrust: and the apostle proceeds to point out
what sort of dress he would have them appear in at the time of prayer,
and at any part of public worship; and thus the Ethiopic version renders
it, "so let the women be clothed in prayer", namely, as follows;

that women adorn themselves in modest apparel: the word rendered
"apparel" signifies a long robe, which reaches down to the feet; and the
word translated "modest" signifies that which is clean, neat, and
decent, yea, beautiful and ornamental; and the sense of the apostle is,
that he would not have them to come to public worship in rags, and in
dirty and filthy garments, but that their bodies should be covered with
clean and decent raiment; so the Israelites washed their clothes that
they might be ready to meet the Lord at Mount Sinai, [Exo
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#014). The Jews always appeared in
their best clothes on the sabbath day; this is one of their rules: (n).

"for the honour of the sabbath, every man must be clothed, , "with clean
or neat apparel" and clothing on the weekday must not be as clothing on
the sabbath day; and if a man can make no change, he must let down his
talith (or upper garment, his cloak); so that his clothing may not be as
the clothing of the weekdays, when that was girt up about him.''

The apostle adds,

with shamefacedness and sobriety: these are the two general rules by
which dress is to be regulated; it is right and proper, when it is
consistent with chastity, when it is not immodest and impudent, and more
like the attire of an harlot than of a woman professing godliness; and
when it is moderate as well as modest, and suitable to a person's age
and station, and is not beyond the circumstances of life in which they
are. There is no religion or irreligion in dress, provided pride and
luxury are guarded against, and modesty and moderation preserved.

Not with broidered hair, or plaited, as in [Pe1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003); see Gill on [Pe1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003). The Jews had women on purpose for
this business; Mary Magdalene is thought to have her name from hence;
See Gill on [Mat 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056). Or gold, or
pearls, or costly array: not that the apostle forbids all use or wear of
such things by proper persons, whose circumstances would admit of it,
and upon proper occasions, and at proper times: certain it is, that
earrings and bracelets of gold, and jewels set in silver and gold, and
raiment, costly raiment, were sent by Abraham, and given to Rebekah, and
wore by her, who was a woman professing godliness so the church in [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009) though in figurative expressions,
yet in allusion to what is literal, and honourable, and commendable, is
said to be in gold of Ophir, and her clothing to be of wrought gold, and
to be brought to the king in raiment of needlework: but however
justifiable such a dress may be at other seasons, the apostle judged it
very improper at the time of public prayer, or at the time of public
worship; seeing it might swell the heart of the wearer with pride, so as
to forget herself and the business she was come about, and draw the eyes
of others upon her; and so cause a general inattention. It was a
complaint of Chrysostom's many hundreds of years ago, that some who came
to public worship, appeared in such a dress, as if they came rather to
dance than to pray; such apparel should be avoided: it is said of
Pythagoras (o), that he taught the inhabitants of Crotona, the men
literature, and the women chastity and modesty; and by his disputations
so far prevailed upon the latter, as to lay aside their garments of gold
and other ornaments of their dignity, as instruments of luxury; all
which they brought into the temple of Juno, and dedicated them to that
goddess; declaring, that shamefacedness or chastity, and not garments,
are the true ornaments of matrons.

\(n\) Maimon. Hilch. Subbat. c. 30. sect. 3. (o) Justin. ex Trogo. l.
20. c. 4.

[1 Timothy 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 2:10</span></span>

But (which becometh women professing god likeness),.... By which is
meant not any particular grace, was it, the fear of God might be
designed, and so the Syriac version renders it; nor the whole of
internal religion only; nor the form of godliness, or the whole scheme
of Gospel truth, which is according to godliness; nor only outward
holiness of life and conversation; but the whole of all this, all
religion, internal and external, the whole of godliness, both in a
doctrinal and in a practical way. All this, these women the apostle
gives directions unto, had made a profession of, and had been baptized
upon it, and received members of churches; and as yet held their
profession: and such persons, it best became them not so much to adorn
themselves with any outward adornings, as

with good works; such as are mentioned in [Th1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010) Good works are like good clothes,
to which the apostle alludes; they do not make persons men and women,
but they adorn them as such; so good works, they do not make men and
women Christians, or believers, but they adorn them as such; they are
ornaments to their persons, and to their profession, and to the Gospel
they profess. See [Tit 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010).

[1 Timothy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 2:11</span></span>

Let the woman learn in silence,.... The apostle goes on to give some
other instructions to women, how they should behave themselves in public
worship, in the church of God; he would have them be learners and not
teachers, sit and hear, and learn more of Christ, and of the truth of
the Gospel, and to maintain good works; and he would have them learn in
silence, and not offer to rise and speak, under a pretence of having a
word from the Lord, or of being under an impulse of the Spirit of the
Lord, as some frantic women have done; and if they should meet with
anything, under the ministry of the word, they did not understand, or
they had an objection to, they were not to speak in public, but ask
their own husbands at home; see [Co1
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034). And thus, they were to behave

with all subjection; both to the ministers of the word, and to their own
husbands; obeying from the heart the form of doctrine delivered to them;
and submitting cheerfully to the ordinances of Christ; the whole of
which is a professed subjection to the Gospel, and which becomes all
professing godliness.

[1 Timothy 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 2:12</span></span>

But I suffer not a woman to teach, They may teach in private, in their
own houses and families; they are to be teachers of good things, [Tit
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003). They are to bring up their
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; nor is the law or
doctrine of a mother to be forsaken, any more than the instruction of a
father; see [Pro 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008). Timothy, no
doubt, received much advantage, from the private teachings and
instructions of his mother Eunice, and grandmother Lois; but then women
are not to teach in the church; for that is an act of power and
authority, and supposes the persons that teach to be of a superior
degree, and in a superior office, and to have superior abilities to
those who are taught by them:

nor to usurp authority over the man; as not in civil and political
things, or in things relating to civil government; and in things
domestic, or the affairs of the family; so not in things ecclesiastical,
or what relate to the church and government of it; for one part of rule
is to feed the church with knowledge and understanding; and for a woman
to take upon her to do this, is to usurp an authority over the man: this
therefore she ought not to do,

but to be in silence; to sit and hear quietly and silently, and learn,
and not teach, as in [Ti1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011).

[1 Timothy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 2:13</span></span>

For Adam was first formed,.... Immediately by God, out of the dust of
the earth; and the breath of life was breathed into him, and he became a
living soul; thus wonderfully and fearfully was he made; after this he
was put into the garden of Eden, to dress it, and all creatures were
brought to him, to give them names; and still an help meet or a
companion was not found for him. All this while Eve was not as yet
formed, but after this,

then Eve. She was formed out of him, was made out of one of his ribs;
and was formed for him, for his use, service, help and comfort; and here
lies the strength of the apostle's reason, why the woman should be in
subjection to the man; not so much because he was made before her; for
so were the beasts of the field before Adam; and yet this gave them no
superiority to him; but because she was made out of him, and made for
him, see [Co1 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#008). So that the
woman's subjection to the man is according to the laws of nature and
creation; and was antecedent to the fall; and would have been, if that
had never been; though that brought her into a lower, and meaner, and
more depressed estate; which the apostle next mentions. The words may be
rendered, "the first Adam", or "Adam the first was formed, and then
Eve". See [Co1 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045).

[1 Timothy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 2:14</span></span>

And Adam was not deceived,.... There is no need to say with
interpreters, that he was not deceived first; and that he was not
deceived immediately by the serpent, but by Eve; and that he is never
said in Scripture to be deceived, as Melchizedek is never said to have a
father or mother. The apostle's positive assertion is to be taken
without any such limitations or qualifications; Adam never was deceived
at all; neither by the serpent, with whom he never conversed; nor by his
wife, he knew what he did, when he took the fruit of her, and ate; he
ate it not under any deception, or vain imagination, that they should
not die, but should be as gods, knowing good and evil. He took and ate
out of love to his wife, from a fond affection to her, to bear her
company, and that she might not die alone; he knew what he did, and he
knew what would be the consequence of it, the death of them both; and
inasmuch as he sinned wilfully, and against light and knowledge, without
any deception, his sin was the greater: and hereby death came in, and
passed on all men, who sinned in him:

but the woman being deceived was in the transgression: and the serpent
really beguiled her; she owned it herself, [Gen
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#013). And this is elsewhere said of
her, [Co2 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003) which never is of Adam.
She really thought the serpent spoke truth, that she and her husband
should not die, if they ate of the fruit; but that it was good to make
them wise; and that, upon eating it, they should be as gods, knowing
good and evil; and under this deception she fell into the transgression,
and was the cause and means, by her persuasions and example, of bringing
her husband into the same sin; which involved him and all his posterity
in ruin and destruction. And therefore she is called by the Jews (p) ,
"the mother of iniquity and sin"; to which they refer, [Psa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005). And they say, (q) she was the
cause of death to Adam, and to all the world: See Gill on [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012). And they observe (r) the order
of the punishment of the serpent, Eve, and Adam, as of their sin; the
serpent was first accursed, then Eve, and last of all Adam. They say

"(s) Samael (the devil) could not subvert Adam, till the serpent came
and turned the heart of Eve, and Eve turned his heart, and they both
sinned; wherefore it is said, "the woman which thou gavest me"; Samael
had no power to turn him, till Eve came, and she was the cause of his
eating.''

Now inasmuch as the serpent did not attack Adam, he being the stronger
and more knowing person, and less capable of being managed and seduced;
but made his attempt on Eve, in which he succeeded; and since not Adam,
but Eve, was deceived, it appears that the man is the more proper person
to bear rule and authority, as in civil and domestic, so in ecclesiastic
affairs; and it is right for the woman to learn, and the man to teach:
and seeing that Eve was the cause of transgression to Adam, and of
punishment to him and his posterity, the subjection of the woman to the
man was confirmed afresh: and she was brought into a more depressed
state of dependence on him, and subjection to him; see [Gen
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016). The Ethiopic version renders the
text, "Adam hath not deceived, the woman hath deceived and
prevaricated".

\(p\) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 141. 3. (q) T. Hieros. Sabbat, fol. 5. 2.
Zohar in Gcn. fol. 27. 3. Caphtor, fol. 37. 2. (r) T. Bab. Erubin, fol.
18. 1. & Taanith, fol. 15. 2. Bereshit Rabba, sect. 20. fol. 17. 1. (s)
Midrash Ruth in Zohar in Gen. fol. 27. 3.

[1 Timothy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 2:15</span></span>

Notwithstanding she shall be saved,.... Not Eve, though no doubt she is
saved; since she had a sense of her sin, and shame for it, a revelation
of the Messiah to her, and faith in him; see [Gen
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007). But rather any woman,
particularly such as profess godliness, who shall be saved

in childbearing; which is to be understood not of a temporal salvation,
or being saved through childbearing, through the perilous time, and be
delivered out of it; for though this is generally the case, yet not
always, nor always the case of good women. Rachel died in childbed: the
Jews say (t), for three transgressions women die in childbearing;
because they do not take care of their menstrues, and of the cake of the
firstfruits, and of lighting the lamp (when the sabbath approaches). But
spiritual and eternal salvation is here meant; not that bearing children
is the cause, condition, or means of salvation; for as this is not God's
way of salvation, so it confines the salvation of women to childbearing
ones; and which must give an uneasy reflection to maidens, and women
that never bore any; but rather the meaning is, that good women shall be
saved, notwithstanding their bearing and bringing forth children in pain
and sorrow, according to the original curse, in [Gen
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016). And so the words administer some
comfort to women, in their present situation of subjection and sorrow;
though they may be rendered impersonally thus, "notwithstanding there is
salvation through the birth of a son": and the sense is, that
notwithstanding the fall of man by the means of the woman, yet there is
salvation for both men and women, through the birth of Immanuel, the
child born, and Son given; at whose birth, the angels sung peace on
earth, good will to men; through the true Messiah, the deed of the
woman, through the incarnate Saviour, who was made of a woman, there is
salvation for lost sinners: he was born of a woman, and came into the
world in order to obtain salvation for them; and he has effected it, and
it is in him, for all such who apply to him for it; and with it all true
believers, men and women, shall be saved through him,

if they continue in faith and charity, and holiness, with sobriety. The
Vulgate Latin version reads in the singular, "if she continues", &c. but
the sense is the same; for the "she", or woman, is to be taken in a
collective sense, as it is in the context, for many women; even for such
as profess faith and godliness. The Syriac and Ethiopic versions render
the words, "she shall be saved by her children", if they continue, &c.
i.e. she shall be saved by bearing of children, and bringing of them up
in a religious way; if they, the children, continue as they were brought
up; which is a very strange rendering of the words, and is as strange an
interpretation of them; and yet is what many have given into, but needs
no confutation. The meaning of the words is, that there is salvation
through the incarnate Messiah, for all sorts of persons; for all men and
women who believe in him, with that faith which works by love, and shows
itself in holiness and sobriety; provided that they continue herein. For
there are some that profess these things, that have only a temporary
faith, and feigned love, and not true holiness; and these fall away, and
are not saved; but such who have these graces in truth, as they do, and
shall continue in them, so they shall certainly be saved.

\(t\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 2. sect. 6.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 3](ti1003)

</div>
