<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti1006)  [Next](ti2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 TIMOTHY

That this epistle was written to Timothy, while he was at Ephesus, where
the apostle in his former epistle had desired him to stay, is evident
from his making mention of some persons in it, who were Ephesians; as
Onesiphorus, whom he commends, and Alexander the coppersmith, of whom he
complains: and that this epistle was written by the apostle, when he was
at Rome, is no less evident; for he expressly calls himself a prisoner,
[Ti2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008) and speaks of being then in
trouble, and in bonds, [Ti2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009) and
the persons that send their salutations in it to Timothy were Romans,
[Ti2 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021) but at what time it was
written is not so certain: it seems by [Ti2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007) that it was but a little time
before his martyrdom; though those words may only signify, that he was
now very much on the decline of life, was now grown an old man, and in
continual expectation of death, and was in a constant readiness for it,
come when it would; having faithfully discharged his duty, and his
warfare being as good as accomplished, and his race almost run out; for
he afterwards presses Timothy to come to him, and that before winter;
and desires him to bring with him his cloak, books, and parchments,
which one would think he would have little occasion for, if just upon
his martyrdom: besides, he says he was delivered out of the mouth of the
lion, that by him the preaching of the Gospel might be fully known, and
that all the Gentiles might hear it; and expresses his confidence, that
he should be again delivered, [Ti2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009). And it looks as if this epistle
was written before the epistles to the Philippians, Colossians, and
Philemon, since it appears that Timothy did come to him at Rome; as here
desired, and is joined with the apostle in those epistles. Some,
therefore, have placed this epistle in the year 58, or 59, about the
fourth or fifth of Nero's reign. The design of it is to stir up Timothy
to the faithful and diligent discharge of his duty, as a minister of the
Gospel; to abide constantly by the truths of it, and to animate him to
suffer patiently, cheerfully, and courageously for the sake of it; and
to warn him against false teachers, and their errors, who were already
risen, and would afterwards arise, and be followed by such who had
itching ears, and could not bear sound doctrine; but this should be no
discouragement to him in the prosecution of his work; and lastly to
desire his presence with him at Rome, being now destitute of his several
assistants.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 1](ti2001)

</div>
