<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](tit001)  [Next](tit003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO TITUS 2

In this chapter the apostle exhorts Timothy to the discharge of his
office with respect to all sorts of persons, of every age, sex; and
condition, he was concerned with, giving reasons for it, taken from the
nature of the Gospel of Christ: he exhorts him in general to insist in
his public ministry on those things, which were agreeable to sound
doctrine, [Tit 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001) and particularly
what became aged men and aged women, and young men and young women, [Tit
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#002) in all which, both with respect to
doctrine and practice, he desires him to be a pattern to them, that so
even his very adversaries may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say of
him, [Tit 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007). And next he charges him
to exhort servants, to obey their masters, and seek to please them, and
not contradict them, and to be faithful to them; that so the doctrine of
God their Saviour, professed by them, might be adorned in all things,
[Tit 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009). And the reasons why the
apostle would have duty urged on persons of every age, sex, and state,
are taken from the nature of the Gospel being a doctrine of grace and
salvation, which was preached to all sorts of persons, [Tit
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011), and from the efficacy of it, in
teaching men to deny sin, and live a holy life and conversation, [Tit
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012) and from an expectation of
eternal glory and happiness at the appearance of Christ, which the
Gospel encourages to, [Tit 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013); and
from the end of Christ's giving himself for his people, and redeeming
them from sin, the sum and substance of the Gospel, which was, that they
might be purified, and be zealous of good works, [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014) and these exhortations were to be
delivered by Titus with authority, and in such a manner, that he might
not be despised, [Tit 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015).

[Titus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 2:1</span></span>

But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine. Concerning sound
doctrine, and the form of it; see Gill on [Ti2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013). The things which become it are a
good life and conversation, the various duties incumbent on professors
of religion, according to their different station, age, and sex, which
are observed in some following verses; these become the Gospel of
Christ, and are ornamental to the doctrine of God our Saviour; and these
are to be spoken of by the ministers of Christ, in their proper places,
and at proper times; who ought not to be dumb, and keep silence at any
time, but especially when there are many unruly and vain talkers: sound
doctrine ought to be spoken out openly and publicly, fully and
faithfully, with great plainness and evidence, that it may be understood
and known by all; and with much certainty, without hesitation, as being,
without controversy, undoubted truth; and with all boldness, not fearing
men, or seeking to please them; and it should be constantly and
continually spoken, in season, and out of season; and care should be
taken that it be spoken consistently, and in an uniform manner, that
there be no clashing and contradiction; and the duties of religion,
which become sound doctrine, should be set in their true light, and
proper place, as fruits of the grace of God, and to glorify him; these
should be spoken out plainly, frequently insisted upon, and warmly and
zealously urged, as being decent things, for the honour of God, the
recommending of religion, the good of mankind, and the service of one
another: as particularly,

[Titus 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">tit 2:2</span></span>

That the aged men be sober,.... Or "vigilant", and watchful over
themselves, their conduct and conversation, lest being evil, it should
be drawn into an example by younger persons: this is to be understood
not of men in office, of presbyters or elders; for their characters are
described in the preceding chapter; but of men in years, of ancient men,
that are professors of religion, and members of churches: who should
also be

grave; in their behaviour, speech, and dress; levity of conversation,
frothy language, and airy dress, are very unbecoming aged persons: and
who ought to be

temperate; in eating and drinking, especially the latter, to which old
age is most addicted, and care should be taken that they be not over
charged with it, and that day overtake them unawares, since they are
upon the brink and borders of eternity: the word is rendered "discreet"
in [Tit 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#005) and sober in [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002) and both are characters suitable
to men in years.

Sound in faith, in charity, in patience; though they may be unhealthful
in their bodies, and become decrepit through age, they should be sound
in their minds; in the doctrine of faith, lest they should lead others
into error; and their faith in Christ should appear to be right and
genuine; and their love to God, to Christ, and to his people, should be
real and sincere, and be taken off from the things of the world, of time
and sense; an affection for which is an evil that frequently cleaves to
old age: and patience should have its perfect work; not only to bear the
infirmities of body, brought on by age; but whatsoever sufferings they
may be called unto for the sake of Christ and his Gospel, in their last
day; and to run out the race that is set before them.

[Titus 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">tit 2:3</span></span>

And the aged women likewise,.... Speak also to them the things which
become their profession, and what is right for them to be, and do: these
aged women design not persons in office, who were ancient widows, and
had some care of the poor; or presbyteresses, as some call them, the
wives of presbyters or elders, as being distinct from deaconesses; but
godly women in years, who are to be instructed and exhorted:

that they be in behaviour as becometh holiness; or "holy women",
sanctified by the Spirit of God; and who are priestesses unto God, as
the word may signify, being made so by Christ unto the Father, as men
are made kings and priests by him; such ought to be in their clothing,
and in their speech, and in the whole of their conduct and conversation,
as become the character which they bear, and the profession they make:

not false accusers; of the brethren, and sisters, which is to act the
part of the devil; and indeed, the same word is here used which is
commonly given to him; not raising false reports of, bringing false
charges against members of churches, and so making differences and
divisions among them.

Not given to much wine; or serving it, or being enslaved by it, which is
very scandalous in any, especially in the female sex, and yet was what
was too common in the eastern countries.

Teachers of good things; both by example and by instruction, but in
their own houses privately; for they were not suffered to teach
publicly, or to speak in the church; these should be teachers, not of
old wives' fables, of superstitious customs, rites, and ceremonies, of
the intrigues of love, and of things filthy and obscene, which are too
often handed down to posterity by such persons; but of things that are
solid and substantial, useful and improving, honest and honourable,
chaste and pure. Particularly,

[Titus 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">tit 2:4</span></span>

That they may teach the young women to be sober,.... Or to be chaste,
modest, and temperate; or to be wise and prudent in their conduct to
their husbands, and in the management of family affairs, who have had a
large experience of these things before them.

To love their husbands; to help and assist them all they can; to seek
their honour and interest; to endeavour to please them in all things; to
secure peace, harmony, and union; to carry it affectionately to them,
and sympathize with them in all afflictions and distresses; for this is
not so much said in opposition to placing their affections on other men,
and to the defilement of the marriage bed, as to moroseness and ill
nature.

To love their children; not with a fond, foolish, loose, and ungoverned
affection; but so as to seek their real good, and not only their
temporal, but spiritual and eternal welfare; to bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord; and to use and keep proper
discipline and government over them; for otherwise, amidst all the
fondness of natural affection, a parent may be said to hate a child,
[Pro 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024).

[Titus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">tit 2:5</span></span>

To be discreet,.... Or temperate in eating and drinking, so the word is
rendered in [Tit 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#002) or to be sober
both in body and mind; or to be wise and prudent in the whole of their
conduct, both at home and abroad:

chaste; in body, in affection, words and actions, having their love pure
and single to their own husbands, keeping their marriage bed undefiled.

Keepers at home: minding their own family affairs, not gadding abroad;
and inspecting into, and busying themselves about other people's
matters. This is said in opposition to what women are prone unto. It is
reckoned among the properties of women, by the Jews, that they are
"gadders abroad" (x): they have some rules about women's keeping at
home; they say (y),

"a woman may go to her father's house to visit him, and to the house of
mourning, and to the house of feasting, to return a kindness to her
friends, or to her near relations--but it is a reproach to a woman to go
out daily; now she is without, now she is in the streets; and a husband
ought to restrain his wife from it, and not suffer her to go abroad but
about once a month, or twice a month, upon necessity; for there is
nothing more beautiful for a woman, than to abide in the corner of her
house; for so it is written, [Psa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013) "the king's daughter is all
glorious within".''

And this they say (z) is what is meant by the woman's being an helpmeet
for man, that while he is abroad about his business, she is , "sitting
at home", and keeping his house; and this they observe is the glory and
honour of the woman. The passage in [Isa
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013) concerning an image being made
"after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man, that it
may remain in the house" is by the Targum thus paraphrased:

"according to the likeness of a man, according to the praise of a woman,
to abide in the house.''

Upon which Kimchi, has this note.

"it is the glory of a woman to continue at home, and not go abroad.''

The tortoise, which carries its house upon its back, and very rarely
shows its head, or looks out of it, was, with the ancients, an emblem of
a good housewife. These also should be instructed to be "good" or "kind"
to their servants, and beneficent to the poor, and to strangers, towards
whom, very often, women are apt to be strait handed, and not so generous
and liberal as they should be:

obedient to their own husbands; See Gill on [Eph
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022), [Eph
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#024).

that the word of God be not blasphemed; by unbelieving husbands, who, by
the ill conduct of their wives, would be provoked to speak ill of the
Gospel, as if that taught disaffection and disobedience to them.

\(x\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 45. fol. 40. 3. (y) Maimon. Hilchot Ishot,
c. 13. sect. 11. (z) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 5. 4.

[Titus 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">tit 2:6</span></span>

Young men likewise exhort to be sober minded. Temperate, chaste, modest,
moderate, wise, and prudent in all things: this is said to Titus, as
being his province to instruct and exhort the young men; as it were
proper and convenient for aged women to teach the young women how they
should behave and conduct themselves.

[Titus 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">tit 2:7</span></span>

In all things showing thyself a pattern of good works,.... It was not
enough for Titus, and so neither for any other Gospel minister, to
deliver out sound doctrine, and to exhort persons of different ages and
sexes to the things which become it, but he should through the whole of
his conversation be a pattern of every good work unto them; for they
that are the shepherds of the flock, are not only to feed them with
knowledge, and with understanding, but to be ensamples to them, as well
as they who are under their care ought to walk, as they have them for an
example; see [Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012).

In doctrine, showing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity; the apostle here
either returns again to his advice about doctrine, that it should be
delivered out pure and incorrupt, free from error and heresy, and every
mixture and invention of man's; and with all gravity of speech and
countenance, without levity in expression, and airiness of gesture; and
that it be the sincere milk of the word that is given forth, and that
with all integrity and uprightness of soul: or else this refers to the
life and conversation of the teacher, as answering to his doctrine, and
going along with it; and the sense is, in, or with doctrine, along with
the doctrine preached, let the conversation be pure and incorrupt, free
from the pollutions of the world, and from any governing vice; and let
it be attended with gravity in word, gesture, look, and dress; and with
all sincerity, faithfulness, and simplicity, in all our dealings, either
with the saints, or with the men of the world.

[Titus 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">tit 2:8</span></span>

Sound speech that cannot be condemned,.... In the public ministry, the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus should be used, and the doctrines of
the Gospel be expressed, as near as can be, in the words which the Holy
Ghost teacheth, and not in the enticing words of man's wisdom; such
speech or language should be chosen, that is plain, easy, and
acceptable, and conveys just ideas of things; and which being agreeable
to the Scriptures of truth, and the analogy of faith, cannot be justly
found fault with: or this may refer to private conversation, in which no
rotten speech, or corrupt communication should proceed out of the mouth;
nothing but what is pure, sound, graceful, and edifying; no filthiness,
nor foolish talking and jesting, which are not convenient, and are
rightly condemned.

That he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed: that is, that he
who is on the other side of the question, who opposes the truths of the
Gospel, and is an adversary to them; whether he be an Heathen
philosopher, or a Jewish Rabbi, or a judaizing teacher, or an heretical
man, under the Christian name, may be put to shame and confusion; partly
on account of that uncorruptness in doctrine and conversation, which he
observes in the true and faithful ministers of the word, and is wanting
in himself; and so being convinced, may be converted and brought to
repentance, and to the acknowledgment of the truth; and partly on the
account of the false charges and accusations brought by him against
such:

having no evil thing to say of you; whether with respect to doctrine or
practice. The Vulgate Latin version, and all the Oriental versions, read
"us", instead of "you". The whole body is reproached for the sake of one
or more.

[Titus 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">tit 2:9</span></span>

Exhort servants to be obedient to their own masters,.... And not others,
whether they be believers, or unbelievers, gentle or froward, all their
lawful commands ought to be obeyed; See Gill on [Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005) and to please them well in all
things; not only to obey and serve them, and do what they order, but to
seek and endeavour to do it in such a way as may be grateful,
acceptable, and well pleasing to them, whereby an interest in their
affection, esteem, and commendation, may be gained: and this should be
done always, and in all things, that are not contrary to a good
conscience and to the Christian religion, and to the laws of God and
nature. Or "that they may be well pleased in all things"; that is, be
satisfied and contented with such things as they have, and in their
state and condition as servants, and cheerfully abide in the calling
wherein they are called:

not answering again; replying to their masters' orders, or complaints,
either in a pert, or saucy, or grumbling manner; an evil very incident
to servants, and which greatly provokes.

[Titus 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">tit 2:10</span></span>

Not purloining..... Or stealing, embezzling their master's substance,
taking away, and making use of what is their property, keeping back part
of money or goods committed to their trust: the word is used in the case
of Ananias and Sapphira. [Act 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#002),

but showing all good fidelity; approving themselves to be faithful
servants in everything they are intrusted with:

that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things;
Christ is our alone Saviour, and he is truly and properly God, and so
fit and able to be a Saviour; and the Gospel is his doctrine, not only
what he himself preached, when on earth, but it is a doctrine concerning
him; concerning his deity, and the dignity of his person, and concerning
his office as Mediator, and the great salvation by him; and which are so
many reasons why it should be adorned by a suitable life and
conversation; for this is what becomes the Gospel of Christ, throws a
beauty upon it, and is ornamental to it; and in this way the doctrine of
Christ may be, and ought to be, adorned by servants, as well as others:
to adorn the Gospel, is first to believe and receive it, then to profess
it, and hold fast that profession, and walk worthy of it. Two of
Stephens's copies read, "in", or "among all men".

[Titus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">tit 2:11</span></span>

For the grace of God that bringeth salvation,.... By which is meant, not
the free love and favour of God, which lies in his own heart; for though
that is productive of salvation, and is the source and spring of it, and
what brings it forth, and is far from encouraging licentiousness, but
instructs in real piety, and constrains to obedience to the will of God;
yet this does not appear, nor has it been, nor is it made manifest unto
all men, but is peculiar to the Lord's own people; nor does it design
the grace of God wrought in the hearts of believers; for though
salvation is strictly connected with it, and it powerfully influences
the lives and conversations of such, who are partakers of it; yet it has
not appeared to, nor in all men; all men have not faith, nor hope, nor
love, nor any other graces of the Spirit: but by the grace of God is
intended the doctrine of grace, the Gospel of the grace of God; called
so, because it is a declaration of the grace of God, and of salvation by
it: and is the means, in the hand of the Spirit, of conveying grace to
the heart, and implanting it in it; in which sense the phrase is used in
[Act 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#024) and this is called the
Gospel of salvation, the word of salvation, and salvation itself, and so
may be said to bring it; it brings and publishes the good news of it; it
shows unto men the way of salvation; it gives an account of the Saviour
himself, that he is the great God, and so fit to be a Saviour; that he
was appointed by God the Father to be his salvation; that he was sent,
and came to work out salvation; and that he is become the author of it;
and that he is the only Saviour, and an able, willing, and complete one:
it gives an account of the salvation itself; that it is the salvation of
the soul; that it is a great one, and includes both grace and glory;
that it is everlasting, and all of free grace; and it points out the
persons who are interested in it, and shall enjoy it, even all those
that are chosen to it, and are redeemed, reconciled, and justified by
the blood of Christ, and are brought to believe in him: and the Gospel
not only brings the news of all this to the ear, in the external
ministration of it; but it brings it to the heart, and is the power of
God unto salvation, when it comes, not in word only, but in power, and
in the Holy Ghost; or when it comes under the powerful influences and
application of the Spirit of God. Some read this clause thus, "that
bringeth salvation to all men"; to which agrees the Syriac version,
which renders it, , "that quickeneth" or "saveth all"; and so the Arabic
version: but then this cannot be understood of every individual person;
for the Gospel has not brought salvation to everyone in any sense, not
even in the external ministry of it; there have been multitudes who have
never so much as heard the outward sound of salvation by Jesus Christ,
and fewer still who have an application of it to their souls by the
Spirit of God; to many to whom it has come, it has been an hidden
Gospel, and the savour of death unto death: it follows indeed,

hath appeared to all men; which supposes it to have been hid, as it was,
in the thoughts, purposes, and counsels of God; and in Jesus Christ, in
whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid; and in the
covenant of grace, of which the Gospel is a transcript; and in the types
and shadows of the ceremonial law: it was in some measure hid from
angels, who desire to look into it, and from the Old Testament saints,
to whom it was not known as it is now, by the apostles and prophets; and
it was entirely hid from the Gentiles, the times of whose ignorance God
overlooked: and it suggests, that it now appeared or shone out more
clearly, and more largely. The Gospel had been like a candle lighted up
in one part of the world, only in Judea, but now it shone out like the
sun in its meridian glory, and appeared to all men; not to every
individual person; it has neither shined upon, nor in everyone: it did
not in the apostle's time, when it appeared the most illustrious, and
shone out the most extensively, as well as the most clearly; nor has it
in ages since, nor does it in ours; there are multitudes who know
nothing of it, and are neither under its form nor power: but this is to
be understood of all sorts of men, of every nation, of every age and
sex, of every state and condition, high and low, rich and poor, bond and
free, masters and servants; which sense well agrees with the context,
[Tit 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#002) and the words are a reason
why the apostle would have duty urged on all sorts of persons, because
the Gospel was now preached to all; and it had reached the hearts of all
sorts of men; particularly the Gentiles may be intended from whom the
Gospel was before hid, and who sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death; but now the great light shined upon them, and the Gospel was no
more confined to one people only, but was preached to every creature
under heaven, or to the whole creation; namely, to the Gentiles,
pursuant to the commission in [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015).

[Titus 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">tit 2:12</span></span>

Teaching us,.... Not all men, to whom the Gospel appears in its outward
ministry; for there are many who externally receive the Gospel, and
profess it, who are never influentially taught by it to deny sin, or
love holiness of life; they profess in words to know it, but in works
deny it; they have a form of godliness, but deny its power: but the
persons effectually taught by the Gospel are the "us", to whom it was
come, not in word only, but in power; and so taught them, not only
doctrinally, but with efficacy, both negative and positive holiness, as
follows:

that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts; all impiety, or sin more
immediately against God; or which is a violation of the first table of
the law, as idolatry, will worship, superstition, perjury, and the like;
and all sinful lusts, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life; which fill the world, and are reigning lusts in it,
and which are common to the men of the world; and they are under the
power of: to "deny" these, is to abhor and detest them, and to abstain
from them, and have nothing to do with them: and this lesson of
self-denial, or of the denial of sinful self, the Gospel teaches, and
urges upon the most powerful motives and arguments; and when attended by
the Spirit of God, does it effectually: so that

we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;
not, only "temperately", but wisely and prudently, as children of the
light, on whom, and into whom the Gospel has shined; and "righteously"
among men, giving to every man his due, and dealing with all according
to the rules of equity and justice; as being made new men, created unto
righteousness and true holiness; and as being dead to sin, through the
death of Christ, and so living unto righteousness, or in a righteous
manner; and as being justified by the righteousness of Christ, revealed
in the Gospel: and "godly"; in a godly manner, according to the Word of
God, and agreeably to the will of God; and in all godly exercises, both
public and private, and to the glory of God: and that as long as

in this present world: which lies in wickedness, and in which there are
so many strong temptations to a contrary way of living. The Gospel then
is no licentious doctrine; it is according to godliness, and teaches and
promotes it; it is an holy faith, yea, a most holy faith; wherefore it
is a vile slander to charge it with leading to looseness of life and
conversation.

[Titus 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">tit 2:13</span></span>

Looking for that blessed hope,.... Not the grace of hope; though that
being a good hope through grace, and a hope of blessedness, may be
called a blessed hope; yet this the saints have already implanted in
their hearts in regeneration, and cannot be said to look for it: rather
Christ, the object and ground of hope, who is our hope, and Christ in us
the hope of glory, who is blessed for evermore; and in the enjoyment of
whom the happiness of the saints hereafter will greatly consist; and
whom they look for, and expect from heaven, and who is expressly
mentioned in the next clause: but as this may be something distinct from
that, it may be best, by this blessed hope, to understand the thing
hoped for, eternal glory and happiness; called elsewhere the hope of
righteousness, and the hope laid up in heaven, [Gal
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005) and which will lie in the beatific
vision of God and Christ; in a perfect knowledge of them, in communion
with them, and conformity to them; and in the society of angels and
glorified saints; and in a freedom from all evil, outward and inward,
and in the possession of all good: and to be looking for this, is to be
desiring it with the heart and affections set upon it, longing to be in
the enjoyment of it, and yet waiting patiently in the exercise of faith
and hope; for looking includes all the three graces, faith, hope, and
love; and particularly the former, which is always attended with the
latter; for it is such a looking for this blessedness, as that a man
firmly believes he shall partake of it: and there is good reason for a
regenerate man so to look for it; since it is his Father's gift of free
grace, and is laid up for him; Christ is gone to prepare it by his
presence, mediation, and intercession; yea, he is gone, as the
forerunner, to take possession of it in his name: this man is begotten
again to a lively hope of it; he is called by the grace of God unto it;
he is a child of God, and so an heir of it; he has a right unto it,
through the justifying righteousness of Christ, and has a meetness for
it through the sanctifying grace of the Spirit; and who is in him as the
earnest and pledge of it: now such a firm expectation of the heavenly
glory does the Gospel, the doctrine of the grace of God, teach, direct,
and encourage to; for these words must be read in connection with the
preceding, as a further instruction of the Gospel, as well as what
follows:

and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus
Christ; not two divine persons, only one, are here intended; for the
word: rendered "appearing", is never used of God the Father, only of the
second person; and the propositive article is not set before the word
"Saviour", as it would, if two distinct persons were designed; and the
copulative "and" is exegetical, and may he rendered thus, "and the
glorious appearing of the great God, even our Saviour Jesus Christ";
who, in the next verse, is said to give himself for the redemption of
his people: so that here is a very illustrious proof of the true and
proper deity of Christ, who will appear at his second coming; for of
that appearance are the, words to be understood, as the great God, in
all the glories and perfections of his divine nature; as well as a
Saviour, which is mentioned to show that he will appear to the salvation
of his people, which he will then put them in the full possession of;
and that the brightness of his divine Majesty will not make them afraid:
and this appearance will be a glorious one; for Christ will come in his
own glory, in the glory of his deity, particularly his omniscience and
omnipotence will be very conspicuous; and in his glory as Mediator,
which will be beheld by all the saints; and in his glory as a Judge,
invested with power and authority from his Father, which will be
terrible to sinners; and in the glory of his human nature, with which it
is now crowned; and in his Father's glory, in the same he had with him
before the world was, and which is the same with his, and in that which
he will receive from him as man and Mediator, and as the Judge of the
whole earth; and in the glory of his holy angels, being attended with
all his mighty ones: to which may be added, that saints will be raised
from the dead, and with the living ones appear with Christ in glory, and
make up the bride, the Lamb's wife, having the glory of God upon her; so
that this will be a grand appearance indeed. Now this the Gospel
directs, and instructs believers to look for, to love, to hasten to,
most earnestly desire, and yet patiently wait for, most firmly believing
that it will be: and this the saints have reason to look for, with
longing desire and affection, and with pleasure, since it will be not
only glorious in itself, but advantageous to them; they will then be
glorified with Christ, and be for ever with him.

[Titus 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">tit 2:14</span></span>

Who gave himself for us,.... Not another, or another's, but himself; not
merely his own things, but his own self; not the world, and the riches
of it, not gold and silver, and such like corruptible things, as the
price of redemption; not the cattle on a thousand hills for sacrifice;
not men nor angels, but himself; all that belong to him, all that is
near and dear, his name, fame, credit, and reputation; his time,
strength, and service: all the comforts of life, and life itself; his
whole manhood, soul, and body, and that as in union with his divine
person; which he gave into the hands of men, and of justice, and to
death itself, to be a ransom price of his people, and for a propitiation
and sacrifice for their sins, to be paid and offered in their room and
stead: not for all mankind, but for many; for us, for all the elect of
God, for the church; and who are represented when he gave himself, or
died for them, as ungodly, sinners, and enemies: this was a free and
voluntary gift, and is an unspeakable one; who can say all that is
contained in this word "himself?" it is an instance of the greatest
love, of love that passeth knowledge; God, because he could swear by no
greater, swore by himself; and Christ, because he could give no greater
gift, nor any greater instance of his love, gave himself, for the
following ends and purposes:

that he might redeem us from all iniquity: sin brings into bondage and,
slavery, redemption is a deliverance from it; sin binds guilt upon the
sinner, and lays him under obligation to punishment, and renders him
liable to the curse and condemnation of the law; Christ was made sin,
and a curse for his people, that he might redeem them from both, and
deliver them from the punishment due to sin; which he has done by
bearing it in his own, body on the tree, whereby he has redeemed them
from all iniquity, that so it shall not be their ruin, or they come into
condemnation on account of it; even from original sin, and from all
actual transgressions; from all which his blood cleanses, and his
righteousness justifies, and which God, for his sake, freely and fully
forgives. Christ was called to this work by his Father, to which he
agreed; and the plan of redemption being drawn in the everlasting
council, and the whole adjusted and fixed in the covenant of peace;
promises and prophecies were given out of it, and in the fulness of time
Christ was sent, and came to effect it; and he has obtained eternal
redemption for us, through the price of his own blood, which could have
never been wrought out by any creature; and wherein all the divine
perfections are glorified and is a plenteous and complete one; it
includes in it, or connects with it, the blessings of justification,
peace, pardon, adoption, and eternal life. It follows as another end of
Christ's giving himself, or what is a branch of redemption, or
consequent upon it,

and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; all
mankind are filthy and unclean by nature, in all the powers and
faculties of their souls; nor can they cleanse themselves from their
impurity of flesh and spirit, by anything that they can do: Christ has a
peculiar people among these, a church whom he loves, and for whom he has
given himself, that he might sanctify and cleanse them from their sins;
which he has done by shedding his blood for them, and washing them in
it, which cleanses from all sin, and he has purified them unto himself,
for his own use and service, for his pleasure and delight, and to his
glory; that they might be a proper habitation for him now; and that they
might be made ready for him, to have the marriage between, him and them
consummated; and that they might be presented to himself a glorious
church, without spot or wrinkle, and be with him, both in the new
Jerusalem state, into which nothing that defiles, or is defiled, enters,
and in heaven, to all eternity. Now these people, for whom Christ has
given himself, and whom he has redeemed and purifies, are a "peculiar
people"; for whom Christ has a peculiar love, in whom he takes a
peculiar delight, and to whom he grants peculiar nearness to himself,
and bestows peculiar blessings on them, and makes peculiar provisions
for them, both for time and eternity; these are Christ's own, his
possession, his substance, what he has a special right to by his
Father's gift, his own purchase, and the conquest of his grace; and they
are a distinct and separate people from all others, in election,
redemption, effectual calling, and in Christ's intercession, and will be
in the resurrection morn, at the day of judgment, and to all eternity;
and they are, as the word also signifies, an excellent and valuable
people; they are Christ's portion and inheritance; they are his peculiar
treasure, his jewels, whom, as such, he values and takes care of. The
Syriac version renders it, "a new people". And they who are redeemed and
purified by Christ, through the power of his grace upon them, become a
people "zealous of good works"; not in order to their justification and
salvation, but in obedience to the will of God, and to testify their
subjection and gratitude to him, and for his honour and glory, and for
the credit of religion, and the good of men, These not only perform
them, but perform them from principles of truth and love, and with a
zeal for the glory of God, and the honour of his Gospel; and with an
holy emulation of one another, striving to go before, and excel each
other in the performance of them.

[Titus 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">tit 2:15</span></span>

These things speak and exhort,.... Sound doctrine, the doctrine of
grace, the doctrines of salvation and redemption by Christ, of peace,
pardon, and cleansing by his blood; these speak out clearly, plainly,
publicly, boldly, and faithfully: and the things which become sound
doctrine; the duties of religion suitable to every age and sex, a
denying of ungodliness and worldly lusts, a sober, righteous, and godly
life and conversation, exhort unto; and encourage the saints to be
zealous of good works, and comfort them with the expectation of the
blessed hope, and glorious appearance of Christ.

And rebuke with all authority; such as imbibe errors and heresies, or
indulge to vice and wickedness, with the authority both of Christ and
his church, in the name of the one, and by the order and vote of the
other, that the reproof may come with the greater weight; and in a grave
and solemn manner, suitable to the dignity of the ministerial office and
character, and with that sharpness and severity the offence requires.

Let no man despise thee; as negligent in the discharge of his office, or
as doing it in a pusillanimous manner, or as behaving in his life and
conversation unworthy of the character he bore, and so is a direction to
himself; or else it may be considered as designed for the churches in
Crete, and the professors of religion, and to be an instruction to them
to value Titus, and treat him with respect, and not with contempt; which
shows that this epistle was not written for Titus only, or for his own
use, but for the service of others. The Ethiopic version reads, "let no
man deceive thee".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 3](tit003)

</div>
