<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac003)  [Next](zac005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 4

In this chapter are contained the vision of a golden candlestick, and of
two olive trees by it, and the explanation thereof. The preparation to
this vision, which is the awaking of the prophet, as of a man out of
sleep, is in [Zac 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001). The vision of
the candlestick, and olive trees, is in [Zac
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002). The candlestick is described by
the matter of it, gold; and by the parts of it, its bowl, lamps, and
pipes; and the olive trees by their situation; the explanation of which
is at the request of the prophet, he not knowing what they meant, [Zac
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#004) when it is observed to him, that
this represents, under the type of Zerubbabel building the temple, the
building of the Gospel church by Christ; and which is done and finished,
not by might or power of man, but by the Spirit, notwithstanding all
opposition, and contempt of it, to the great joy of many, who observe
the grace of God, and his providential care and goodness, in it, [Zac
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#006) and upon the prophet's inquiring
the meaning of the two olive trees, which he was ignorant of, he is told
that these are the two anointed ones that stood by the Lord of the whole
earth, [Zac 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011).

[Zechariah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 4:1</span></span>

And the angel that talked with me,.... See [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009),

came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep;
into which he fell, after he had had the former vision; see [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018).

[Zechariah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 4:2</span></span>

And said unto me, What seest thou?.... That is, after he was awake, and
had looked about him:

And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold; such an
one as was in the tabernacle of Moses, only with this difference; that
had no bowl on the top, nor seven pipes to it, nor two olive trees on
each side of it, with two pipes to them, [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031) such a candlestick was never in
being, only in vision; and is an emblem of the church of Christ, into
which the light of the Gospel is put by Christ, and held forth by it,
and especially by its ministers; see [Rev
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012) for the light put into this
candlestick, the church, is not the light of nature or reason, which is
"the candle of the Lord searching into the inward parts" of man; by
which he may discern somewhat the being and perfections of God in his
works, and of moral good and evil; but it is too dim to direct and guide
him in the affair of salvation: nor the law of Moses, said to be a
light, and a lamp; by which men might come to the knowledge of sin, but
not of a Saviour from it: but the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, which was like a candle lighted up in the evening of the Jewish
dispensation, and placed in the Christian church; and gave light, not
only to the saints in Judea, but in all parts of the world, whither it
has been carried; for this candlestick is portable, and has been removed
from place to place; and wherever it is set, it gives light, and removes
the darkness of error, infidelity, and immorality; and is useful to
direct the saints in their walk and conversation, and render them more
capable of working with delight and pleasure; and will blaze out more
brightly in the end of the world, when it is about to be no more; and by
the light of it lost sinners, like the lost piece of silver, are looked
up, strayed ones are brought back, and backsliders restored; hypocrites
and formalists, heretics and false teachers, and their doctrines, are
discovered and detected; and saints are enlightened, comforted, and
directed: and this candlestick being "all of gold" may denote the value
of it; the true church of Christ, and the real members of it, are highly
esteemed by Christ; the precious sons of Zion are comparable to fine
gold, jewels, and precious stones; they are the excellent in the earth,
in whom is his delight: and likewise its brightness and purity,
splendour and glory; its members being possessed of the gifts and graces
of the Spirit, of the pure and glorious doctrines of the Gospel, and
exercising holy discipline, and living holy lives and conversations: and
also the duration of it, which will be to the end of the world, the
gates of hell not being able to prevail against it; and which is
continued, not by might or power of man, but by the Spirit of the Lord,
and his grace, which is sufficient for it, and with which it is
supplied; not by any natural or artificial means, but by a wonderful and
uncommon manner; signified by oil not pressed from the olive by the help
of man, but flowing from two olive trees, on both sides the candlestick,
of itself, freely, and constantly. This candlestick may primarily
respect, and may be an emblem of, the then present state of the Jewish
church, when this vision was seen; and point at how it was raised up,
restored, and preserved; but has a further view to the church of God,
under the Gospel dispensation, unto the end of the world:

with a bowl upon the top of it; an oil vessel, or cruet, round, and
large enough to hold the oil, which supplied it, and each of its lamps,
whereby its light was maintained and continued; and this may intend,
either the fulness of grace in Christ, which is as "a fountain", as the
word (l) here used signifies, [Jos
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019) to supply his church and people;
and from whence they have the oil of grace in measure, which is in him
without measure, whereby their lamps are filled, and their lights are
kept burning; and who is fitly placed as the Head of the church for this
purpose, as this bowl was upon the top of the candlestick: or rather,
since this "bowl" is but a measure, though it may be a large one it may
signify that large portion of gifts and grace which is communicated to
the church in all ages, and abides in it, and is severally divided to
the ministers and members of it, for its profit and edification; to one
one gift, to another another; to some greater, and others less; and all
for mutual good; and which are given forth from Christ and his Spirit;
who, as Capellus thinks, may be meant by the two olive trees, who of
themselves, without pressing, having all fulness of grace in them
without measure, freely and liberally impart it; and keep filling the
bowl, so that there is constantly a supply of the Spirit, and grace for
the church and people of Christ in all ages; according to [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021) "my Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed's seed saith the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever". Cocceius
thinks the merit of Christ is meant by this bowl or cup, by which he
obtained the promise of the Spirit:

and his seven lamps thereon; on the candlestick; such a number of lamps
were on the candlestick in the tabernacle, [Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037) and may design the many members
of the church bearing the lamps of profession; or rather the ministers
of the Gospel, who are the lights of the world, and bright and burning
ones, that hold forth the word of life both in doctrine and
conversation; unless the gifts and graces of the Spirit, qualifying them
for such work, should be meant; see [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005) but rather ministers themselves
are designed, who are called lights and lamps, [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014) and the number seven, being a
number of perfection, may denote a fulness and sufficiency of Gospel
ministers, which Christ furnishes his church with, and will do unto the
end of the world; he having a perfection of gifts in his hands for them,
to fit them for his service; just as these are called the "seven
pillars" of Wisdom's house, [Pro 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001).
Cocceius thinks by these seven lamps are intended the seven churches, or
the seven states of the church under several periods in the Gospel
dispensation; the same with the seven churches of Asia, and the seven
golden candlesticks, in the midst of which Christ was seen by John, [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004),

and seven pipes to the seven lamps which were upon the top thereof;
these pipes, infusers or funnels, were at the bottom of the bowl, in
which were so many holes, that let out the oil into them, by which it
was carried to the lamps; a pipe to every lamp. In the Hebrew text it
is, "seven and seven pipes" (m); that is, fourteen, two to every lamp;
which Fortunatus Scacchus (n) thinks, they being joined to one another,
the one put in the neck of the other, were for the better cleansing and
purifying of the oil from any dregs that might be in it. Jarchi is of
opinion there were seven to every lamp, in all forty nine, but without
any foundation: by these are meant, not the seven sacraments, as say the
Papists; but either the various gifts of the Spirit, fitting ministers
for their service; or the various means they make use of to learn the
mind of Christ in the Scriptures, to know the Gospel, and more of it,
that they may hold it forth to others; such as reading, meditation, and
prayer.

\(l\) "fons", Pembellus; "scaturigo", Sanctius. (m) "septem et septem",
Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin, Piscator. (n) Sacrer. Elaeochrism. Myrothec.
l. 1. c. 10. p. 53.

[Zechariah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 4:3</span></span>

And the two olive trees by it,.... Which are explained in; see Gill on
[Zac 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014),

one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side
thereof; in [Zac 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011) they are said to
be on the right and left sides of the bowl or candlestick, which is the
same; for the situation of them was alike, with respect to the one and
the other: according to Fortunatus Scacchus, these two olive trees did
not arise out of the earth, and the top of the candlestick; but out of
the base of the candlestick, one on the right hand of the bowl, which
hung in the middle of the candlestick; and the other on the left (o), of
which he has given the figure.

\(o\) Ibid. (Sacer. Elaeochrism, Myrothec. l. 1.) c. 12. p. 62.

[Zechariah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 4:4</span></span>

So I answered, and spake to the angel that talked with me,.... The same
that awoke him out of sleep, and asked him what he saw:

saying, What are these, my lord? that is, what do they signify? what do
they represent? or what are they emblems of? for he knew what they were;
that they were a candlestick, and two olive trees; but he was desirous
of knowing what the meaning of them were.

[Zechariah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 4:5</span></span>

Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me,.... Either
to upbraid him with his ignorance and stupidity; or rather to quicken
his attention, and that of others, to the interpretation of it he was
about to give him:

Knowest thou not what these be? art thou ignorant of the design of them?
or knowest thou not what is meant by them?

and I said, No, my lord; he made an ingenuous confession of his
ignorance, joined with great respect unto, and veneration of, the angel
that conversed with him.

[Zechariah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 4:6</span></span>

Then he answered, and spake unto me, saying,.... In great condescension,
in order to instruct him into the true meaning of the vision:

This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel; this signifies what was
said by the Lord to Zerubbabel, by some one of the prophets sent unto
him:

saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of
hosts: that is, that as the candlestick was supplied with oil, from the
two olive trees by the side of it, without the help of any man, to pour
in the oil, and trim the lamps; so the temple should be built by
Zerubbabel, not through the multitude and strength of men, but through
the Spirit of God, animating, exciting, encouraging, and strengthening
them to go through the work. The temple was a type of the church, and
Zerubbabel a type of Christ; he was so in the high esteem he was had in
by the Lord; he was chosen by him; made as a signet, and was precious to
him, [Hag 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#023) in his titles and
characters, a servant of the Lord, and governor of Judah, [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001) and in his work, in bringing the
Jews out of captivity, and in rebuilding the temple: so Christ is the
chosen of God, and exceeding dear and precious to him; is his righteous
servant, and Governor of the church, or King of saints; and who has
redeemed and delivered his people from the captivity of sin, and Satan,
and the law; and is the builder of his church; who has laid the
foundation of it, and will bring in the headstone; and which church is
built up in all generations through the conversion of sinners; and that
is done, not by external force, by carnal weapons, or moral persuasion;
but by the sword of the Spirit, the word of God; and not by the power of
man's free will, but by the efficacious grace of the divine Spirit: it
is indeed done by power and might, but not of the creature: man,
whatever power he has to do things natural, civil, outwardly religions,
and materially moral, or however in appearance, has no power to do
anything spiritually good; not to think a good thought, nor do a good
action, in a spiritual manner; much less to work such a work as the work
of regeneration, conversion, and sanctification; since he is dead in
sin, and can not quicken himself; his understanding is darkened, yea,
darkness itself, and he can not command light into it; his will is
stubborn and obstinate, and he can not bend it, and subdue it; his heart
is hard as a nether millstone, and he cannot soften it, and repent of
his sins, in a truly spiritual, gracious, anti-evangelic manner; his
affections are inordinate; and he is a lover of sinful pleasures, and
not of God, nor of anything divine, to which his carnal mind is enmity;
he cannot believe in Christ of himself; faith is not of himself, it is
the gift of God, and so is repentance, and every other grace. The work
of grace on the soul is expressed by a regeneration, a resurrection from
the dead, a creation, and the new man, or a transformation of a man into
another man; all which require almighty power to effect: regeneration is
not of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God, of
Jehovah the Spirit: sanctification is called the sanctification of the
Spirit, and every grace of it is a fruit of his; it is he who is the
Spirit of life from Christ, that quickens men when dead in trespasses
and sins, and enlightens their dark minds with spiritual light, in
divine things; it is he that produces evangelical repentance in them,
and faith in Christ is of his operation; it is he that begins the work
of grace on the heart, and carries it on, and causes to abound in the
exercise of every grace, and performs the work of faith with power. The
Targum, instead of "by my Spirit", renders it "by my Word".

[Zechariah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 4:7</span></span>

Who art thou, O great mountain?.... This is said in reference to those
who opposed the building of the temple, as Sanballat, and others; or the
Persian monarchy, and Babylon the capital of it; a mountain being a
symbol of a kingdom, or capital city; so Babylon is called, [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025) hence the Targum paraphrases the
words thus,

"how art thou accounted a foolish kingdom before Zerubbabel!''

and may denote the opposition made to Christ, and to the building of his
church, both by Rome Pagan and Rome Papal; Rome is signified by a
burning mountain cast into the sea, [Rev
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008) and may include all the enemies of
the church and people of God, as sin, Satan, and the world; who, though
they may look like high and great mountains, and make much opposition,
and throw many difficulties in their way, yet in the issue will he of no
avail; See Gill on [Isa 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#011). Some
Jewish writers (p), by "the great mountain", understand the Messiah, but
very wrongly; for he is designed by Zerubbabel in the next clause; but
not by the "headstone", as the Targum interprets it:

before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain; as all opposition and
difficulties were surmounted by Zerubbabel in building the temple; so
all vanish and disappear before Christ, the antitype of Zerubbabel, in
the building up of his church, through the conversion of sinners, and in
the protection and preservation of it:

and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof; that is, he, Zerubbabel,
shall finish the building of the temple, as in [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009) the headstone being the last and
uppermost stone in the building, which is last laid, and completes the
whole; and in the spiritual sense designs, not Christ the headstone of
the corner, for it is he that is Zerubbabel's antitype, who brings it
in; but the last man that will be converted, when the number of God's
elect will be completed in regeneration: they are all in Christ's hands,
and under his care; before conversion they are secretly his, his hidden
ones; in conversion he brings them forth, and makes them to appear what
they are; and, when the last of this number is born again, the church of
the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven, will be wholly built,
and nothing wanting in it; and the work of grace will have the last hand
put to it, and be perfect in all. Christ is indeed sometimes called the
headstone of the corner, and the chief cornerstone, [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022) and he is the principal one in
the spiritual building the church; he is the foundation stone, on which
the whole is laid; and he is the cornerstone, that joins, knits, and
keeps all together; he is both the stability, safety, and ornament of
the building; Christ is the first, but not the last stone laid, which
this must be: rather the perfection of grace is designed, or the
bringing of the work of God to perfection; which may be signified
hereby, in allusion to an edifice, which, when the last or top stone is
laid, is then completed; and, if taken in this sense, must be
understood, not of justifying grace, which is complete at once; Christ's
righteousness being a perfect justifying righteousness, and every
believer complete in it; but of sanctifying grace, which, though, as to
the principle of it, is all wrought together, yet is not at once
perfected; it is gradually brought to perfection; there is a perfection
of parts, but not of degrees; no man is perfectly holy in himself, only
as he is in Christ; but holiness in the saint will be perfected, for
without it no man can see the Lord; and this is done at death in every
individual believer; and then follows a state of sinless perfection; and
the last measure of grace given, which perfects the work, may be called
the headstone, the crowning, finishing part: and this wilt be brought in
by Christ, the author and finisher of faith; who is a rock, and his work
is perfect; he is able to do it; and who so fit, as he who is full of
grace? and who so proper, as the master builder, and Head of the church?
this grace, which perfects all, is in Christ; he brings it out from
himself, in whom it has pleased the Father all fulness should dwell: but
it is best of all to interpret the headstone of the last of the elect of
God, and redeemed of the Lamb, that will be called by grace; who has
this name, not from any superior excellency in him to any of the other
lively stones, laid in the spiritual building; but because he is the
last that is put there; and which shows, that not one of those God has
chosen, and Christ has redeemed, shall be lost; it is the will of God,
and it is the care of Christ, that none should perish, but all should
come to repentance, to the glory of his rich grace; or otherwise the
building would not be complete, nor the church the fulness of him that
filleth all in all. The Targum indeed paraphrases the words of Christ,

"and he shall reveal his Christ, whose name is said from eternity, and
he shall rule over all kingdoms:''

and mention being made of a capital and principal stone, in this vision
of the candlestick, may put one in mind of the stone the Jews (q) speak
of, which was before the candlestick in the temple, which had three
steps, and on which the priest stood, and trimmed the lamps: and this
will be attended

with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it; as the people of the Jews
shouted, when the first stone was laid in the foundation of the temple,
[Ezr 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011) so it is here intimated that
their acclamations would be very great when the last stone would be
brought in, and the building finished; which they would ascribe to the
grace, favour, and good will of God to them: so likewise, as the work of
conversion is wholly owing to the grace of God, an abundance of which is
displayed in it; when it is finished in the hearts of all the Lord's
people, and the last man designed to be called by it is converted, and
so the spiritual building of the church finished; this will be attended
with the shouts of angels, who rejoice at the conversion of every
sinner, and much more when all the elect are gathered in; and the
acclamations of all the saints, for the marriage of the Lamb, will now
be come, and the church be ready, as a bride prepared for her husband;
see [Rev 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006). The repetition of the
phrase, "grace, grace", denotes that the work of conversion in all the
saints, from the first to the last, is only owing to the grace of God,
and not to any merit, motive, and condition in man; that they are saved
and called, not according to their works, but according to the purpose
and grace of God, his abundant mercy, free favour, and great love; and
that this grace is exceeding abundant, which is displayed in the
conversion of a single individual; and how large and copious must it be,
which is given forth to them all. It is also expressive of the vehemency
of those that use the phrase; and shows that they have a deep sense of
it on their hearts; and are warmed, and glow with it; and cannot
sufficiently express their admiration of it; and strive to magnify it to
the uttermost of their power, being sensible of their obligations to God
for it, and what gratitude is due to him on account of it: and this will
be the cry of every saint in glory, throughout the endless ages of
eternity; nor will the least sound be heard that is jarring, or contrary
to it; all will be of one mind, and in one tone, and strive to outdo
each other in exalting the free grace of God in the highest strains,
with the greatest fervency of soul, and with the loudest acclamations,
and those continually repeated.

\(p\) Tanchuma in Yalkut Simeoni in loc. (q) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 92.
1. & Tamid, fol. 30. 2. Maimon. Beth Habechira, c. 3. sect. 11.

[Zechariah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 4:8</span></span>

Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. As follows; which
is a confirmation of the angel's interpretation of the vision.

[Zechariah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 4:9</span></span>

The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house,.... The
temple at Jerusalem, which was laid, or however renewed, after it had
been long neglected, even the four and twentieth day of the ninth month,
two months before this vision and prophecy, [Hag
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018) compared with [Zac
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007),

his hands shall also finish it: signified by bringing in the head or top
stone, [Zac 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#007) and so Christ our
great Zerubbabel has laid the foundation of his church, which is no
other than himself; and is a foundation firm and strong, sure and
certain, immovable and everlasting; and his hands will finish the
building of it, by bringing and laying every elect soul upon this
foundation; which may be concluded from his hands being those which have
laid the foundations of the heavens and the earth; uphold all things in
being, and hold the reins of government; and who, as Mediator, has all
the persons of his people in his hands, and all grace and glory for
them: his hands also have laid the foundation of grace in the hearts of
his people, and he will finish it; he, who is the author, will be the
finisher of faith:

and thou shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you; this
clause is not an address to Zerubbabel, as Aben Ezra and others think;
but to the people of the Jews, as appears from the plural word used, at
the end of it; nor are the words spoken by the prophet of himself;
though the Targum paraphrases them to this sense,

"and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me to prophesy unto
you;''

that is, when they should see his prophecies accomplished, and the
temple built, then they would know and acknowledge that he was a true
prophet, sent of God unto them; nor is the angel designed, so often
mentioned, that talked with the prophet; for he was sent, not to the
Jews, but to him; but they are spoken by the Messiah, called "the Word
of the Lord"; [Zac 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#008) who, when he
shall have finished the work of grace on every man's heart by his
Spirit, and shall have completed the whole Gospel building, the church,
by gathering in everyone of the elect; then it shall be known and owned
by all, both the converted Jews and Gentiles, that he is the true
Messiah, the sent of God to the forefathers of the Jews, who came to
preach the Gospel to them, work miracles among them, and obtain eternal
redemption for men.

[Zechariah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 4:10</span></span>

For who hath despised the day of small things?.... This literally refers
to the building of the second temple, which was contemptible to the
enemies of Judah, Sanballat, and others; and little in the eyes of many
of the Jews themselves, who had seen the former temple; yet not in the
eyes of the Lord of hosts, [Ezr 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012)
and so the Targum paraphrases the words,

"for who is he that despiseth this day, because the building is small?''

but in the spiritual sense, to the building up of the church by
conversion: the first work of conversion may be called day "of small
things" to men; it may be called a "day", because a time of light into
themselves, their sin and danger, and the way from it; the day of
Christ's power upon the soul, in making it willing to quit all, and be
saved by him; a season in which there is a display of the love, grace,
and mercy of God unto it; and is the day of its espousals to Christ; and
the day of salvation, of the knowledge and application of it; and of
good tidings, of peace, pardons, and life, by Christ; and yet a day of
"small things": not that what is done or made known are small things in
themselves; but the light and knowledge which young converts have of
themselves, of Christ, and of the doctrines of the Gospel, is but small;
and so is their faith in Christ, but a mere venture on him, or a
peradventure there may be salvation in him for them also; and their
spiritual strength to exercise grace, do their duty, comfort from
Christ, and in the promises and experience of the everlasting love of
God, are but small at first; yet this day of small things is not to be
"despised": it is not by Jehovah the Father, who regards their prayers,
and does not despise them, though like the chatterings of a crane or
swallow; he takes them by the hand, leads them, and teaches them to walk
by faith, and proportions their duty to their strength, and their
strength to their day: nor by Jesus Christ, who delights in their
applications to him, and never rejects them; regards his buds in his
vineyards, the beginnings of grace; the lambs in his flock, the weak and
feeble; and the bruised reed, and smoking flax, who have but little
light and grace: nor by the Holy Spirit, who helps their infirmities,
makes intercession for them with groans unutterable; carries on the good
work in them, and performs it till the day of Christ: nor should it be
despised by men of greater light, faith, and experience; though it is no
wonder they should be despised by carnal men; but even for them to
despise one of the little ones that believe in him is resented by him.
The interest of Christ in general is sometimes "a day of small things":
it was so among the Jews at the time of Christ's ascension; and among
the Gentiles, at the first preaching of the Gospel to them; and so it
was at the time of the Reformation, and is so now: Jacob is small, but
there is a day coming, called the great day of Jezreel, [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011).

For they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of
Zerubbabel with those seven: which may literally respect the building of
the second temple; and that was expressed not only at the laying of the
foundation, [Ezr 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011) but at the
carrying of it on, and especially at the finishing of it, [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014) when they saw the building rise
under, the direction and encouragement of Zerubbabel, who is represented
here as a master builder, with a "plummet" in his hand; which is an
instrument used by masons and carpenters, to draw perpendicular lines
with, in order to judge whether the building is upright; and is so
called from a piece of lead fastened at the end of a cord or thread. In
the Hebrew text it is called a "stone of tin" (r); it may be, in those
times, they used a stone for this purpose, cased with tin or lead. And,
"those seven" with him may mean seven principal persons that joined with
him, and assisted him in this work: though some interpret them of the
seven lamps, and the seven pipes to them, in the candlestick; and the
Targum explains them of "seven rows of stone", measured by the plummet:
but rather they are to be understood of the eyes of the Lord, after
mentioned, which were upon the Jews, in favour of the building, that it
might not be caused to cease by their enemies, [Ezr
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005) though Cocceius chooses to render
the words thus, "and those seven shall rejoice, and see the plummet in
the hand of Zerubbabel"; and applies them to the seven churches of Asia,
representatives of the whole church of Christ, in successive periods,
rejoicing at the growing interest of Christ; and doubtless the mystical
and spiritual sense of the words is, that it is matter of rejoicing to
gracious souls when the spiritual building goes forward, under the
direction and encouragement of Christ. The carrying on of the work of
grace in particular believers affords joy and pleasure. This work is in
the hands and under the care of Christ; it is curiously wrought and
framed by line and rule, and goes on to perfection; which being observed
by others, though it is the nature of grace to desire more, yet it does
not envy the gifts and graces of others, but rejoices at them. The
carrying on of the work of God in the church in general is an occasion
of great joy to the saints; they rejoice that it is in such hands; not
in the hands of ministers or magistrates, or even angels, but in the
hands of Christ; who is so great, and has condescended to engage in it;
has so much wisdom to manage and conduct it; is so faithful in
everything he is concerned, and is so able to go through with it: they
rejoice that it is carried on with so much exactness; that the whole
building is so fitly framed and compacted together; everything in the
church being done according to the plummet of God's everlasting love and
eternal purposes, which plummet is with Christ, [Rom
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039) according to which persons are
called by grace; the blessings of grace are bestowed on them; and they
are put in such an office or place in the church: and as this building
goes on by an increase of persons, or an addition of such as shall be
saved; and by an increase of grace, gifts, and spiritual knowledge in
them; it is matter of joy to angels and men, and especially to the
ministers of the Gospel.

They are the eyes of the Lord, or "the eyes of the Lord are they" (s),

which run to and fro through the whole earth; these design not the
angels, who walk to and fro through the earth, [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) nor the various gifts and graces
of the Spirit, [Rev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006) but rather the
infinite providence of God, signified by an "eye"; it being intuitive,
omniscient, approbative of that which is good, and vindictive of that
which is evil; loving to, and careful of, the saints, making them
prosperous and successful: and by "seven eyes", to denote the perfection
and fulness of it; and these being said to run to and fro throughout the
earth, expresses the large compass of persons and things it reaches to:
and it may he observed, that the carrying on of the work of God, both in
particular persons, and in the church of God in general, is attended
with and owing to his special providence, as well as grace.

\(r\) "lapidem stanni", Montanus, Drusius, Cocceius; "lapidem stanneum",
V. L. Vatablus, Calvin; "lapidem stannum", i. e. "cum stanno", so
Burkius. (s) "oculi Jehovae sunt illi".

[Zechariah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 4:11</span></span>

Then answered I, and said unto him,.... To the angel that talked with
him, [Zac 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001),

What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick,
and upon the left side thereof? in [Zac
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002) they are said to be on each side
of the bowl. The mystery of the candlestick being explained to Zechariah
by the angel, the prophet desires to know the meaning of the two olive
trees that were on the right and left of it, one on one side, and the
other on the other side.

[Zechariah 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 4:12</span></span>

And I answered again, and said unto him,.... Before he could have an
answer to the former question, he puts the following, as being of the
same import:

What be these two olive branches; which grew upon the olive trees, and
were nearest to the candlestick, and the pipes that were to the lamps:
these, in [Zac 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014), are interpreted
of the two anointed ones, or sons of oil, and may design the ministers
of the word, if, by the "golden oil" after mentioned, is meant the
Gospel; even a set of evangelical preachers in Gospel times, in the
various periods of the church; Christ's faithful witnesses, who stand on
each side of the bowl, and receive out of Christ's fulness gifts and
grace to fit them for their work; and on each side of the candlestick,
the church, to impart the oil of the Gospel to it. These may be compared
to "olive trees" for their beauty and comeliness in the eyes of saints,
to whom they bring the good news of salvation by Christ, [Hos
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#006) and for their greenness and
flourishing condition, being filled with the gifts and graces of the
Spirit, [Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008) and for their
fruitfulness; for, as the olive tree produces an oil used both for light
and food, so they bring the Gospel with them, which is the means of
spiritual light, and contains in it refreshing and delightful food, [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008) and for their fatness, with which
they honour God and men, [Jdg 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#009) so
ministers of the Gospel honour Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit, by
ascribing the contrivance, obtaining, and application of salvation to
each of them; and they honour men, by acquainting them what honour all
the saints have through Christ, being made kings and priests by him; and
by showing them what honour they shall have hereafter. And they may be
compared to "olive branches", with respect to Christ the good olive
tree, in whom they are as branches; are bore by him, and subsist in him;
receive all they have from him, and do all they do in his strength: and
also for their tenderness and weakness in themselves, and for their
fruitfulness from him.

Which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of
themselves? if by the "two" olive trees and branches, or anointed ones,
ministers of the Gospel are intended; then, by the "golden oil", is
meant, not the Spirit and his grace, which is sometimes compared to oil;
nor inward spiritual joy and peace, the oil of gladness, for ministers
cannot communicate either of these to others; but the Gospel, and the
precious truths of it, compared to "oil", because of a healing,
cheering, and refreshing nature; and because beautifying, feeding, and
fattening; and because of a searching and penetrating nature, and being
pure, unmixed, and good for light: and to "golden" oil, or oil, that,
being poured out, is like liquid gold, for colour, value, splendour,
purity, and duration: and this they "empty out"; which phrase denotes
the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel they come with; their free and
ready delivery of it; their faithfulness in giving out all, and keeping
back nothing that may be profitable; and their ease and satisfaction of
mind in so doing and this they do, not out of the corrupt fountains of
moral philosophy; nor from the writings of others; nor out of their own
heads, or from mere notional knowledge; but out of their hearts, and
from their inward experience of Gospel truths; and which is not to be
understood exclusive of Christ, or of the Scriptures of truth, from
whence they fetch all truth; nor have they this knowledge and experience
of or from themselves. The means by which they communicate the golden
oil of the Gospel are "the two golden pipes", the ministry of the word,
and administration of ordinances; which are like "pipes" or canals,
through which Gospel grace is conveyed; and are "golden", are valuable,
to be kept pure, and are durable; they are but "pipes", or means, and
not to be depended on, yet they are "golden", and not to be despised.
But if by the two olive trees, or anointed ones, are meant two divine
Persons, of which see [Zac 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014) then
by the "golden oil" may be intended the grace of God, often compared to
"oil" in Scripture, in allusion to oil in common, or to the anointing
oil, which was made of precious spices; or rather, as here, to the lamp
oil for the candlestick in the tabernacle, which was pure oil olive:
grace, like oil, is of a cheering and refreshing nature, hence called
"oil of gladness"; very beautifying and adorning; like oil, it makes the
face to shine; and by it the church, and all believers, become "all
glorious within": it is of a searching nature; like oil, it penetrates
into the heart, and has its seat there; and as oil will not mix with
other liquid, so neither will grace with sin and corruption: but
chiefly, as here, may it be compared to oil olive, because it burns and
gives light, as that does in the lamp. The lamp of a profession, without
the oil of grace, is a dark and useless thing. Grace is a light in the
inward parts, and causes the light of an outward conversation to shine
in good works before men; and this may be truly called "golden", being
exceeding valuable, yea, much more precious than gold that perisheth; it
being as durable, nay, much more durable than that, for it will last for
ever, and can never be lost; see [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007) and of this the word and
ordinances are the means; and so may be designed by the pipes, through
which it is conveyed to the souls of men; for "faith", and other graces
of the Spirit, "come by hearing, and hearing by the word of God", [Rom
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017) hence says the apostle to the
Galatians, [Gal 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002), "received ye the
Spirit"; that is, the special gifts and graces of the Spirit, comparable
to the best oil and purest gold; "by the works of the law", or through
the preaching of that, through the doctrine of justification by the
works of it, "or by the hearing of faith?" by the doctrine of
justification by faith in the righteousness of Christ, or by the Gospel
preached and heard: this is the usual way in which the Spirit and his
grace are communicated to men; hence the Gospel is called the "Spirit",
and "the ministration of the Spirit", [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006) and this seems to be a further
confirmation of this sense of the words, since this golden oil is
distinct from the pipes through which it flows; as grace is from the
Gospel, through which it is received; whereas, in the other sense, they
seem to coincide.

[Zechariah 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 4:13</span></span>

And he answered me, and said,.... That is, the angel answered to the
prophet's questions:

Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord; See Gill on
[Zac 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#005).

[Zechariah 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 4:14</span></span>

Then said he, These are the two anointed ones,.... Or "sons of oil" (t).
Some think the gifts and graces of the Spirit are meant, which come from
the God of all grace, remain with Christ, are given freely by him to the
sons of God, and are always for the service of the church, and
sufficient for it; others, Christ the Son of God, and the Holy Spirit.
Christ is the anointed One, or son of oil, being anointed with the Holy
Ghost to the office of Prophet, Priest, and King; and with which oil he
has supplied his candlestick, the church, in all ages. The Holy Spirit
is the oil of gladness, and that anointing which teacheth all things.
And this is the sense of Capellus, as has been observed on [Zac
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002). And the learned and judicious
Pemble makes a "query" of it, whether Christ and the Comforter; or
Christ in his two natures; or Christ in his two offices of King and
Priest of his church; or how else the words are to be understood: and
this was the sense of Origen long ago, though censured by Jerom; it may
be the rather, because he interprets the candlestick of the Father. But
these epithets, "anointed ones", and "sons of oil", are very suitable to
them; the one being called the Messiah, or anointed; and the other the
unction, and the oil of gladness: and indeed, if by the golden oil
emptied out of them is meant the grace of God, as it frequently
signifies in Scripture, no other can be meant; since they are the
inexhaustible fountain of all grace and gifts to the church in all ages,
whereby it is supplied and supported; and may be said to "stand before
the Lord of the whole earth", God the Father; who does not immediately
by himself administer to the church, but by Christ the Head of it; and
Christ communicates by his Spirit, whom he sends from himself, and from
the Father: and the rather they may be thought to be meant, since the
ministers of the word seem to be designed by the seven lamps which
receive the oil, or gifts and graces of the Spirit, fitting them for
their work, from the bowl on the top of the candlestick, which is
supplied with it from these two olive trees; and therefore must be
distinct from them, or otherwise they will be said to be supplied from
themselves: though, whereas both Christ and the Spirit communicate by
the word and the ordinances, administered by the faithful dispensers of
the word; hence those witnesses of Christ, in all ages, may with
propriety enough be called two anointed ones, and "the two olive trees",
as they are in [Rev 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004) where there
is a plain allusion to this passage. The Targum renders the words,
"these are the two sons of princes", or "great men". Some Jewish writers
interpret them of their two Messiahs, Messiah ben Joseph, and Messiah
ben David (u). Some interpreters understand by them Enoch and Elias;
others Peter and Paul; others, better, with Kimchi and Ben Melech,
Joshua and Zerubbabel, the one anointed for the priesthood, and the
other for the kingdom; of which two offices Jarchi interprets them; and
others the two churches, Jewish and Christian.

That stand by the Lord of the whole earth; the Creator and Governor of
the universe: ministers of the word are on his side, abide by his truths
and ordinances, and are faithful to his cause and interest: or, "before
the Lord of the whole earth" (w); they are his ministers, and serve him;
they "stand", as it becomes them, which shows their work is not done;
and that it is the Lord's work they are engaged in; and that they
continue and persevere in it: likewise it shows that they are under his
eye, notice, dispose, care, and protection; that they are in his favour,
and enjoy his presence. How this may be applied to the two divine
Persons standing by or before God the Father has been before observed,
and to be understood of them as in their office capacity.

\(t\) "filii olei", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Tigurine version,
Vatablus, Cocceius, Burkius. (u) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 114. 3. (w) "super
Dominum", Montanus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 5](zac005)

</div>
