<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac009)  [Next](zac011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 10

This chapter is a prophecy of the conversion of the Jews in the latter
day, when the fulness of the Gentiles is brought in, spoken of in the
preceding chapter [Zac 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001). It begins
with an exhortation to ask rain of the Lord; denounces wrath upon his
enemies; and consists of various promises to his people. The exhortation
to ask rain is in [Zac 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) to which
encouragement is given from its being of the Lord, from his willingness
to grant it, and from the fruitfulness occasioned by it. The vanity of
idols, and idolaters, who can not give it, is exposed; and the distress
and confusion they were thrown into is observed, [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002). The anger of the Lord against
the principal of them is declared; and his gracious visitation of the
people of the Jews, whom he will honour and glorify, is taken notice of,
[Zac 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003) from whom the Messiah
sprung, than which a greater glory can not be enjoyed, [Zac
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004) and then follow various promises,
relating to them; as of victory over their enemies, through the presence
of the Lord with them, [Zac 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005) of
strength and salvation to them, as owing to his free grace and mercy,
[Zac 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006) of inward spiritual joy in
them and theirs, [Zac 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007) of their
effectual calling and spiritual increase, in consequence of redeeming
grace, [Zac 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008) of their having a
name and a place in Gospel churches, where they will remember the Lord,
and live with their children, being converted, [Zac
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#009) which conversion of theirs is
represented in terms alluding to their deliverance from Egypt and
Babylon, [Zac 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010) and the chapter is
concluded with a promise of spiritual strength, so that they shall
continue in their profession of faith in Christ, and persevere therein
to the end, [Zac 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012).

[Zechariah 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 10:1</span></span>

Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain,.... There was
the former and the latter rain, of which see [Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003). The former rain was in autumn, a
little before or about seed time; the latter was in the spring, and a
little before harvest, which is here referred to. So Hesiod (g) calls
those rains the autumnal and vernal rains; and between these two rains
there was seldom any more. Jerom says (h) that he never saw in the
eastern countries, especially in Judea, any rain at the end of the month
of June, or in July; and now, at Aleppo, a little more northerly, for
three or four months after May, they have scarce so much as any dew upon
the ground, as Pemble on the place observes. So Dr. Shaw says (i),
little or no rain falls in this climate (of Algiers and Tunis), during
the summer season; and in most parts of the Sahara, particularly in the
Jereede, they have seldom any rain at all. It was likewise the same in
the holy land, [Pro 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#001) where rain is
accounted an unusual thing in "harvest", [Sa2
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010) where it is also mentioned,
"from harvest till rain dropped on them"; i.e. their rainy season fell
out, as in Barbary, in the autumnal and winter months.

"The first rains (he observes) fall here some years in September, in
others a month later; after which the Arabs break up their ground, in
order to sow wheat, and plant beans: this commonly falls out about the
middle of October.''

If the latter rains fall as usual in the middle of April, (in the holy
land we find they were a month sooner, [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023).) the crop is reckoned secure;
the harvest coming on in the latter end of May, or in the beginning of
June, according to the heat and quality of the preceding seasons:
wherefore, since there was so little rain fell in these countries, and
particularly in Judea; if these former and latter rains failed, a
scarcity followed; for, for want of the former rain, the earth was hard,
and not easily ploughed up; and for want of the latter the grain
withered away in the blade, and did not ear, at least did not produce
ears plump and good; so that these rains were great temporal blessings,
and to be asked for, as they were by the Jews, when they were wanted;
and for which they appointed fasts (k), and were emblems of spiritual
blessings here designed; for rain here is not to be literally
understood, but mystically and spiritually; and designs either the love
and favour of God, and the comfortable discoveries of it; see [Pro
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#015) which may be compared to rain in
its original; it is from above, from on high, it comes from heaven; it
is not owing to anything in man, but to the will of God; and is
distinguishing, as rain falls on one city, and not on another; in its
objects, undeserving persons, as rain is sent on the just and unjust; in
its manner of communication, it tarries not for the will and works of
men; it comes at times in great abundance, and the discoveries of it are
to be asked for; in its effects, it softens and melts the heart into
evangelical repentance; it cools and extinguishes the flaming wrath of a
fiery law in the conscience; it refreshes and revives the drooping
spirit, and makes the barren soul fruitful: or the blessings of grace in
general may be meant; these are from above, depend on the will of God;
are to be sought after, and asked for; are free grace gifts; are given
largely and plentifully, and make fruitful: or the coming of Christ in
the flesh in particular is intended; see [Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003) who came down from heaven; is a
free gift of God to men, was sought after, and greatly desired, and to
be desired, by the Old Testament saints, and very grateful to such when
he came. This may also be applied to his spiritual coming in his power
and kingdom in the latter day, which is to be earnestly wished and
prayed for, [Psa 72:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007) or else the
Gospel may be designed; see [Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002)
this is of God, and from above; comes and falls upon the sons of men,
according to divine direction; softens hard hearts, when it becomes
effectual; comforts the souls of God's people; is a blessing to be
desired, and asked for; and will be enjoyed in great plenty in the
latter day:

so the Lord shall make bright clouds; by which may be meant the
ministers of the Gospel, who are of God's making, and not man's: these
may be compared to "clouds" for their number, especially as they will be
in the latter day; and for their moving to and fro, to communicate
spiritual knowledge: and to "bright" ones, such as from whence lightning
springs, thunderclouds, full of water; (the same word is used for
lightning, [Job 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025);) because full
of Gospel truths, and because of that clear light they diffuse to
others:

and give them showers of rain: productive, under a divine influence, of
large conversions among Jews and Gentiles:

to everyone grass in the field: on whom these showers fall with
efficacy, and a divine blessing; everyone of these have a spiritual
knowledge of Christ, faith in him, repentance towards God, food and
fulness of it; and are filled with the fruits of righteousness, or good
works, to the glory of God; see [Isa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010). The Targum is,

"that he may give to them (the children of men) corn to eat, and grass
to the beasts in the field;''

taking the words literally.

\(g\) Opera & Dies, l. 2. (h) Comment. in Amos iv. 7. fol. 39. F. (i)
Travels, p. 136, 137. Ed. 2. (k) Misn. Taanith, c. 1. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7.

[Zechariah 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 10:2</span></span>

For the idols have spoken vanity,.... The vanities of the Gentiles
cannot give rain; if they promise it, they speak vain things; God only
can give it, and therefore it must, be asked of him, [Jer
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022). The word for idols is
"teraphim", the same as in [Gen 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)
and here signifies worshippers of idols, as the Targum interprets it;
and may be understood of the idolatrous Papists who worship idols of
gold, silver, brass, and wood, [Rev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020) and who speak lies in hypocrisy,
great swelling words of vanity, and even blasphemy against God, his
name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven, [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001). Jarchi on [Kg2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024), says, the teraphim are images
that speak by sorcerers or sorceries; and to such evils the followers of
the man of sin are addicted, [Rev 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021)
and the Jews (l) have a notion that those images were so formed, that
they were capable of speaking and talking with men; see [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004) they seem to confound them with
the "talisman":

and the diviners have seen a lie; delivered it out, and others believed
it, being given up to judicial blindness, because they received not the
love of the truth, [Th2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010). The
Targum is,

"the diviners prophesy falsehood;''

or preach false doctrine, as the Romish clergy do, who are meant by the
diviners:

and have told false dreams; about transubstantiation, purgatory, &c.
which are visionary things; false doctrines are compared to dreams, [Jer
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025),

they comfort in vain; by works of supererogation, by selling pardons,
and praying souls out of purgatory:

therefore they went their way as a flock; as a flock of sheep straying
from the fold. The Targum is,

"they are scattered as sheep are scattered;''

that is, the Jews, being hardened against the Christian religion, by the
idolatry, lies, and dreams of the Papists, wander about in their
mistakes and errors concerning the Messiah; which is their case to this
day, and will be until the man of sin is destroyed:

they were troubled, because there was no shepherd; or, "no king", as the
Targum paraphrases it; that is, the King Messiah, according to them, is
not yet come; which is their affliction and trouble, that they are as
sheep without a shepherd: or, "they answered", that there "is no
shepherd" (m); they replied to the diviners, the tellers of false dreams
and idolaters, and affirmed that the Messiah is not come, and that the
pope of Rome is not the shepherd and bishop of souls.

\(l\) Targum Jon. in Gen. xxxi. 19. R. Eliezer Pirke, c. 36. fol. 40. 1.
(m) "testificati sunt nullum fuisse pastorem", Junius & Tremellius,
Heb.; "responderunt", Piscator; "respondebunt quod non sit pastor",
Burkius.

[Zechariah 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 10:3</span></span>

Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds,.... The Targum interprets
it of "kings"; as the "goats" of "princes", in the next clause; by whom,
according to Jarchi, Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Abarbinel, are meant the
kings of Greece; but rather the antichristian kings are designed, the
kings of the earth, who have committed fornication with the whore of
Rome, which is the cause of the anger of the Lord being kindled: or else
ecclesiastical rulers are meant, the Romish clergy, the chief of them,
as cardinals, archbishops, bishops, &c. who may fitly be represented by
the shepherds of Israel in the times of the prophets for their name,
professing to be of Israel, or to be Christians; and by them for their
ignorance, covetousness, luxury, disregard to the flock, tyranny and
cruelty over it, and murder of it; see [Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010), against these the fire of God's
wrath will be kindled, and with it will they be destroyed:

and I punished the goats; not the Seleucidae, as the above Jewish
writers; though they may with propriety be so called, since they were
the successors of Alexander, signified by the he goat in [Dan
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005) rather the monks and friars,
comparable to these for their filthiness and uncleanness; and because
they pretend to be guides of the people, and to go before them, and yet
use them ill, and push them with their horns of power; wherefore God
will punish them, and kill those children of Jezebel with death, [Rev
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022),

for the Lord of hosts hath visited his flock, the house of Judah; by
sending the Gospel to them, and his Spirit with it, to make it effectual
to their conversion; which will be at the time that the antichristian
hierarchy will be destroyed; then the Lord's flock, who have gone
astray, shall be returned to the true Shepherd and Bishop of souls, and
shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall be saved
by him: a gracious visitation this will be!

and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle; this denotes that
the Jews, when converted, will be bold in their God; valiant for the
truth on earth; courageously fight the good fight of faith, and be
victorious over their enemies; and that they will be in great honour and
esteem among the saints, though so mean and justly despicable now: the
sense is, that as the horse shows its strength and courage in battle, so
should they; see [Job 39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019).

[Zechariah 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 10:4</span></span>

Out of him came forth the corner,.... Or "cornerstone"; by which is
meant a king or ruler, as the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi; and is no
other than the King Messiah, who was to come out of Judah, and did
spring from that tribe, [Ch1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#002) and
this is a reason why God will visit the house of Judah, or the Jews, in
the latter day, because the Messiah was promised and sent unto them,
salvation was of them, though they rejected him; but the Lord will have
mercy on them; the Redeemer shall come to Zion in a spiritual manner,
and turn away iniquity from them, and then all Israel shall be saved by
him. The epithet of a "corner" stone well agrees with him, that being
not only the ornament, but the strength and support of the building,
which knits, cements, and keeps the whole together: Christ is a
beautiful and precious cornerstone, which gives glory and lustre to the
church, and is the support, yea, the foundation of it; and who joins and
unites together men and angels; Jews and Gentiles; Old and New Testament
saints; saints above and below; saints in all ages and places, and of
all nations and denominations; and is the Head of the corner, being
superior to men and angels, to the kings of the earth, and to the church
of God; see [Eph 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020).

Out of him the nail; the Targum is, "out of him his Messiah"; which
shows that this text was formerly understood of Christ by the Jews;
Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it of a prince and governor; so Eliakim the
governor is said to be "as a nail in a sure place", [Isa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023) who was a type of Christ; and
this agrees with Christ himself. The allusion is either to a nail, by
which the timber in the building is compacted together, and the whole is
strengthened, as the church is by Christ: or to a nail to which the
cords of tents are fastened, as those of shepherds, travellers, or
soldiers; the church is as such a tent; Christ is the nail to which its
cords are fastened, which denotes the stability and security of it: or
to a nail fixed in a wall, on which things are hung; on Christ are hung
all the vessels of mercy; the covenant of grace, and all its promises
and blessings; and all the glory of his Father's house, of his building,
the temple, and of the salvation of his people, is to be hung on him.

Out of him the battle bow; or "warrior", as Jarchi interprets it; the
Lord is a man of war; Christ makes war in righteousness; the armies of
heaven follow him; he is at the head of them, and fights the battles of
his people, and is victorious, and makes them more than conquerors;
their spiritual armour is from him, and they are armed by him, [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)

out of him every oppressor together: or "exactor" (n); which is used in
a good sense, [Isa 60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017) as it must be
here, since all the rest of the epithets are; and may design the
apostles of Christ, who preached the doctrines of grace and
righteousness, and required of men the obedience of faith; and these
came out of Judah and Jerusalem, and went into all the world, demanding
faith in and obedience to the Son of God.

\(n\) "exactor", Montanus, Vatablus, Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, Calvin, Drusius, De Dieu, Cocceius, Burkius.

[Zechariah 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 10:5</span></span>

And they shall be as mighty men,.... That is, the converted Jews shall
be such; they shall be strong in faith, giving glory to the Messiah;
they shall be strong in the grace that is in him; they shall be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might; his strength shall be made
perfect in their weakness:

which tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle;
being victorious over sin, Satan, and the world, through Christ, in whom
they will believe:

and they shall fight; against all their inward and outward enemies, the
good fight of faith, with great valour and courage:

because the Lord is with them; who is the Lord of hosts or armies; his
presence gives boldness and intrepidity; for, if he is for them, who can
be against them? the battle is theirs, success is certain:

and the riders on horses shall be confounded; such that come up against
them on them, and trust in them, shall be beaten by them, and so made
ashamed; and the flesh, both of the horses and their riders, shall be
the food of the fowls of the air, [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018) perhaps the Turkish cavalry is
meant, who may attempt to hinder the settlement of the Jews in their own
land; the armies of the Turks consisting greatly of horsemen, [Rev
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#016).

[Zechariah 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 10:6</span></span>

And I wilt strengthen the house of Judah,.... Both with internal and
external strength, so that they shall be able to stand their ground
against enemies of every sort:

and I will save the house of Joseph: the ten tribes, such of them that
shall be found, for all Israel shall be saved, [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026) not only temporally, but
spiritually, with an everlasting salvation:

and I will bring them again to place them; there is but one word in the
original text; it is composed of two words, as Kimchi observes, of "to
return", and "to sit" or "dwell" (o), quietly, constantly, and at ease;
and our version takes in both senses: the meaning is, that these people
should be returned from the state and condition and from each of the
places they are in, and be settled either in their own land, or in
Gospel churches, under a Gospel ministry, enjoying Gospel ordinances, or
in both:

for I have mercy upon them; which is the spring and source of all the
above benefits promised, or that are after mentioned; even of the
covenant and its blessings; the mission of Christ, and salvation by him;
regeneration, pardon, and eternal life; hence they that had a "loammi"
upon them, and were not the people of God, now will be his people; and
those who had not obtained mercy shall obtain it, even those that were
concluded in unbelief:

and they shall be as though I had not cast them off; or rejected them
from being his people; which was done when the natural branches, the
Jews, were broken off, and the Gentiles of the wild olive tree were
grafted in; when their civil and church state were dissolved, and their
city and temple destroyed:

for I am the Lord their God; covenant interest always remains, and is
the source of all the blessings of grace, and will be of the conversion
of the Jews, [Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026),

and will hear them; when, the Spirit of grace and supplication being
poured upon them, they shall cry unto the Lord, and look to him for
salvation. The Targum is,

"and I will receive their prayer.''

\(o\) "et reverti et habitare faciam", Burkius.

[Zechariah 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 10:7</span></span>

And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man,.... What remain, and
shall be found of the ten tribes, shall be as is said of Judah, or the
Jews of the two tribes, [Zac 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005),

and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: they shall be filled with
inward and spiritual joy, through the love of God shed abroad in their
heart; and through the Gospel of Christ having a place there; and
through the blessings of divine grace, those streams of love, and which
flow in the Gospel, and make glad the hearts of God's people; all which
are comparable to wine:

yea, their children shall see it, and be glad; they shall see the
strength, victory, and salvation of their fathers, and the joy they
shall be possessed of, and join with them in it, having a share in the
same blessings they are partakers of:

their heart shall rejoice in the Lord; in the person and offices of
Christ, who will now be known by the spiritual seed and offspring of the
church, and in the great salvation wrought out by him, and in all the
blessings of grace that accompany it. The Targum is,

"their heart shall rejoice in the word of the Lord;''

the essential Word, the Son of God.

[Zechariah 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 10:8</span></span>

I will hiss for them,.... Or "whistle for them" (p); the word signifies,
as Kimchi and Ben Melech observe, the motion of the lips with the voice,
and is a sign of calling; and so the Targum renders it, I will cry or
call for them; and it denotes the call of them by the Gospel, which is
the voice of Christ, which is soft, sweet, and melodious; is a sound of
love, grace, and mercy; of peace, pardon, life, and salvation: the
allusion seems to be to the shepherd gathering his sheep together with
his pipe or whistle, and which was a reed; and so may denote the
weakness of the instrument, the ministry of the word in itself, which is
made the power of God unto salvation:

and gather them; from the places where they are scattered, into their
land; or, by effectual calling, out from the state and condition in
which they are, and from among the men of the world, to the Lord
himself, as their Redeemer and Saviour; and to him for pardon and
righteousness; and into his churches, and communion with him there:
Kimchi observes, that some interpret this verse of future time; and
Jarchi says it relates to it; and in the Talmud (q) it is applied to the
times of the Messiah; where they speak of a bird called "racham", which
we translate the gier eagle, [Deu
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#017) and they say it is so called,
because, when that comes, mercies come into the world, which this word
signifies. R. Bibi bar Abi says, when it sits, it makes a whistling or
hissing, from whence it is called "sarakrak", a word derived from what
is here used; and when it sits on the ground, and hisses or whistles,
the Messiah will come, as it is said, "I will hiss for them", &c.; the
gloss is, when it stands not, but sits and chirps, it is a sign of good
news. The design, seems to be to show, that the Messiah's coming is
owing mercy, and would be good news, which the Gospel publishes.

For I have redeemed them; from sin, Satan, the law, death, and hell, and
every enemy, by his precious blood, and the sacrifice of himself when
here on earth; and this is the foundation of the effectual calling of
any and every sinner; and will be the reason of the conversion and
ingathering of the Jews in the latter day; they being a people redeemed
and purchased by the blood of Christ, [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001),

and they shall increase as they have increased; either when in Egypt, or
in the days of Solomon; their number shall be as the sand of the sea,
[Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010) a nation shall be born at
once; they shall be multiplied, and not be few, and glorified, and not
be small; yea, the place shall be too strait for them to dwell in, [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018).

\(p\) "sibilabo", i. e. "fistula pastorali", Grotius, Burkius. (q) T.
Bab. Cholin, fol. 63. 1.

[Zechariah 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 10:9</span></span>

And I will sow them among the people, The people of God in the Gentile
world: this is to be understood of the conversion of the Jews, when they
will become the good seed that hear the word, and understand it, and
bring forth fruit; and of their being known, acknowledged, and reckoned
among the people of God, who now are not; and of their being planted in
Gospel churches, where the word is truly preached; the ordinances are
faithfully administered; the Lord grants his presence, and saints have
communion one with another; to be in such a fruitful soil, and in such
sacred enclosures, fenced by the power and grace of God, is a great
happiness:

and they shall remember me in far countries; they shall call to mind
what their ancestors did to Christ, and mourn on account of a pierced
Saviour; they shall remember him in the ordinance of the supper, being
in a Gospel church state; they shall remember what he did and suffered
for them, and his love to them in all, and that with faith, affection,
and thankfulness:

and they shall live with their children; a very happy, comfortable,
temporal life; and they shall live a spiritual life; a life of faith on
Christ; of communion with him, and of holiness from him, and to his
glory: and their children also shall live the same life, being
regenerated and quickened by the same grace; these are the church's
children:

and turn again; that is, when they shall turn again, either to the Lord,
shall be converted unto him; or return to their own land.

[Zechariah 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 10:10</span></span>

I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt,.... The Targum
paraphrases it,

"and as I brought them out of the land of Egypt, so will gather their
captivity out of Assyria;''

suggesting there would be a likeness between the one and the other.
Egypt may denote the state of distance and bondage in which all men are
by nature; and the Jews, at their conversion, will be brought out of it,
into the glorious liberty of the children of God, by the mighty arm of
the Lord, according to his purposes and promises. Moreover, as Cocceius
observes, Egypt may signify Rome, or the Romish jurisdiction, which is
spiritually called Egypt and Sodom, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008) for darkness, idolatry, tyranny,
and cruelty; and out of which the Jews, as many of them as are there,
will be brought at the time of their conversion:

and gather them out of Assyria; which may design the Turkish or Persian
dominions, or both, as the above commentator suggests; from whence the
Jews, as many as are in those parts, will be brought into their own
land, as follows; see [Isa 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011),

and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; Gilead was a
land of pasture, and signifies "a heap of testimonies"; and may
mystically intend the Scriptures, which testify of Christ, and direct to
green pastures, beside the still waters: and Lebanon, that goodly
mountain, and hill of frankincense, and where cedars grew, may design
the church, whither the converted Jews will be brought, and worship
before it, [Rev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009) or both may
literally be understood, which they shall return unto; Gilead being, as
Kimchi observes, beyond Jordan eastward; and Lebanon, comprehending the
whole land of Israel, on this side of it:

and place shall not be found for them; they will be so numerous; see
[Isa 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#020) the Targum is,

"and I will bring them to the land of Gilead and the sanctuary, and it
shall not be sufficient for them;''

that is, to hold them. The Septuagint render it, "and not one of them
shall be left": all Israel shall now be converted and saved, though
their number will be as the sand of the sea, [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010).

[Zechariah 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 10:11</span></span>

And he shall pass through the sea with affliction,.... Either the people
of the Jews, as Israel of old did, when they came out of Egypt, to which
the allusion is; or the wind shall pass through the sea, as Aben Ezra
supplies it, and it shall become dry; that is, the river of Egypt: or
"affliction" (r), as many supply it, shall pass through the sea; the
nations, which are many as the sea, as Kimchi interprets it; and so may
design that hour of temptation that shall come upon all the earth, [Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010) or with which the kingdom of the
beast, who rose up out of the sea, and consists of many waters, people,
tongues, and nations, will be afflicted, [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) which the Lord shall pass through
and smite; or it may in general denote the sea of this world, and the
afflictions of it, which the Lord causes his people to pass through, and
brings them out of them:

and shall smite the waves in the sea: that is, the Lord shall smite
them; repress afflictions, which are like the proud waves, not suffering
them to proceed further than is for his glory and his people's good, and
remove all obstacles in their way; see [Isa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015) or destroy their enemies, which
are like the proud waters, that otherwise would go over their souls, and
overwhelm them; and particularly the antichristian states, at the
pouring out of the vials, signified by the sea, and by fountains and
rivers, [Rev 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003). Kimchi explains it
of the multitude of the people:

and all the deeps of the river shall dry up; not Nile, the river of
Egypt, as Jarchi and Aben Ezra (s), but the river Euphrates; see [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012) the drying up of which signifies
the destruction of the Turkish empire; and the Targum paraphrases it,

"all the kings of the people shall be confounded:''

and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down; the pride of the Ottoman
empire, of which the old Assyria is a part, and which has been large and
powerful, that shall be destroyed; this will be at the passing away of
the second woe; and then quickly comes the third, which is as follows,
[Rev 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014),

and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away; all rule and government
shall cease; see [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010) meaning
that the kingdom of the antichristian beast of Rome, called Egypt, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008) shall be at an end; which will be
at the blowing of the seventh trumpet, and upon and through the pouring
out of the seven vials. So the Targum, the dominion of the Egyptians
shall be taken away; or its rod, with which it has smote, hurt, and
greatly oppressed and afflicted the saints; persecution shall now cease;
it will not be in the power of the Romish antichrist to persecute any
more.

\(r\) Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Vatablus, Calvin, Drusius, Cocceius.
(s) So Stockius, p. 891.

[Zechariah 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 10:12</span></span>

And I will strengthen them in the Lord,.... Not the Egyptians and
Assyrians, but the Jews, as in [Zac
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005), the Targum is,

"I will strengthen them in the word of the Lord;''

in the Messiah, by his power, and in the grace that is in him; and their
faith and hope in him, and love to him: or "by" (t) him; so that,
through him strengthening them, they will be able to do all things; to
exercise grace; perform duty; withstand temptation; oppose indwelling
sin; bear the cross of Christ; endure afflictions; engage with all their
spiritual enemies, and conquer them: for the words may be rendered, "I
will cause them to prevail", or "overcome in the Lord" (u); all their
enemies, temporal and spiritual; and even to be more than conquerors
through him that has loved them:

and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the Lord; walk in
him, the way to the Father, to heaven and happiness; walk by faith on
him, in his strength, and in imitation of him; walk according to his
Gospel, calling on his name, professing and worshipping him; and walk in
his church and ordinances, agreeably to his will; see [Mic
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005). Kimchi owns that this whole
chapter belongs to the times of the Messiah, as well as the former. The
words may be considered as a testimony to the doctrine of the Trinity;
that I, Jehovah the Father, will strengthen them in Jehovah the Son; and
they shall walk up and down in the name of the Son of God, saith Jehovah
the Spirit. Moreover, as a promise of the saints' final perseverance,
very peremptorily expressed; I "will" strengthen them, and they "shall"
walk, &c.

\(t\) "per Jehovam", Piscator. (u) "et faciam illos ut vincant",
Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 11](zac011)

</div>
