<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](hag002)  [Next](zac001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH

This book is in the Hebrew copies called "the Book of Zechariah"; in the
Vulgate Latin version, "the Prophecy of Zechariah"; and, in the Syriac
and Arabic versions, the Prophecy of the Prophet Zechariah. His name,
according to Jerom, signifies "the memory of the Lord": but, according
to Hillerus (a), "the Lord remembers": either us, or his covenant; his
promises of grace, and concerning the Messiah, of which there are many
in this book. The writer of this prophecy could not be, as some have
imagined, Zacharias the father of John the Baptist; since there must be
some hundreds of years difference between them; nor the Zacharias, the
son of Barachias, slain between the temple and the altar, our Lord
speaks of in [Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035) for though
their names agree, yet it does not appear that this prophet was slain by
the Jews; indeed the Jewish Targumist, on [Lam
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020), speaks of a Zechariah, the son
of Iddo, a high priest, slain in the temple; but it could not be this
Zechariah, since he was no high priest; Joshua was high priest in his
time; nor could he be slain in such a place, seeing the temple and altar
were not yet built; nor was this prophet Zechariah the son of Jehoiada,
slain in the court of the Lord's house, [Ch2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020) for, as their names do not
agree, so neither their office, he being a high priest, this a prophet;
nor the times in which they lived, Zechariah the son of Jehoiada lived
in the times of Joash king of Judah, two or three hundred years before
this; but this was one of the captivity of Babylon, and who came up from
thence with Zerubbabel, [Neh 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#016) and
was contemporary with the Prophet Haggai; so that the time of his
prophecy was after the Babylonish captivity, and was delivered to the
Jews that were returned from thence; and the design of it is to stir
them up to build the temple, and restore the pure worship of God; and to
encourage their faith and hope in the expectation of the Messiah; for
the book consists of various visions and prophecies relating to him, and
to the times of the Gospel; and the visions are, as some Jewish writers
(b) observe, very obscure, and like the visions of Daniel, and difficult
of interpretation. There are several passages cited out of this book in
the New Testament, as [Zac 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016) in
[Eph 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025), [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009) in [Mat
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005) in [Mat
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009) in [Joh
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037) in [Mat
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#031) which abundantly confirm the
authenticity of it. This prophet seems to have lived and died in
Jerusalem; and, according to Pseudo-Epiphanius (c), was buried near
Haggai the prophet; and with which agree the Cippi Hebraici (d), which
inform us that Haggai was buried in a cave in the downward slope of the
mount of Olives; and at the bottom of that mount was a large statue
called the hand of Absalom, near to which was the grave of Zechariah the
prophet, in a cave shut up, and over it a beautiful monument of one
stone: and Monsieur Thevenot (e) tells us, that now is shown, near the
sepulchres of Absalom and Jehoshaphat, on the descent of the mount of
Olives, the sepulchre of the Prophet Zacharias.---It is cut in a diamond
point upon the rock, with many pillars about it. Sozomen (f) the
historian, indeed, makes mention of Caphar Zechariah, a village on the
borders of Eleutheropolis, a city in Palestine, where it is pretended
the body of this prophet was found in the times of Theodosius, to which
no credit is to be given; nor is there any dependence to be had on the
former accounts.

\(a\) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 508, 957, 958. (b) Aben Ezra & Jarchi in loc.
& R. Abendana in Miclol Yophi in loc. & Kimchi in ver. 8. (c) De
Prophet. Vita & Interitu, c. 21. (d) P. 29. Ed. Hottinger. (e) Travels,
par. 1. B. 2. ch. 37. p. 184. (f) Hist. Eccles. l. 9. c. 17.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 1](zac001)

</div>
