<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac010)  [Next](zac012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 11

This chapter contains a prophecy of the destruction of the Jews, and
shows the causes and reasons of it; and is concluded with a prediction
concerning antichrist. The destruction of the temple and city of
Jerusalem, and the inhabitants of it, is signified by figurative
expressions, [Zac 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001) which occasions
an howling among the shepherds or rulers of Israel, on account of whose
cruelty and covetousness the wrath of God came upon them without mercy,
[Zac 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003) but inasmuch as there were a
remnant according to the election of grace among them, named the flock
of the slaughter, Christ is called upon to feed them; who undertakes it,
and prepares for it, [Zac 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004) but
being abhorred by the shepherds, whom he therefore loathed and cut off,
he determines to leave the people to utter ruin and destruction, [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008) and, as a token of it, breaks the
two staves asunder he had took to feed them with, [Zac
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010) and, as an instance of their
ingratitude to him, and which is a justification of his conduct towards
them, notice is taken of his being valued at and sold for thirty pieces
of silver, [Zac 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012) but, in the
place of these shepherds cut off, it is suggested that another should
arise, who is described by his folly, negligence, and cruelty, [Zac
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015) to whom a woe is denounced, [Zac
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017).

[Zechariah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 11:1</span></span>

Open thy doors, O Lebanon,.... By which may be meant, either the temple
of Jerusalem, which was built of the cedars of Lebanon;

"the gates of which are said (w) to open of themselves forty years
before the destruction of Jerusalem, when Jochanan ben Zaccai, who lived
at the same time, rebuked them, saying, O temple, temple, wherefore dost
thou frighten thyself? I know thine end is to be destroyed; for so
prophesied Zechariah, the son of Iddo, concerning thee, "open thy doors,
O Lebanon".''

So Lebanon, in [Zac 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010), is
interpreted of the sanctuary, both by the Targum and by Jarchi; or else
it may be understood of Jerusalem, and of the whole land of Judea,
because it was situated by it; it was the border of it on the north
side.

That the fire may devour thy cedars; of which the temple was built, and
the houses of Jerusalem, which were consumed by fire; unless the
fortresses of the land are meant. So the Targum paraphrases it,

"and the fire shall consume your fortresses.''

\(w\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 39. 2.

[Zechariah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 11:2</span></span>

Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen,.... By which are designed the
princes, nobles, and magistrates of the land: so the Targum interprets
them of kings and princes; see [Nah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003),

because all the mighty are spoiled; which is an explanation of the
figurative expressions in the former clause, and in the following; and
designs rich men, as the Targum paraphrases it, who at this time would
be spoiled of their wealth and substance.

Howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; which the Targum interprets of governors of
provinces; and men of power and authority are doubtless intended; see
[Isa 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013),

for the forest of the vintage is come down; or rather, "the fortified
forest"; meaning the city of Jerusalem, which was a fortified place, and
like a forest full of trees, for number of inhabitants, but now cut down
and destroyed; see [Isa 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016).

[Zechariah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 11:3</span></span>

There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds,.... Which may be
understood either of the civil rulers among the Jews, who now lose their
honour and their riches; and so the Targum, Jarchi, and Aben Ezra,
interpret it of kings; or of the ecclesiastical rulers, the elders of
the people, the Scribes and Pharisees:

for their glory is spoiled; their power and authority; their riches and
wealth; their places of honour and profit; their offices, posts, and
employments, whether in civil or religious matters, are taken from them,
and they are deprived of them:

a voice of the roaring of young lions; of princes, comparable to them
for their power, tyranny, and cruelty: the Targum is,

"their roaring is as the roaring of young lions:''

for the pride of Jordan is spoiled; a place where lions and their young
ones resorted, as Jarchi observes; See Gill on [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019). Jordan is here put for the
whole land of Judea now wasted, and so its pride and glory gone; as if
the waters of Jordan were dried up, the pride and glory of that, and
which it showed when its waters swelled and overflowed; hence called by
Pliny (x) "ambitiosus amnis", a haughty and ambitious swelling river.

\(x\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 15.

[Zechariah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 11:4</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord my God,.... The Syriac version adds, "to me"; not
the Prophet Zechariah, but the Messiah, who calls the Lord his God, as
he was man and Mediator, [Joh 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)
for what follow are the words of God the Father to him, calling upon
him, and giving him a commission to

Feed the flock of the slaughter; meaning the people of the Jews in
general, to whom Christ was sent as a prophet, to teach and instruct
them by the ministry of the word; so "feeding" is interpreted of
prophesying, by the Targum and Jarchi: and these are called "the flock
of slaughter", because of the cruel usage they met with from their
shepherds and owners, mentioned in the next verse [Zac
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005); and because they were appointed
and given up to ruin and destruction of God, on account of their sins
and transgressions; though there was a remnant among them, a little
flock, afterwards in this chapter called the poor of the flock [Zac
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007), who were the special care of
Christ, and were fed by him in a spiritual manner; and may go by this
name, because exposed to the cruelties of men, and are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter, [Rom 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036)
these Christ was called upon by his Father in the council of peace to
take care of, which he did; and in the everlasting covenant of grace he
agreed to feed them; and in the fulness of time he was sent to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, who were as sheep without a shepherd; and
he fed them with knowledge and with understanding.

[Zechariah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 11:5</span></span>

Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty,.... Not the
Romans after Christ came, into whose hands they were delivered, and by
whom they were slain in great numbers, not accounting it any sin to put
them to death; but the priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and doctors, among
the Jews, who ruined and destroyed their souls, by feeding them with
poisonous doctrines; teaching them the commandments of men, and to
observe the traditions of the elders; and to seek for life and salvation
by the works of the law, which was a ministration of condemnation and
death to them; and yet thought they did God and the souls of men good
service:

and they that sell them; as false teachers make merchandise of the souls
of men:

say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; having devoured widows' houses
and substances, under a pretence of long prayers; and enriched
themselves through tithes of everything, and by other methods; as the
Scribes and Pharisees did:

and their own shepherds pity them not; those who should have been
concerned for the welfare of their souls had no compassion on them. Aben
Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, interpret this of God, the Shepherd of
Israel; the verb being singular, though the noun is plural: so God is
called Makers, Creators, [Psa 149:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#002)
and this sense agrees with the following words.

[Zechariah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 11:6</span></span>

For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord,....
Or spare them; but cause his wrath to come upon them to the uttermost,
as it did at the time of Jerusalem's destruction by the Romans;

but, lo, I will deliver the men everyone into his neighbour's hand; this
seems to refer to the factions and divisions among themselves during the
siege of Jerusalem, when multitudes fell into the hands of the zealots,
and heads of parties, and perished by them:

and into the hand of his king; Vespasian the Roman emperor; the Jews
having declared, long before this time, that they had no king but
Caesar, [Joh 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015) and now into his
hands they were delivered up:

and they shall smite the land; that is, the Romans shall lay waste the
land of Judea:

and out of their hand I will not deliver them; as formerly out of the
hands of their neighbours, the Philistines, Ammonites, &c. and out of
the captivity of Babylon. It denotes that their destruction would be an
utter one; nor have they been delivered yet, though it has been over
1900 years ago.

[Zechariah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 11:7</span></span>

And I will feed the flock of slaughter,.... According to the call and
commission he had from his divine Father, [Zac
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004) he determines to do as it was
enjoined him, and as he had undertook:

even you, O poor of the flock; besides the people of the Jews in
general, to whom Christ was sent, and he came to feed, there were a
small remnant, according to the election of grace, he had a special
regard for; and whom he fed by the word and ordinances with himself, the
bread of life; and with the discoveries of his love, and with the
covenant of grace, its blessings and promises, the sure mercies of
David. These are called "the poor of the flock", because they were the
poor of this world, as were the disciples and followers of Christ; "the
poor have the Gospel preached unto them"; [Mat
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005) and because they were spiritually
poor, or poor in spirit, [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003) who
saw their spiritual poverty, and owned it; who bewailed it, and were
humbled under a sense of it; and sought after the true riches; and
acknowledged that all they had were owing to the grace of God: and who,
as to the frame of their mind, are the meek and humble ones; or, as to
their outward state and condition, afflicted ones, as the word (y) may
be rendered; who were persecuted, reviled, reproached, and accursed by
others, [Joh 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049) and, as to their
gifts and graces, the meanest of God's people:

And I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I
called Bands; Jarchi, agreeably to the Targum, interprets this of the
division of the kingdom of Israel into two parts, in the times of
Rehoboam and Jeroboam. Some think persons are meant. In the Talmud (z)
it is explained of the disciples of the wise men in the land of Israel,
who make each other pleasant by their doctrines; and of the disciples of
the wise men in Babylon that corrupt one another, or object to one
another: according to Aben Ezra, Zerubbabel and Nehemiah are intended:
others, the good king Josiah, and the bad king Zedekiah: others the
priest, and the king, as Abendana observes; and Kimchi explains it of
the different manner in which the Lord led the people, according to
their behaviour to him; when they behaved well, they had good kings and
governors, which led them in a right way, and they were filled with good
things; but when they behaved otherwise they had evil kings, and evil
befell them. The first of these staves some render "clemency" (a)
lenity, kindness, gentleness; and suppose it has respect to the kind and
gentle manner in which God dealt with the Jews before the times of
Christ, both as to civil and religious things; as to civil things, by
bringing them into and settling them in a pleasant land, a land flowing
with milk and honey; by giving them wholesome laws, by which they were
governed, such as no other nation had; and by setting over them judges,
to protect, defend, and deliver them; and kings to rule over them, very
wise and good, especially some of them, David, Solomon, &c.: and as to
religious things, by giving them a revelation of his mind and will, his
word, statutes, and judgments, he did not give to other nations; and by
sending prophets to instruct them in them, and stir them up to the
observance of them; and by appointing a place of worship, and settling
the form of it; setting apart men to the office of priests, and ordering
sacrifices to be offered, with the whole of temple service; which were
the beauty of the Lord, to be beheld in his sanctuary: and then the
latter, called "Bands", which some render destroyers (b), may denote
either the destruction of this people, when they sinned against God,
either by the Chaldeans or by the Romans; when severity was exercised on
them, and wrath came upon them to the uttermost, in the ruin of their
nation, city, and temple: and others think these may refer to the
different usage of the Roman emperors, with respect to the Jews, who,
for the most part, used them kindly, until the times of Nero; but
afterwards, by him and other emperors, they were treated very roughly,
until they were utterly destroyed by them; but as it plainly appears
from the context that this is spoken of no other shepherd but Christ,
and of no other feeding but his, they must design the instruments he
makes use of, and still continues to make use of, in feeding his people.
Shepherds commonly have but one staff, rod, or crook; but Christ has
two: so the psalmist makes mention of a "rod" and "staff", when speaking
of Christ as a Shepherd, [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004) and
these two staves some interpret of his twofold way of government, lenity
to his people, and severity to his enemies; but rather it denotes the
very great diligence and care Christ takes of his flock, both in guiding
and directing them, and in protecting and defending them from their
enemies: he fed his people in his own person when here on earth, with
his staff "Beauty", or "clemency"; he was sent, and came to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, and had great compassion on them, as being
like sheep without a shepherd; their present shepherds, or who bore that
name, being such as are before described: and his tenderness and
gentleness towards them appeared in his calling sinners to repentance;
in his gracious invitations to come unto him; by his kind reception of
them; his affable and courteous deportment towards them; the gentle
reproofs and suitable instructions he gave them, and the comfortable
truths of the Gospel he delivered to them; and, during his personal
ministry, he suffered his disciples to go nowhere else with his Gospel;
and, at his resurrection from the dead, ordered them to begin preaching
at Jerusalem, and to continue preaching to the Jews first everywhere, as
they did, until they rejected the Gospel; and then Christ broke both his
staves, or removed the Gospel, and the ordinances of it, which I think
are meant by these staves: for these staves are not only ensigns of the
shepherd, as instruments of guiding, directing, and protecting the
flock; but emblematical, as their names show; and emblems they might be
of the stay and staff of food, of the whole stay of bread, and the whole
stay of water, [Isa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001) and we find
that Christ's rod and staff, in a mystical sense, are of use to feed,
refresh, and comfort, as well as to guide and direct, [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004) by the staff "Beauty" we are to
understand the Gospel, which was preached to the Jews before the
destruction of Jerusalem, which is beautiful and pleasant in itself; the
doctrines of it are so, such as those of peace, pardon, righteousness,
and salvation by Christ; and such are the promises of it, being absolute
and unconditional, sure and suitable to the cases of God's people, and
likewise its ministers, [Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007) and
the ordinances of it comely and lovely; and besides, it sets forth the
beauty of Christ, and represents the saints' beautifulness in him; and
it is like the shepherd's staff; of great use in feeding the flock, not
only by supplying with food, being food itself, milk for babes, and meat
for strong men; and by directing to Christ, his covenant and church,
where it is to be had; but by setting right such who are going in wrong
pastures; pushing forward such as are backward to duty; fetching back
such as are driven away, or backslidden, and preserving the whole from
wolves and bears: and by the other staff, "Bands", the ordinances of the
Gospel are designed, which are of use to keep the saints together, and
to direct them to proper food; particularly the ordinance of the Lord's
supper, which, as it is a feeding ordinance, and sets forth Christ, as
food for faith, his flesh which is meat indeed, and his blood which is
drink indeed; so it is a knitting and uniting ordinance, and is fitly
expressed by "bands"; is not only a means of knitting the affections to
Christ, whose love is so fully expressed in it; but of uniting the
hearts of believers to one another, who herein become one bread, and one
body, and feed together; and have communion with each other, and
maintain their church state in a comfortable manner; and keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace; and the ordinances of the Gospel,
though they are such bonds as are disagreeable to graceless persons, who
are for breaking them asunder; yet they are a yoke that is easy, and a
burden light to the people of God, [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003). It may be observed, that the word
for "bands" is rendered "pilots", [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008) and masters or governors of
ships, [Jon 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#006) and is so rendered
here (c); and as churches may be compared to ships, [Rev
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009) so may ministers of the word to
those who have the government and direction of them; and whose business
lies in the ministration of the word, and the administration of
ordinances, and taking care of the discipline of the Gospel: this seems
to be the evangelic sense of these words; and they express the manner in
which Christ fed his own dear people in Judea, partly by his own
ministry, and partly by the ministry of his apostles, while he had an
interest there, until the sins of that nation brought utter ruin upon
them. It is a most ridiculous application made of these two staves by
Antoninus, archbishop of Florence (d), that Zechariah, being of the
Dominican order, took to him in the person of God two staves; the one he
called "Beauty", which is the order of the preaching Friars; and the
other "Bands", which is the order of the Minors:

and I fed the flock; with the said staves, as he had determined; which
includes the doing of the whole office of a shepherd; taking an exact
account of his sheep, that none be lost; going before them, and setting
them an example in the exercise of grace and discharge of duty; leading
them to the still waters of his Father's love; to the fountains and
fulness of his own grace; to the rich provisions of his house, and the
green pastures of Gospel ordinances; feeding them himself, and with
himself, the bread of life, the hidden and heavenly manna; appointing
shepherds under him, whom he qualifies to be pastors, gives them to his
churches as such, and who receive from him the doctrines of the Gospel
to feed them with; and protecting them from all their enemies, the
roaring lion, Satan, wolves in sheep's clothing, false teachers, and the
world's goats, who thrust with side and shoulder, and push with their
horns of power; as well as by seeking that which is lost; bringing back
that which is driven, or drawn away; binding up that which is broken;
strengthening the weak; healing the sick; and watching over the whole
flock night and day, lest any hurt them.

\(y\) "mites de grege", Grotius; "afflictos pecoris", Montanus;
"afflictos gregis", Burkius. (z) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 24. 1. (a)
"clementia", Cocceius. (b) "perditores", Munster; "destructores",
Vatablus; "perdentes", Burkius. (c) "Nautae, vel gubernatores",
Cocceius. (d) Apud Quistorpium in loc.

[Zechariah 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 11:8</span></span>

Three shepherds also I cut off in one month,.... Not Moses, Aaron, and
Miriam, as is suggested in the Talmud (e); nor David, Adonijah, and
Joab, who died in the space of a month; nor the three kings, Jehoash,
Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah, who died by the hand of their enemies in a very
little time; which is the sense of some, as Abendana observes; nor the
three last prophets, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, according to Aben
Ezra; nor the three Maccabees, Judas, Jonathan, and Simon, as Abarbinel;
rather the three sects among the Jews, the Pharisees, Sadducees, and
Essenes, instead of which last some put the Herodians; and others the
Scribes; though some are of opinion that the three sanhedrim or courts
of judicature among the Jews are designed; but it seems best of all to
interpret them of the three orders of magistrates among them, princes,
prophets, and priests; and the "cutting" them "off" may denote the
cessation of civil government, the sealing up of vision and prophecy,
and the putting an end to sacrifice; which is much better than to
interpret them of the three Roman emperors who succeeded Nero; that is,
Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, who were put to death by their own subjects,
within the space of a year and some days (f); and which is a term of
time that can not well be thought to be expressed by a month; which
either signifies in general a small space of time; or, if a certain
month is meant, either it designs the month Nisan, in which Christ
suffered, when of right sacrifice should have ceased, as well as then
prophecy was sealed up, and there was no more of it among the Jews, nor
any civil government in their hands: or else the month Ab, in which the
city of Jerusalem was burnt; and so an end was put in fact to all the
above offices there. It may be that a month of years is intended, as in
[Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002) and so Abarbinel here
interprets it; though he applies it to the times of the Maccabees; but
it may respect the thirty years, or thereabout, which were between the
death of Christ and the destruction of Jerusalem, within which compass
of time the above events were actually and manifestly fulfilled:

and my soul loathed them; because they did not perform the duties of
their office; the civil magistrate did not govern according to the laws
of God; the prophets did not teach sound doctrine; and the priests did
not do their service aright, nor teach the people the use and end of
sacrifices, and in them direct to the Messiah, as they should have done:
wherefore Christ expressed his dislike of them by words in his ministry,
particularly in Matthew chapter twenty three, [Mat
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#001) and by deeds, causing vengeance
to come upon them to the entire removal of them: or, "my soul was
shortened", or "contracted in them", or "towards them" (g); his
affections were lessened towards them; he loathed their ways and works,
which were not good; and he rejected and cast them off as his people,
and wrote a "loammi" on them; took away his Gospel from them, and
abolished their civil and church state:

and their soul also abhorred me; which is the reason of the former; and
so the Targum paraphrases it,

"and my Word cast them away, because their soul abhorred my worship;''

all ranks and orders of men among the Jews had Christ in abhorrence;
they abhorred his person, his name, his miracles, his doctrines, his
ordinances, and his people; this they did because of his mean
appearance; and because of his inveighing against their traditions,
superstitions, and immoralities; and this appeared by their contemptuous
rejection of him as the Messiah; by their crucifixion of him; and by
persecuting his disciples and followers.

\(e\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 9. 1. (f) Calmet's Dictionary, in the word
"Shepherds". (g) "et abbreviata est anima mea in eis", Montanus,
Cocceius, Burkius; "coarctata est", Calvin; "contractabatur, vel
contrahetsese", Vatablus; "contracta est", Drusius, Grotius.

[Zechariah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 11:9</span></span>

Then said I, I will not feed you,.... That is, any longer; either
personally, or by his apostles; he fed them himself, during his public
ministry; and afterwards by his apostles, whom he ordered to preach the
Gospel to the Jews first; but that being contradicted, blasphemed, and
despised by them, they were ordered to turn away from them, and go to
the Gentiles: this shows that not the shepherds only, but the body of
the people, abhorred Christ and his Gospel: and therefore it was taken
away from them:

that that dieth, let it die; literally, by the pestilence, that going by
the name of death in Scripture; and spiritually, they that are dead in
sin, let them continue so; let them die through famine of the word they
have despised; let them die in their sins, and die the second death,
they justly deserve:

and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; literally, by the
sword; spiritually, the meaning is, that whereas some were in righteous
judgment appointed to ruin, vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; let
them be left to themselves, to a judicial blindness, and hardness of
heart, and be cut off as unfruitful branches, and be no more in a church
state here, and hereafter cast into everlasting burnings:

and let the rest eat everyone the flesh of another; through famine; or
destroy each other in their internal divisions, which was the case of
the Jews, when Jerusalem was besieged; see [Gal
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015).

[Zechariah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 11:10</span></span>

And I took my staff, even Beauty, and cut it asunder,.... Signifying
that he dropped his pastoral care of them: the Gospel indeed, which is
meant by the staff "Beauty", cannot be made void; it will have its
designed effect; it is the everlasting Gospel, and will endure; its
blessings, promises, doctrines, ordinances, and ministers, shall
continue, till all the elect are gathered in, even unto the second
coming of Christ: but then it may be removed from one place to another;
it may be taken from one people, and given to another; and which is
generally owing to contempt of it, unfruitfulness under it, and
indifference to it; and this is the case here, it designs the taking
away of the Gospel from the Jews, who despised it, and the carrying of
it into the Gentile world; see [Mat
21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043),

that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the people; not
the covenant of works, that was made with all mankind in Adam; that was
broke, not by the Lord, but by man; and was broke before the Gospel was
published; nor the covenant of grace, for this was not made with all the
people, nor can it be broken; but the Mosaic economy, the Sinai
covenant, called the old covenant, which gradually vanished away: it was
of right abolished at the death of Christ; when the Gospel was entirely
removed, it more appeared to be so; and this was thoroughly done at the
destruction of the city and temple. The last clause may be rendered,
"which" covenant "I have made with all the people"; the Gentiles, having
promised and given orders to send the Gospel unto them, which was
accordingly done.

[Zechariah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 11:11</span></span>

And it was broken in that day,.... In right, the day Christ died;
apparently, when the Gospel, the substance of it, was removed; and, in
fact, at the time of Jerusalem's destruction:

and so the poor of the flock; See Gill on [Zac
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007),

that waited upon me; as servants on their masters; as clients on their
patron; as beggars at the door for alms; as attendants on the worship of
God, for the manifestations of himself, for the performance of promises,
and for answers of prayer: or "observed me" (h); what he said and did,
his word, and his ordinances; what he abolished, and what he instituted:

knew that it was the word of the Lord; either that Christ the Shepherd
was the essential Word of the Lord; or that the prophecies concerning
the destruction of the Jews, their civil and ecclesiastical state, were
the word and decree of God now fulfilled; or that the Gospel taken from
them is the word of the Lord, which he is the author of; his grace is
the matter and substance of; and which he speaks by his ministers; and
may be known by the matter and efficacy of it; by the refreshment and
comfort it gives; by its leading souls to Christ; and by the harmony,
agreement, and uniformity of its doctrines.

\(h\) "qui observabant me", Burkius.

[Zechariah 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 11:12</span></span>

And I said unto them, If ye think good,.... Not to the poor of the flock
that waited on him, and knew the word of the Lord, and valued it; but to
the other Jews that despised Christ and his Gospel:

give me my price; or, "give my price" (i); what I am valued at by you,
to Judas the betrayer: or the price due unto him for feeding the flock,
such as faith in him, love to him, reverence and worship of him. So the
Targum paraphrases it, "do my will". Kimchi says the price is
repentance, and good works:

and if not, forbear; unless all is done freely, willingly, and
cheerfully; see [Eze 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005) or, if worth
nothing, give nothing:

So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver; the price a
servant was valued at, [Exo 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032) see
the fulfilment of this prophecy in [Mat
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#015). The Jews own (k) that this
prophecy belongs to the Messiah; but wrongly interpret it of thirty
precepts given by him: in just retaliation and righteous judgment,
thirty Jews were sold by the Romans for a penny, by way of contempt of
them (l).

\(i\) "date mercedem meam", Vatablus, Calvin, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Cocceius. (k) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 98. fol. 85. 3. (l)
Egesippus de Urb. excidio Anacep. p. 680.

[Zechariah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 11:13</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me,.... The Prophet Zechariah, in a visionary way
representing the sanhedrim of the Jews, the chief priests, scribes, and
elders:

Cast it unto the potter; for the purchase of his field, in order to make
a burying ground of it for strangers:

a goodly price that I was prised at of them; this is sarcastically said;
meaning that it was a very poor price; and showed that they had no
notion of the worth and value of Christ, the Pearl of great price:

and I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in
the house of the Lord; it is a question with some what these pieces of
silver were; they are commonly understood of silver shekels. So the
Targum, in [Gen 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016) renders pieces
of silver by shekels of silver; and Eusebius (m) calls these here thirty
staters, the same with shekels; which, if common shekels, reckoned at
one shilling and three pence, made but thirty seven shillings and
sixpence; and if shekels of the sanctuary, which at most were but two
shillings and sixpence, thirty of these would make but three pounds
fifteen shillings; and therefore may be truly called, ironically
speaking, "a goodly price"; being no more than the price of a servant,
as before observed: but Drusius objects to this, seeing a potter's field
was bought with this money; and asks, who can believe that a field near
so populous a city as Jerusalem could be bought for thirty shekels? and
observes, from R. Elias Levita (n), that it is a rule with their
doctors, that all silver mentioned in the law signifies shekels; in the
prophets, pounds; and in the Hagiographa, talents: this is said, but not
proved: to understand these of pounds, indeed, would make the price
considerable, and sufficient for the purchase of a large field; for a
silver maneh or pound with the Jews was of the value of sixty shekels,
[Eze 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012) and thirty of these make
two hundred and seventy pounds; but then this would not in an ironical
way be called "a goodly price": and as to the objection about the
purchase of a field with such a sum of money as thirty shekels amount
to, it may be observed, what Grotius seems rightly to conjecture, that
this was a field the potter had dug up, and had made the most of it, and
so was good for nothing but for such an use, for which it was bought, to
bury strangers in. It is also a difficulty to fix it certainly to whom
this money was ordered to be given, and was given. It is here said "to
the potter"; but Jarchi and Kimchi observe, that some of their
interpreters render it the "treasurer"; and being sometimes changed for
one another; thus, the Targum paraphrases it,

"under the hand of the treasurer;''

and so others (o); and indeed the money was given to the chief priests
and elders, some of whom might be in that office, [Mat
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003) though there is no need of such
an alteration of the word, since the money Judas took for betraying
Christ, and cast into the temple to the priests, they took up, and gave
it to the potter for the field they bought of him with it; and, in the
evangelist, the phrase by way of explanation is rendered, "for the
potter's field", and may be here properly enough translated, "for the
potter"; as the particle is sometimes used (p); that is, to be given to
him for purchase money (q): and whereas the money is said to be cast, or
given to him, "in the house of the Lord", i.e. in the temple, it appears
a fact, in the accomplishment of this prophecy, that it was cast into
the temple, [Mat 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005) and was took up
by the priests; who, in all probability, sent for the potter thither,
and agreed with him for his field, and paid him his money there; for
there is no reason to believe that he had a workhouse for his business
in the temple; though it may be he had one near it; see [Jer
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001) and worked for the service of it,
since earthen vessels were used in temple service (r). The
accomplishment of all this is in [Mat
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007).

\(m\) Demonstr. Evangel. l. 10. p. 479. (n) In Tishbi, p. 130. (o) "Ad
thesaurarium", Pagninus, Vatablus. (p) Vid. Nold. Ebr. Part. Concord. p.
63. (q) "pro figulo", Cocceius; "conferendos in figulum", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "ut detur ad figulum", Burkius. (r) Vid. Misn.
Parah, c. 5. sect. 1.

[Zechariah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 11:14</span></span>

Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands,.... By which is meant,
either the removal of the form of civil government from the Jews; or the
abrogation of the Mosaic law, and the carnal ordinances of the Jews, in
which judaizing Christians joined them, until the destruction of
Jerusalem; or rather the ordinances of the Gospel, which, upon taking
that away, ceased:

that l might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel; the Gospel
and Gospel ordinances being removed from the Jews, there was no more
work of conversion among them; their church state came to nothing, and
an entire disagreement between them and the Gentiles ensued: and so it
is when God takes away his word and ordinances from a people, they are
unchurched and their brotherhood is broken, those being the bands which
keep them together; and therefore, when loosed, their unity and society
cease. There seems to be an allusion to the case of the two tribes of
Judah and Benjamin, and of the ten tribes; the former are often
signified by Judah only; and the latter by Israel or Ephraim: the
division between them was made in the times of Rehoboam, which continued
unto their respective captivities; after the Jews' return from the
Babylonish captivity, there was some show of an union between them; some
of the ten tribes returning with the Jews, and coalescing in one state;
and moreover, at their certain stated feasts, they came from different
parts of the world, and joined together in religious service; see [Act
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001) but, upon the dissolution of their
civil and church state, this friendly correspondence was broken off, and
their communion with each other ceased: and as for the Jews, after the
Christians were called out from among them at Jerusalem, and removed to
Pella, they fell into internal divisions and quarrels among themselves,
which lasted during the siege of that city; and when it was taken and
destroyed, their brotherhood and union among themselves were broken to
such a degree, that they were scattered one from another; and now know
not of what kingdom and tribe they are, whether of Judah or Israel, or
of what tribe in either.

[Zechariah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 11:15</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me,.... The Prophet Zechariah:

Take unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd; the meaning
is, that the prophet should put on the habit of a shepherd, and take a
scrip and staff in his hands, and represent a foolish shepherd,
hereafter described.

[Zechariah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 11:16</span></span>

For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land,.... Not in the land of
Judea, but in the Roman empire; and so not Herod, nor King Agrippa, as
Kimchi; nor Antiochus Epiphanes, as others; nor those wicked priests and
princes, who governed after the times of Zechariah; nor the Scribes and
Pharisees in Christ's times, though they are often called fools by him,
and were truly foolish shepherds; nor even Titus Vespasian, who
destroyed the city and temple; nor Bar Cozba, who set up for the
Messiah, and was a false one; or any other of that sort. Calmet (s)
thinks this designs the Roman emperors, successors of Tiberius, under
whom Jesus Christ was crucified. Caligula succeeded Tiberius. Claudius
Caligula, and Nero succeeded Claudius: everyone knows (adds he) the
characters of those princes, that they were truly foolish shepherds,
mad, wicked, and cruel: but rather it intends shepherd, or shepherds,
not in a civil, but in an ecclesiastic sense; all such after Christ, who
took upon them this office, but did not perform it aright, as heretics,
false teachers, with which the first ages abounded; and especially it
points at the bishop of Rome, and all under him, when he fell off from
the true doctrine and discipline of the Gospel, the man of sin, or
antichrist, as Jerom rightly observes; who, though his coming is
according to the working of Satan, yet may be said to be raised up by
the Lord, because he suffered him to rise; and by his secret providence,
and wise ordination in righteous judgment, he came to the height of his
power: with him agrees the name of a "shepherd"; he calls himself the
vicar of Christ, the chief shepherd and bishop of souls; Peter's
successor, who was ordered to feed the sheep and lambs of Christ; and
universal pastor, and a single one, that will not admit of any
associate. The character of a "foolish" one belongs to him, though he
would be thought to be wise; nor is he wanting in wicked craft and
cunning, but ignorant of the pastoral office, and how to feed the church
of God; and is a wicked or evil shepherd, as the word (t) used is pretty
much the same in sound with our English word "evil": he governing the
flock, not with and according to the word of God, but according to his
own will and laws; for his "instruments" are laws of his own making, an
exercise of tyrannical power over kings and princes, unwritten
traditions, pardons, indulgences, &c.:

which shall not visit those that be cut off; not that cut off
themselves, or are cut off by the church; but such that go astray,
wander from the fold, and are in danger of being lost; that are
perishing, as Jarchi explains the word; these he looks not after, nor
has he any regard to their spiritual and eternal welfare:

neither shall seek the young one; the lamb, the tender of the flock; he
will not do as the good shepherd does, carry the lambs in his arms, [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011) or, "that which wanders" (u);
that strays from the fold, and out of the pastures, or the right way:

nor heal that that is broken; that is of a broken and of a contrite
spirit; or whose bones are broken, and consciences wounded, through
falls into sin:

nor feed that that standeth still; that can not move from its place to
get fresh pasture, but is obliged to stay where it is, and needs supply
and support there:

but he shall eat the flesh of the fat; that is, as the Targum well
explains it,

"shall spoil the substance of the rich;''

see [Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003),

and tear their claws in pieces; take all their power and privileges from
them; all which well agrees with the pope of Rome.

\(s\) Dictionary, in the word "Shepherds." (t) (u) "errantem", Noldius;
"quod prae ruditate evagatur", Cocceius.

[Zechariah 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 11:17</span></span>

Woe to the idol shepherd,.... Or, "the shepherd of nothing" (w); that
is, no true shepherd, that is good for nothing, for an idol is nothing
in the world, [Co1 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004) and who is an
idol himself, sits in the temple of God, and is worshipped as if he was
God. [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004) and is an encourager and
defender of idolatry:

that leaveth the flock; has no regard to its spiritual concerns; does
not feed it, but fleece it, and leaves it to the cruelty and avarice of
his creatures under him:

the sword shall be upon his arm; with which he should feed the flock:

and upon his right eye; with which he should watch over it:

his arm shall be clean dried up; his power shall be taken away from him;
the antichristian states, which supported him, shall withdraw from him;
the ten kings shall hate the whore, strip her naked, eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire, [Rev 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016),

and his right eye shall be utterly darkened; not only given up to
judicial blindness, which has been always his case; but his kingdom
shall be full of darkness, [Rev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010)
his hidden things of darkness shall be exposed; all his crafty schemes
will be confounded; and all his wit, cunning, and subtlety, will cease;
and everything desirable to him will be taken away from him. His "arm"
may denote his secular power, which shall be taken away from him: and
his "right eye" his knowledge of the Scriptures, judgment in
controversies, and infallibility pretended to by him, which wilt cease,
even in the opinion of men. Ben Melech interprets it the eye of his
heart or mind; and so Aben Ezra.

\(w\) "pastori nihili", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, So R.
So. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 4. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 12](zac012)

</div>
