<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep000)  [Next](zep002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO ZEPHANIAH 1

After the title of the book, [Zep 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001),
follows the Lord's threatening of the land of Judea with an utter
consumption of it, and of all creatures in it, for the sins of its
inhabitants, especially their idolatry and apostasy, [Zep
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002), and this is represented under the
notion of a sacrifice, to which guests are bid; and which even princes,
and those of the blood royal, should not escape, nor ministers of state,
or such who filled their masters' houses with violence, [Zep
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007). Some particular places are
mentioned, where there should be a great noise of crying and howling,
and especially Jerusalem, which should be diligently searched, and its
goods become a booty, and its houses desolate, [Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010). This destruction is spoken of as
near at hand, and is described as very terrible and distressing, [Zep
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014) and as inevitable; nothing would
be able to deliver from it, [Zep 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018).

[Zephaniah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi,....
This is the title of the book, which expresses the subject matter of it,
the word of the Lord; the word of prophecy from the Lord, as the Targum;
and shows the divine authority of it; that it was not of himself, nor
from any man, but was of God; as well as describes the penman of it by
his descent: who or what this his father was; whether a prophet,
according to the rule the Jews give, that, when the name of a prophet
and his father's name are mentioned, he is a prophet, the son of a
prophet; or, whether a prince, a person of some great family, and even
of the blood royal, as some have thought, is not certain; or who those
after mentioned:

the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah; which last
name, consisting of the same letters with Hezekiah, king of Judah, some
have thought, as Aben Ezra, that he is intended; and that Zephaniah was
a great-grandson of his; and which some think is confirmed by his style
and diction, and by the freedom he used with the king's family, [Zep
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008) but it is objected, that, if so it
was, Hizkiah, or Hezekiah, would have been called king of Judah; that it
does not appear that Hezekiah had any other son besides Manasseh; and
that there was not a sufficient distance of time from Hezekiah for four
descents; and that, in fact, there were but three generations from him
to Josiah, in whose days Zephaniah prophesied, as follows; though it is
very probable that these progenitors of the prophet were men of note and
character, and therefore mentioned, as well as to distinguish him from
others of the same name, who lived

in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah: not Amos, as the
Arabic version: Amon and Manasseh, who reigned between Hezekiah and
Josiah, were both wicked princes, and introduced idolatrous worship
among the Jews; which Josiah in the twelfth year of his reign began to
purge the people from, and endeavoured a reformation; but whether it was
before or after that Zephaniah delivered out this prophecy is not
certain; it may seem to be before, by the corruption of the times
described in it; and so it may be thought to have some influence upon
the after reformation; though it is thought by many it was after; since,
had he been in this office before the finding of the book of the law,
he, and not Huldah the prophetess, would have been consulted, [Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014) nor could the people so well
have been taxed with a perversion of the law, had it not been as yet
found, [Zep 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#004) and, besides, the
reformation seems to be hinted at in this prophecy, since mention is
made of the remnant of Baal, which supposes a removal of many of his
images; and also notice is taken of some that apostatized after the
renewal of the covenant, [Zep 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)
moreover, the time of the Jews' destruction and captivity is represented
as very near, [Zep 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007) which began a
little after the death of Josiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim; to
which Dr. Lightfoot (f) adds, that the prophet prophesies against the
king's children, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah, for their new
fashions, and newfangled apparel, [Zep
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008) and therefore it must be in the
latter part of his reign; and, if so, it shows how a people may relapse
into sin after the greatest endeavours for their good, and the best of
examples set them. Mr. Whiston (g) and Mr. Bedford (h) place him in the
latter part of his reign, about 611 or 612 B.C.: there were three that
prophesied about this time, Zephaniah, Jeremiah, and Huldah the
prophetess; of whom the Jewish Rabbins say, as Kimchi quotes them,
Jeremiah prophesied in the streets, Zephaniah in the synagogues, and
Huldah among the women.

\(f\) Works, vol. 1. p. 117. (g) Chronological Tables, cent. 9. (h)
Scripture Chronology, p. 674.

[Zephaniah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zep 1:2</span></span>

I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the Lord.
That is, from the land of Judah, by means of the Chaldeans or
Babylonians: this is a general denunciation of the judgments of God, the
particulars follow: or, "in gathering I will gather"; all good things
out of the land; all the necessaries of life, and blessings of
Providence; all that is for the sustenance and pleasure of man, as well
as all creatures, by death or captivity; and so the land should be
entirely stripped, and left naked and bare. The phrase denotes the
certainty of the thing, as well as the utter, entire, and total
consumption that should be made, and the vehemence and earnestness in
which it is expressed.

[Zephaniah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zep 1:3</span></span>

I will consume man and beast,.... Wicked men for their sins, and beasts
for the sins of men; and, as a punishment for them, the creatures whom
they have abused to the gratifying of their lusts:

I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea; so
that there shall be none for the use of man, which are both delicate
food; the latter were not consumed at the general deluge. Kimchi thinks
this is said by way of hyperbole; but it is possible for these to be
consumed, as men by famine, pestilence, and captivity, and beasts by
murrain; so the fowls of the air by the noisomeness of it; and the
fishes of the sea, that is, such as were in the sea of Tiberias, and
other lakes in Judea, by the stagnation of the waters, or by some
disease sent among them; unless wicked men, comparable to them, are
intended; though they are expressly mentioned, both before and after:

and the stumblingblocks with the wicked: that is, idols, which are
stumblingblocks to men, and cause them to offend and fall; these,
together with those that made them, and the priests that sacrificed unto
them, and the people that worshipped them, should be consumed from off
the land: or, "the stumblingblocks of the wicked"; for is sometimes used
as a sign of the genitive case, as Noldius (i) observes; and so the
Vulgate Latin version and the Targum render it:

and I will cut off men from off the land, saith the Lord: this is
repeated for the certainty of it; or else this designs another sort of
men from the former; and that, as before wicked men are designed, here
such as are not perfectly wicked, as Kimchi observes; yea, the righteous
should be carried captive, so that the land should be left desolate,
without men, good or bad; for even good men may fall in a general
calamity, and be cut off from the land, though not from the Lord. The
Septuagint indeed here render it wicked men. The phrase, "saith the
Lord", is twice expressed, for the certain confirmation of it; for it
may be concluded it will be, since God has said it again and again that
it shall be.

\(i\) Ebr. Concord. Part. p. 122.

[Zephaniah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 1:4</span></span>

I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah,.... Under whom the tribe
of Benjamin is comprehended, which are only designed; the ten tribes
having been carried captive in Hezekiah's time many years before this:
not "to Judah", as beckoning to come and hearken to him, as calling to
repentance and reformation; this he had done, but was rejected, and
therefore determines to stretch out his hand "upon" them; nor "over
Judah", to protect and defend them; but "upon Judah", exerting his
power, stirring up his wrath, and executing his vengeance; and this is
dreadful and intolerable to bear! and when his hand is stretched out, it
cannot be turned back; and when laid on, can never be removed, till he
pleases:

and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; the metropolis of Judea, the
royal seat of the kings of the house of David; where were the temple of
the Lord; the ark, the symbol of his presence; the altar, where his
priests sacrificed, and the place where his people worshipped; and yet
these inhabitants should not escape the hand of the Lord, having sinned
against him; nor should these things be any security to them:

and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place; either what of
the idolatry of Baal, or belonging to it, remained among the Jews after
the ten tribes were carried captive; which must be the sense, if this
prophecy was before the reformation was begun by Josiah; or, if after,
the meaning is, what was left unremoved by him, as any of the images of
Baal, or altars erected for his worship, or vessels consecrated to his
service, or groves that were for his use; all which would be cut off and
destroyed by the Chaldeans, as well as the worshippers of him that
remained:

and the name of the Chemarims with the priests; that is, the priests of
Baal, with the priests of the tribe of Levi, who sometimes tampered and
officiated with them in idolatrous service; for the word "Chemarim" is
translated "idolatrous priests", [Kg2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005) said to be put down by Josiah, in
whose days Zephaniah prophesied; and must be the same with these, and it
is used for such in [Hos 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005) so
called, either from the black garments they wore, as some think; or from
the colour of their faces, smutted with the smoke of the incense they
frequently offered; or of the fires in which they sacrificed, or made
the children to pass through to Molech. Hillerus (k) thinks they are the
same with those heathen priests called "Phallophori"; deriving the word
from one in the Arabic language, which has the signification of the
"Phalli"; which were obscene images, carried about in an impudent manner
by the priests of Bacchus, in the performance of his sacred rites: the
carrying of them was first instituted by Isis, as Plutarch (l) says; and
if this was the case here, it is no wonder they should be so severely
threatened. Some take them to be a sort of servants or ministers to the
priests of Baal, who waited on them at the time of service; and so are
distinguished from them in this clause, taking the word "priests" in it
to design the priests of Baal; and the Vulgate Latin version renders it,
"the name of sextons with the priests". The word is used now by the Jews
for Popish monks that live in cloisters; and Elias Levita (m) thinks
these here are so called from their living in such like recluse places.
The Targum is,

"and the name of their worshippers with their priests;''

one and the other; priests of Baal, and apostate priests of the Lord;
the worshippers of Baal, and those that attend upon his priests, shall
all feel the weight of Jehovah's hand, and the lighting down of his arm
with indignation.

\(k\) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 113. (l) De Iside & Osiride. (m) Tishbi, p.
163. Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Talmud. in voce

[Zephaniah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zep 1:5</span></span>

And upon them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops,....
The sun, moon, and stars, which some worshipped upon their house tops;
the roofs of their houses being flat, as the roofs of the houses of the
Jews generally were; from hence they had a full view of the host of
heaven, and worshipped them openly; and fancied, the nearer they were to
them, the more acceptable was their service; see [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013),

and them that worship, and that swear the Lord, and that swear by
Malcham; that is, that worship the true God, or at least pretend to do
so, and swear by him when they take an oath: or, "that swear to the
Lord"; as the words (n) may be rendered; that swear allegiance to him,
to be true and faithful to him, to serve and obey him, and to keep his
statutes and ordinances; and yet they swear by Malcham also, or Milchom,
or Melchom, the same with Molech, or Mo, the god of the Ammonites. These
were such as partly worshipped God, and partly idols; they divided their
religion and devotion between them, sometimes served the one, and
sometimes the other; they halted between two opinions, and were a sort
of occasional conformists; and such were as detestable to God as those
that worshipped idols; as the Papists are, who pretend to worship God
and their images, or God in them, and with them; and so all such persons
that seek for justification and salvation, partly by their own works,
and partly by Christ, are displeasing to the Lord, and miss of the
thing; stumbling at the stumbling stone, and so fall and perish.

\(n\) "qui jurant Domino", Drusius; "qui jurant Jehovae", Cocceius;
"jurantes Domino Jehovae", Burkius.

[Zephaniah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zep 1:6</span></span>

And them that are turned back from the Lord,.... Who once were
worshippers of him, but now become apostates, and had turned their backs
on him and his worship. Some think this describes those who renewed
their covenant with God in Josiah's time, and after that revolted from
him, who must be very abominable to him; and therefore he threatens to
stretch out his hand, and pour out his wrath upon them:

and those that have not sought the Lord, nor inquired for him; profane
abandoned sinners, that lived without God in the world, and as if there
was no God; never concerned themselves about the worship of him, having
no faith in him, love to him, or fear and reverence of him; so far were
they from seeking him in the first place diligently, zealously, and with
their whole heart, that they never sought him at all; nor took any pains
to get any knowledge of him, or of his mind and will, and manner of
worship; but were altogether careless about these things, and
unconcerned for them.

[Zephaniah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 1:7</span></span>

Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord God,.... When he comes forth,
and appears in the way of his judgments, do not dispute the point with
him, or pretend to offer reasons against his proceedings, or in order to
disprove the justice of them; stand in awe and reverence of him, who is
the Lord God omniscient and omnipotent, holy, just, and true; humble
yourselves under his mighty hand; be still, and know that he is God; and
let not one murmuring and repining word come out of your mouth. The
Targum is,

"let all the wicked of the earth perish from before the Lord God:''

for the day of the Lord is at hand; the time of his vengeance on the
Jewish nation for their sins, which he had fixed in his mind, and had
given notice of by his prophets: this began to take place at Josiah's
death, after which the Jews enjoyed little peace and prosperity; and his
successor reigned but three months, was deposed by the king of Egypt,
and carried thither captive, and there died; and Jehoiakim, that
succeeded him, in the fourth year of his reign was carried captive into
Babylon, or died by the way thither; so that this day might well be said
to be at hand:

for the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice: his people the Jews, who were to
fall a victim to his vengeance, and a sacrifice to his justice, to atone
in some measure for the injury done to it by their sins; thus they that
had offered sacrifice to idols, and neglected the sacrifices of the
Lord, and especially the great sacrifice of Christ typified by them, the
only proper atoning one, should themselves become a sacrifice to the
just resentment of God; this he had prepared in his mind, determined
should be done, and would bring about in his providence; see [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006),

he hath bid his guests: or "called ones" (o); the Chaldeans, whom he
invited and called to this sacrifice and feast: or whom he "prepared",
or "sanctified" (p); he prepared them in his purpose and providence; he
set them apart for this service, and called them to it; to be the
sacrificers of this people, and to feast upon them; to spoil them of
their goods and riches, and enjoy them. These guests may also design, as
Kimchi observes, the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field,
invited to feast upon the slain; see [Eze
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#017).

\(o\) "vocatos suos", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius, Burkius; "invitatos
suos", Vatablus, Tigurine verson, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Drusius. (p) "praeparavit", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so
Ben Melech; "sanctificavit", V. L. Montanus, Cocceius, Burkius.

[Zephaniah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 1:8</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lord's sacrifice,.... When
the above sacrifice prepared shall be offered, and the slaughter of his
people made, when his wrath shall be poured out upon them, within the
time of its beginning and ending:

that I will punish the princes, and the king's children; either the
children of Josiah, who, though a good prince, his children did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and were punished by him: Jehoahaz, after a three
months' reign was carried down to Egypt, and died there; Jehoiakim, his
elder brother, that succeeded him, rebelling against the king of
Babylon, in the fourth year of his reign, fell into his hands, and died,
and was buried with the burial of an ass; and Jeconiah his son was
carried captive into Babylon, and there remained to the day of his
death; and with him were carried the whole royal family, and all the
princes, and all the mighty men of valour, [Kg2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014) or else the children of
Zedekiah, another son of Josiah, and the last of the kings of Judah, who
was carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, who before his
eyes slew his sons, and all the princes of Judah, and then put out his
eyes, and bound him in chains, [Jer
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010) and thus this prophecy had its
accomplishment:

and all such as are clothed with strange apparel; either which they put
on in honour of the idols they worshipped, as Jarchi; so the heathens
wore one sort of garments for one idol, and another sort for another; or
these were men of a pharisaical cast, who wore garments different from
others, that they might be thought to be very holy and religious, which
sense is mentioned by Kimchi; or they were such, which he also observes,
who, seeing some to have plenty of good clothes, stole them from them,
and put them on; or such who arrayed themselves in garments that did not
belong to their sex, men put on women's garments, and women clothed
themselves with men's, and both strange apparel; or rather this points
at such persons, who, in their apparel, imitated the fashions and
customs of foreign nations; which probably began with the king's
children and courtiers, and were followed by others. The Targum is,

"and upon all those that make a noise at the worship of idols.''

[Zephaniah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zep 1:9</span></span>

In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold,.... Not in a ludicrous way, who, by dancing and leaping, made
sport for persons, and brought their masters much gain, as the damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination did, [Act
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016) rather, that entered rashly and
irreverently into the house of God; or else in an idolatrous way, who,
when they went into an idol's temple, did not tread upon the threshold,
but leaped over it, as the priests of Dagon, after the fall of that idol
on the threshold, [Sa1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#004). So the
Targum,

"and I will visit all those that walk in the laws (or according to the
customs) of the Philistines;''

whose idol Dagon was: but it seems better to interpret it of such, who,
seeing houses full of good things, in a rude, bold, insolent manner,
thrust themselves, or jumped into them, and took away what they pleased;
or when they returned to their masters' houses with their spoil, who set
them on, and encouraged them in these practices, leaped over the
threshold for joy of what they had got, as Aben Ezra observes; which
agrees with what follows:

which fill their masters' houses with violence and deceit; that is, with
goods got by rapine and force, and by fraudulent ways and methods: this
is to be understood of the servants of great men, who, to feed the
ambition and avarice of their masters, used very oppressive methods with
inferior persons to get their substance from them, and gratify their
masters. Cocceius interprets these "three" verses of the day of Christ's
coming in the flesh being at hand, when the true sacrifice should be
offered up, and God would call his people to feed by faith upon it; when
all civil power and authority in the sanhedrim and family of David
should be removed from the Jews; and all friendship with the nations of
the world, signified by likeness of garments; and the priestly dignity,
the priests, according to him, being those that leaped over the
threshold; that is, of the house of the Lord, the temple, and filled it
with the spoil of widows' houses, unsupportable precepts, and false
doctrines.

[Zephaniah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zep 1:10</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord,.... In the day of
the Lord's sacrifice, when he shall punish the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem by the Chaldeans; which, as well as what follows, shall surely
come to pass, because the Lord has said it; for not one word of his
shall pass away, but all be fulfilled:

that there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate; a gate of the
city of Jerusalem so called, which suffered as the rest in the
destruction of the city by the Babylonians, and, after the captivity,
was rebuilt by the sons of Hassenaah, [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003) according to Jerom, it was on the
west side of the city, and led to Diospolis and Joppa; and was the
nearest road to the Mediterranean sea, or any of the roads to Jerusalem,
from whence fish were brought, and brought in by this gate; and very
probably the fish market was near it, from whence it had its name;
though Cocceius places it in the north corner of the east side of the
city, and so was nearer Jordan, the sea of Tiberias, and the city of
Tyre, from whence fish might be brought hither, and sold, [Neh
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#016) however, be it where it will,
the enemy it seems would attack it, and enter in by it; upon which a
hideous cry would be made, either by the assailants, the Chaldeans, at
their attack upon it, and entrance through it; or by the inhabitants of
it, or that were nearest to it, upon their approach, or both:

and an howling from the second; either from the second gate; and if the
fish gate is the same with the first gate, [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010) then this may be pertinently
called the second. Jarchi calls it the bird gate, which was the second
to the fish gate. So the Targum,

"from the bird, or the bird gate;''

though some copies of it read, from the tower or high fortress: or else
this designs the second wall, and the gate in that which answered to the
fish gate; for Jerusalem was encompassed with three walls; the fish gate
was in the outermost, and this was in the second, to which the Chaldeans
came next, and occasioned a dreadful howling and lamentation in the
people that dwelt near it. Kimchi interprets it of the school or
university that was in Jerusalem; the same word is rendered the cottage
in which Huldah the prophetess lived, [Kg2
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014) and there, by the Targum,

"the house of doctrine or instruction;''

so then the sense is, a grievous outcry would be heard from the
university or school of the prophets; the enemy having entered it, and
were slaying the students, or seizing them in order to carry them
captive:

and a great crashing from the hills; either that were in Jerusalem, as
Mount Zion and Moriah, on which the temple stood; or those that were
round about it, as Gareb, and Goath, and others; though some interpret
this of the houses of nobles that stood in the higher parts of the city,
where there would be a shivering, a breaking to pieces, as the word
signifies, of doors and windows without, and of furniture within.

[Zephaniah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zep 1:11</span></span>

Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh,.... The name of a street in Jerusalem,
as Aben Ezra; perhaps it lay low in the hollow of the city, and in the
form of a mortar, from whence it might have its name, as the word (q)
signifies; which is used both for a hollow place and for a mortar, [Jdg
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#019) unless it might be so called
from such persons dwelling in it, that used mortars for spice, and other
things. The Targum is,

"howl, all ye that dwell in the valley of Kidron;''

and Jerom thinks the valley of Siloah is intended, which is the same;
which, Adrichomius (r) says, was broad, deep, and dark, and surrounded
the temple in manner of a foss, or ditch; and was disposed in the form
of a mortar, called in Hebrew "machtes"; in Latin, "pila"; in which
merchants and tradesmen of all kinds dwelt. It is thought by others to
be the same which Josephus (s) calls "the valley of the cheese mongers",
which lay between the two hills Zion and Acra. The reason of their
howling is,

for all the merchant people are cut down; either cut to pieces by the
sword of the enemy, and become silent, as the word (t) sometimes
signifies, and the Vulgate Latin version here renders it; become so by
death, and laid in the silent grave, and no more concerned in
merchandise; or else stripped of all their wealth and goods by the
enemy, and so cut down, broke, and become bankrupt, and could trade no
more. The word for merchant signifies a Canaanite; and the Targum
paraphrases it thus,

"for all the people are broken, whose works are like the works of the
people of the land of Canaan:''

all they that bear silver are cut off; that have large quantities of it,
and carry it to market to buy goods with it as merchants; these shall be
cut off, and so a great loss to trade, and a cause of howling and
lamentation; or such that wear it in their garments, embroidered with
it; or rather in their purses, who are loaded with this thick clay,
abound with it. The Targum is,

"all that are rich in substance shall be destroyed.''

\(q\) "mortarii", Vatablus, Tigurine version; "cavi", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "loci concavi", Calvin. (r) Theatrum Terrae
Sanctae, p. 163. (s) De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 4. sect. 1. (t) "conticuit",
V. L. "in silentium redactus est", Drusius.

[Zephaniah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 1:12</span></span>

And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem
with candles,.... To find out the sins of the inhabitants of it, and the
authors of them, and punish them for them, however hid and concealed
from the eyes of others, or thought to be: this must be understood
consistent with the omniscience of God, who knows all persons and
things; nothing is hid from him; men may fancy their sins are hid, being
privately and secretly committed; but all will be manifest, sooner or
later; if not now, yet at the day of judgment; and sometimes they are
made manifest by God in this life, as here; for what the Lord here says
he would do, he did it by instruments, by the Chaldeans, whom he sent to
Jerusalem; and to whom the gates of the city, the doors of houses, and
the innermost recesses of them, were opened and plundered by them; and
all for the sins of the people, which were hereby exposed. So the
Targum,

"and it shall be at that time that I will appoint searchers, and they
shall search Jerusalem, as they that search with candles;''

and no doubt but this was literally true of the Chaldeans, who with
candles might search vaults and cellars, and such like dark places,
where they supposed goods and riches were concealed. The allusion may be
to the searching with lamps for leaven on the fourteenth of Nisan, when
the passover began, in every corner of a house, and, when they found it,
burnt it (u); or in general to searching for anything which lies
concealed in dark places, where the light of the sun comes not, and can
only be discovered by the light of candles; and denotes that nothing
should escape the sight and knowledge of God, by whom a full discovery
would be made of their persons and sins, and cognizance taken of them in
a vindictive way, as follows:

and punish the men that are settled on their lees; like wine on the
lees, quiet and undisturbed; in a good outward estate and condition,
abounding in wealth and riches, and trusting therein; and which, as the
Targum paraphrases it, they enjoy in great tranquillity; Moab like,
having never been emptied from vessel to vessel, [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011) and so concluded they should
ever remain in the same state, and became hardened in sin, or "curdled",
and thickened, as the word (w) signifies; and were unconcerned about the
state of religion, or the state of their own souls; and fearless and
thoughtless of the judgments of God; but should now be visited,
disturbed in their tranquil state, and be troubled and punished:

that say in their heart; not daring to express with their lips the
following atheism and blasphemy; but God, who searched and tried their
hearts, knew it:

The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil; which is a flat
denial of his providence; saying that he takes no notice of what is done
by men on earth, whether good or bad; and neither rewards the one, nor
punishes the other. So the Targum, as Kimchi quotes it,

"it is not the good pleasure of God to do good to the righteous, or to
do evil to the wicked;''

than which nothing is more false! the Lord does good to all in a
providential way, and to many in a way of special grace; and rewards
with a reward of grace all good men, both here and hereafter; and though
he does not do any moral evil, yet he executes the evil of punishment in
this world, and in that to come, on evildoers.

\(u\) Vid. Misn. Pesachim, c. 1. sect. 1, 4. (w) "concreti sunt", Junius
& Tremellius, Piscator; "congelati", Calvin; "coagulatos", Montanus,
Cocceius; "qui concreverunt glaciei, vel casei ad instar", Burkius.

[Zephaniah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zep 1:13</span></span>

Therefore their goods shall become a booty,.... To the enemy; the riches
they trusted in, and thought themselves so secure of; and therefore
denied divine Providence, which ought to be depended upon amidst the
greatest affluence; or otherwise the Lord has various ways by which he
can soon strip men of all their enjoyments, and dispose of them to
others:

and their houses a desolation; be pulled down by the enemy; or left
uninhabited, they being killed or carried captive, even their whole
families:

they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; not long, at least;
not always, as they expected, and promised themselves when they built
them:

and they shall plant vineyards, and not drink the wine thereof: but
before the vines planted by them bring forth grapes, and these are
pressed, and wine made of them, they should fall into the hands of the
enemy, who would drink it, and not they; and all this agreeably to what
was threatened them in the law of Moses, which they ought to have
regarded, [Deu 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030).

[Zephaniah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 1:14</span></span>

The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly,....
Not the day of judgment, but the day of God's vengeance upon the Jews,
which yet bore some resemblance to that day of the Lord, and it may be
therefore so called; as the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans had
some likeness to it, and therefore the signs of the one and of the other
are given together by our Lord in [Mat
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001) and this was a day in which he
would do great things, by the Chaldeans, and against the Jews; and this
is represented as very "near"; and repeated again for the confirmation
of it, and to arouse the thoughtless and careless about it, and who put
away this evil day far from them; yea, it is said to make great haste,
and to fly away swiftly, even faster than time usually does; though in
common it has wings ascribed unto it:

even the voice of the day of the Lord; in which the Lord's voice will be
heard; not his voice of grace and mercy, as in the day of salvation; but
of wrath and vengeance, which will be terrible; hence it follows:

the mighty men shall cry there bitterly; not the voice of the mighty men
besieging the city, making a hideous noise to animate the soldiers in
making the assault, as some; but the mighty men within the city of
Jerusalem besieged, who, when they see the city broken up, would be in
the utmost terror, and cry bitterly, like women and children, being
quite dismayed and dispirited; even the men of war upon the walls, and
in the garrisons, with their officers and generals; and if this would be
the case with them, how must it be thought to be with others, the weak
and timorous?

[Zephaniah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zep 1:15</span></span>

That day is a day of wrath,.... Both of the wrath of God against his
people for their sins; these judgments being the effects of his wrath,
provoked by their iniquities; and of the wrath and cruelty of the
Chaldeans, exercised in a furious manner:

a day of trouble and distress; to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, they
being taken and led captive, their houses plundered and demolished, and
the whole city and temple laid in ruins:

a day of wasteness and desolation; of the whole country of Judea, and
the metropolis of it; of their houses, fields, and vineyards:

a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness: as
it might be in a natural sense; the displeasure of God being shown in
the very heavens, by the darkness and gloominess of them, and the thick
clouds with which they were covered; and made still more dark and gloomy
by the burning of the city, and the smoke of it; and, in such
circumstances, gloominess and melancholy must sit upon the minds of men:
and thick clouds and darkness portend greater troubles and calamities
coming on; and the whole is expressive of great adversity; for, as light
frequently designs prosperity, so darkness adversity.

[Zephaniah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zep 1:16</span></span>

A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities,.... The
trumpet of the enemy, sounding the alarm of war against the fenced
cities of Judea, which were taken before Jerusalem; calling and
gathering the soldiers together, and animating them to the assault of
them; and blowing them in a way of triumph; and as expressive of
victory, having got possession of them:

and against the high towers; or "corners" (x); towers being usually
built corner-wise, and full of corners, and on the corners of walls of
cities; sometimes these signify princes, magistrates, and great men,
[Zac 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004).

\(x\) "pinnas", Montanus, Castalio; "angulos", Junius & Tremellius,
Burkius.

[Zephaniah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zep 1:17</span></span>

And I will bring distress upon men,.... Not upon men in general, but
particularly on the men of Judea, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; and
especially those that were in the fenced cities and high towers; and who
might think themselves safe and secure; but, being besieged, should be
distressed with famine and pestilence, and with the enemy; and more
especially when stormed, and a breach made, and the enemy just entering:

that they shall walk like blind men; not knowing which way to go, where
to turn themselves, what methods to take, or course to steer, no more
than a blind man. The phrase is expressive of their being at their wits'
ends, void of all thought and consultation:

because they have sinned against the Lord; and therefore he gives them
up, not only into the hand of the enemy, but unto an infatuation of
spirit, and a judicial blindness of mind:

and their blood shall be poured out as dust; in great quantities, like
that, without any regard to it, without showing any mercy, and as if it
was of no more value than the dust of the earth. The Targum is,

"their blood shall be poured out into the dust;''

or on it, and be drunk up by it:

and their flesh as the dung; or their carcasses, as the same paraphrase;
that is, their dead bodies shall lie unburied, and rot, and putrefy, and
shall be cast upon fields like dung, to fatten them. The word for
"flesh", in the Hebrew language, signifies bread or food; because dead
bodies are food for worms; but in the Arabic language, as Aben Ezra and
Jarchi observe, it signifies "flesh".

[Zephaniah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zep 1:18</span></span>

Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lord's wrath,.... Which they have gotten in an unjust way,
and have hoarded up, and put their confidence in; these were the lees on
which they were settled; but now, as they would be disregarded by the
Lord, as insufficient to atone for their sins, and appease his wrath,
and procure his favour; see [Job 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018)
so they would be of no avail to them, to deliver from their enemies, who
would not be bribed therewith to save their lives; the same is said of
the Medes at the taking of Babylon, [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017),

but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy; his
zeal against sin, and for his own glory, shall burn like fire; which
shall consume the whole land, and all the inhabitants of it, and was not
to be stopped by anything that could be done by them; so furious and
raging would it be:

for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the
land; burn up at once all the briers and thorns, even all that offend,
and do iniquity, and spare neither root nor branch; or, as when a field
is cleared of the stubble on it, after the wheat is gathered in; or a
grain floor of its chaff, after the wheat is separated from it; thus
with the besom of destruction would the Lord sweep away the sinful
inhabitants of Judea, and clear it of them, as he did by the sword, by
famine, by pestilence, and by captivity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 2](zep002)

</div>
