[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mlcr02)  [Next](mlcr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter III: The Irish Invasion Myths

**The Celtic Cosmogony**

AMONG those secret doctrines about the "nature of things" which, as
Ciesar tells us, the Druida never would commit to writing, was there
any-thing in the nature of a cosmogony, any account of the origin of the
world and of man? There surely was. It would be strange indeed if; alone
among the races or the world, the Celts had no world-myth. The spectacle
of the universe with all its vast and mysterious phenomena in heaven and
on earth has aroused, first the imagination, afterwards the speculative
reason, in every people which is capable of either. The Celts had both
in abundance, yet, except for that one phrase about the
"indestructibility" of the world handed down to us by Strabo, we know
nothing of their early imaginings or their reasoning's on this subject.
Ireland possesses a copious legendary literature. All of this, no doubt,
assumed its present form in Christian times; yet so much essential
paganism has been allowed to remain in it that it would be strange if
Christian infuences had led to the excision of everything in these
ancient texts that pointed to a. non-Christian conception of the origin
of things - if Christian editors and transmitters had never given us
even the least glimmer of the existence of such a conception. Yet the
fact is that they do not give it; there is nothing in the most ancient
legendary literature of the Irish Gaels, which is the oldest Celtic
literature in existence, corresponding to the Babylonian conquest of
Chaos, or the wild Norse myth of the making of Midgard out of the corpse
of Ymir, or the Egyptian creation of the universe out of the primeval
Water by Thoth, the Word of God, or even to the primitive folk-lore

\[94\]

conceptions found in almost every savage tribe. That the Druids had some
doctrine on this subject it is impossible to doubt. But, by resolutely
confining it to the initiated and forbidding all lay speculation on the
subject, they seem to have completely stifled the myth-making instinct
in regard to questions of cosmogony among the people at large, and
ensured that when their own order perished, their teaching, whatever it
was, should die with them.

In the early Irish accounts, therefore, of the beginnings of things, we
find that it is not with the World that the narrators make their
start-it is simply with their own country, with Ireland. It was the
practice, indeed, to prefix to these narratives of early invasions and
colonisations the Scriptural account of the making of the world and man,
and this shows that something of the kind was felt to be required; but
what took the place of the Biblical narrative in pre-Christian days we
do not know, and, unfortunately, are now never likely to know.

 

The Cycles of Irish Legend

Irish mythical and legendary literature, as we have it in the most
ancient form, may be said to fall into four main divisions, and to these
we shall adhere in our presentation of it in this volume. They are, in
chronological order, the Mythological Cycle, or Cycle of the Invasions,
the Ultonian or Conorian Cycle, the Ossianic or Fenian Cycle, and a
multitude of miscellaneous tales and legends which it is hard to fit
into any historical framework.

 

The Mythological Cycle

The Mythological Cycle comprises the following sections:

\[95\]

I. The coming of Partholan into Ireland.

2\. The coming of Nemed into Ireland.

3\. The coming of the Firbolgs into Ireland.

4\. The invasion of the *Tuatha De Danann,* or People of the god Dana.

5\. The invasion of the Milesians (Sons of Miled) from Spain) and their
conquest of the People of Dana.

With the Milesians we begin to come into something resembling history -
they represent, in Irish legend, the Celtic race; and from them the
ruling families of Ireland are supposed to be descended. The People of
Dana are evidently gods. The pre-Danaan settlers or invaders are huge
phantom-like figures) which loom vaguely through the mists of tradition,
and have little definite characterisation. The accounts which are given
of them are many and conflicting, and out of these we can only give here
the more ancient narratives.

 

The Coming of Partholan

The Celts, as we have learned from Caesar, believed themselves to be
descended from the God of the Underworld, the God of the Dead. Partholan
is said to have come into Ireland from the West, where beyond the vast,
unsailed Atlantic Ocean the Irish Fairyland, the Land of the Living -
i.e., the land of the Happy Dead - was placed. His father's name was
Sera (? the West). He came with his queen Dalny \[Dealgnaid. I have been
obliged here, as occasionally elsewhere; to modify the Irish names so as
to make them pronounceable by English readers\] and a number of
companions of both sexes. Ireland - and this is an imaginative touch
intended to suggest extreme antiquity-was then a different country,
physically, from what it is now. There were then but three lakes in
Ireland) nine rivers, and only one plain. Others were added gradually

\[96\]

during the reign of the Partholanians. One, Lake Rury, was said to have
burst out as a grave was being dug for Rury, son of Partholan.

 

The Fomorians

The Partholanians, it is said, had to do battle with a strange race*,*
called the Fomorians, of whom we shall hear much in later sections of
this book. They were a huge, misshapen, violent and cruel people,
representing, we may believe, the powers of evil. One of these was
surnamed *Cenchos,* which means The Footless, and thus appears to be
related to Vitra, the God of Evil in Vedantic mythology, who had neither
feet nor hands. With a host of these demons Partholan fought for the
lordship of Ireland, and drove them out to the northern seas, whence
they occasionally harried the country under its later rulers.

The end of the race of Partholan was that they were afflicted by
pestilence, and having gathered together on the Old Plain (Senmag) for
convenience of burying their dead, they all perished there ; and Ireland
once more lay empty for reoccupation.

 

The Legend of Tuan mac Carell

Who, then, told the tale ? This brings us to the mention of a very
curious and interesting legend - one of the numerous legendary
narratives in which these tales of the Mythical Period have come down to
us. It is found in the so called "Book of the Dun Cow," a manuscript of
about the year A.D. 1100, and is entitled "The Legend of Tuan mac
Carell."

St. Finnen, an Irish abbot of the sixth century, is said to have gone to
seek hospitality from a chief named Tuan mac Carell, who dwelt not far
from Finnen's monastery at Moville, Co. Donegal. Tuan refused

\[97\]

him admittance. The saint sat down on the doorstep of the chief and
fasted for a whole Sunday \[see p. 48, *note* 1\] upon which the surly
pagan warrior opened the door to him. Good relations were established
between them, and the saint returned to his monks.

"Tuan is an excellent man," said he to them; "he will come to you and
comfort you, and tell you the old stories of Ireland." \[I follow in
this narrative R. I. Best's translation of the "Irish Mythological
Cycle" of d'Arbois de Jubainville\]

This humane interest in the old myths and legends of the country is, it
may here be observed, a feature as constant as it is pleasant in the
literature of early Irish Christianity.

Tuan came shortly afterwards to return the visit of the saint, and
invited him and his disciples to his fortress. They asked him of his
name and lineage, and he gave an astounding reply. "I am a man of
Ulster," he said. "My name is Tuan son of Carell. But once I was called
Tuan son of Starn, son of Sera, and my father, Starn, was the brother of
Partholan."

"Tell us the history of Ireland," then said Finnen, and Tuan began.
Partholan, he said, was the first of men to settle in Ireland. After the
great pestilence already narrated he alone survived, "for there is never
a slaughter that one man does not come out of it to tell the tale." Tuan
was alone in the land, and he wandered about from one vacant fortress to
another, from rock to rock, seeking shelter from the wolves. For
twenty-two years he lived thus alone, dwelling in waste places, till at
last he fell into extreme decrepitude and old age.

"Then Nemed son of Agnoman took possession of Ireland. He \[Agnoman\]
was my father's brother. I

\[98\]

saw him from the cliffs, and kept avoiding him. I was long-haired,
clawed, decrepit, grey, naked, wretched, miserable. Then one evening I
fell asleep, and when I woke again on the morrow I was changed into a
stag. I was young again and glad of heart. Then I sang of the coming of
Nermed and of his race, and of my own transformation. . . . 'I have put
on a new form, a skin rough and grey. Victory and joy are easy to me; a
little while ago I was weak and defenceless.

Tuan is then king of all the deer of Ireland, and so remained all the
days of Nemed and his race.

He tells how the Nemedians sailed for Ireland in a fleet of thirty-two
barks, in each bark thirty persons. They went astray on the sea for a
year and a half, and most of them perished of hunger and thirst or of
ship-wreck. Nine only escaped - Nemed himself, with four men and four
women. These landed in Ireland, and increased their numbers in the
course of time till they were 8060 men and women. Then all of them
mysteriously died.

Again old age and decrepitude fell upon Tuan, but another transformation
awaited him. "Once I was standing at the mouth of my cave - I still
remember it - and l knew that my body changed into another form. I was a
wild boar. And I sang this song about it:

" 'Today I am a boar. . . . Time was when I sat in the assembly that
gave the judgments of Partholan. It was sung, and all praised the
melody. How pleasant was the strain of my brilliant judgment ! How
pleasant to the comely young women ! My chariot went along in majesty
and beauty. My voice was grave and sweet. My step was swift and firm in
battle. My face was full of charm. Today, lo ! I am changed into a black
boar.'

"That is what I said. Yea, of a surety I was a wild boar. Then I became
young again and I was glad. I

\[99\]

was king of the boar-herds in Ireland; and, faithful to any custom, I
went the rounds of my abode when I returned into the lands of Ulster, at
the times old age and wretchedness came upon me. For it was always there
that my transformations took place, and that is why I went back thither
to await the renewal of my body."

Tuan then goes on to tell how Semion son of Stariat settled in Ireland,
from whom descended the Firbolgs and two other tribes who persisted into
historic times. Again old age comes on, his strength fails him, and he
undergoes another transformation; he becomes "a great eagle of the sea,
and once more rejoices in renewed youth and vigour. He then tells how
the People of Dana came in, "gods and false gods from whom every one
knows the Irish men of learning are sprung." After these came the Sons
of Miled, who conquered the People of Dana. All this time Tuan kept the
shape of the Sea-eagle, till one day, finding himself about to undergo
another transformation, he fasted nine days; "then sleep fell upon me,
and I was changed into a salmon." He rejoices in his new life, escaping
for many years the snares of the fishermen, till at last he is captured
by one of them and brought to the wife of Carell, chief of the country.
"The woman desired me and ate me by herself, whole, so that I passed
into her womb." He is born again, and passes for Tuan son of Carell; but
the memory of his pre-existence and all his transformations and all the
history of Ireland that he witnessed since the days of Partholan still
abides with him, and he teaches all these things to the Christian monks,
who carefully preserve them.

This wild tale, with its atmosphere of grey antiquity and of childlike
wonder, reminds us of the transformations of the Welsh Taliessin, who
also became an eagle,

\[100\]

and points to that doctrine of the transmigration of the soul which as
we have seen, haunted the imagination of the Celt.

We have now to add some details to the sketch of of the successive
colonisations of Ireland outlined by Tuan mac Carell.

 

The Nemedians

The Nemedians, as we have seen, were akin to the Partholanians. Both of
them came from the mysterious regions of the dead, though later Irish
accounts, which endeavoured to reconcile this mythical matter with
Christianity, invented for them a descent from Scriptural patriarchs and
an origin in earthly lands such as Spain or Scythia. Both of them had to
do constant battle with the Fomorians, whom the later legends make out
to be pirates from oversea, but who are doubtless divinities
representing the powers of darkness and evil. There is no legend of the
Fomorians coming into Ireland, nor were they regarded as at any time a
regular portion of the population. They were coeval with the world
itself. Nemed fought victoriously against them in four great battles,
but shortly afterwards died of a plague which carried off 2000 of his
people with him. The Fomorians were then enabled to establish their
tyranny over Ireland. They had at this period two kings, Morc and
Conann. The stronghold of the Formorian power was on Tory Island, which
uplifts its wild cliffs and precipices in the Atlantic off the coast of
Donegal - a fit home for this race of mystery and horror. They extracted
a crushing tribute from the people of Ireland, two-thirds of all the
milk and two-thirds of the children of the land. At last the Nemedians
rise in revolt. Lead by three chiefs, they land on Tory Island, capture
Conann's Tower, and Conann himself falls by the

\[101\]

hand of the Nemedian chief, Fergus. But Morc at this moment comes into
the battle with a fresh host, and utterly routs the Nemedians, who are
all slain but thirty:

"The men of Erin were all at the battle,  
After the Fomorians came  
All of them the sea engulphed,  
Save only three times ten."  
*Poem by Eochy O'Flann, circa.* A.D. 960.

The thirty survivors leave Ireland in despair. According to the most
ancient belief they perished utterly, leaving no descendants, but later
accounts, which endeavour to make sober history out of all these myths,
represent one family, that of the chief Britain, as settling in Great
Britain and giving their name to that country, while two others returned
to Ireland, after many wanderings, as the Firbolgs and People of Dana.

 

The Coming of the FirboIgs

Who were the Firbolgs, and what did they represent in Irish legend? The
name appears to mean "Men of the Bags," and a legend was in later times
invented to account for it. It was said that after settling in Greece
they were oppressed by the people of that country, who set them to carry
earth from the fertile valleys up to the rocky hills, so as to make
arable ground of the latter. They did their task by means of leathern
bags; but at last, growing weary of the oppression, they made boats or
coracles out of their bags, and set sail in them for Ireland. Nennius,
however, says they came from Spain, for according to him all the various
races that inhabited Ireland came originally from Spain; and "Spain"
with him is a rationalistic rendering of the Celtic words designating
the Land of the Dead. \[De Jubainville, "Irish Mythological Cycle," p.
75\] They came in three

\[102\]

groups, the Fir-Boig, the Fir-Domnan, and the Gailoin, who are all
generally designated as Firbolgs. They play no great part in Irish
mythical history, and a certain character of servility and inferiority
appears to attach to them throughout.

One of their kings, Eochy \[Pronounced "Yeóhee"\] mac Erc, took in
marriage Taltiu, or Telta, daughter of the King of the "Great Plain"
(the Land of the Dead). Telta had a palace at the palace now called
after her, Telltown (properly Teltin). There she died, and there, even
in medieval Ireland, a great annual assembly or fair was held in her
honour.

 

The Coming of the People of Dana

We now come to by far the most interesting and important of the mythical
invaders and colonisers of Ireland, the People of Dana. The name,
*Tuatha De Danann;* means literally "the folk of the god whose mother is
Dana." Dana also sometimes bears another name, that of Brigit, a goddess
held in much honour by pagan Ireland, whose attributes are in a great
measure transferred in legend to the Christian St. Brigit of the sixth
century. Her name is also found in Gaulish inscriptions as "Brigindo,"
and occurs in several British inscriptions as "Brigantia." She was the
daughter of the supreme head of the People of Dana, the god Dagda, "The
Good." She had three sons, who are said to have had in common one only
son, named Ecne that is to say, "Knowledge," or "Poetry." \[The science
of the Druids, as we have seen, was conveyed in verse, and the
professional poets were a branch of the Druidic Order\] Ecrie, then, may
be said to be the god whose mother was Dana, and the race to whom she
gave her name are the dearest representatives we have in Irish myths of

\[103\]

the powers of Light and Knowledge. It will be remembered that alone
among all these mythical races Tuan mac Carell gave to the People of
Dana the name of "gods." Yet it is not as gods that they appear in the
form in which Irish legends about them have now come down to us.
Christian influences reduced them to the rank of fairies or identified
them with the fallen angels. They were conquered by the Milesians, who
are conceived as an entirely human race, and who had all sorts of
relations of love and war with them until quite recent times. Yet even
in the later legends a certain splendour and exaltation appears to
invest the People of Dana, recalling the high estate from which they had
been dethroned.

 

The Popular and the Bardic Conceptions

Nor must it be overlooked that the popular conception of the Danaan
deities was probably at all times something different from the bardic
and Druidic, or in other words the scholarly, conception. The latter, as
we shall see, represents them as the presiding deities of science and
poetry. This is not a popular idea; it is the product of the Celtic, the
Aryan imagination, inspired by a strictly intellectual conception. The
common people, who represented mainly the Megalithic element in the
population, appear to have conceived their deities as earth-powers -
*dei terreni;* as they are explicitly called in the eighth-century "Book
of Armagh" \[,Mever and Nutt, "Voyage of Bran, ii. 197.\] presiding, not
over science and poetry, but rather agriculture, controlling the
fecundity of the earth and water, and dwelling in hills, rivers, and
lakes. In the bardic literature the Aryan idea is prominent; the other
is to be found in innumerable folk-tales and popular observances; but of
course in each case a considerable amount

\[104\]

of interpenetration of the two conceptions is to met with - no sharp
dividing line was drawn between them in ancient times, and none can be
drawn now.

 

The Treasures of the Danaans

Tuan mac Carell says they came to Ireland "out of heaven." This is
embroidered in later tradition into a narrative telling how they sprang
from four great cities, whose very names breathe of fairydom and romance
- Falias, Gorias, Finias, and Murias. Here they learned science and
craftsmanship from great sages one of whom was enthroned in each city,
and from each they brought with them a magical treasure. From Falias
came the stone called the *Lia Fail* or Stone of Destiny, on which the
High-Kings of Ireland stood when they were crowned, and which was
supposed to confirm the election of a rightful monarch by roaring under
him as he took his place on it. The actual stone which was so used at
the inauguration of a reign did from immemorial times exist at Tara, and
was sent thence to Scotland early in the sixth century for the crowning
of Fergus the Great, son of Ere, who begged his brother Murtagh mac Erc,
King of Ireland, for the loan of it. An ancient prophecy told that
wherever this stone was, a king of the Scotic *(i.e.,* Irish-Milesian)
race should reign. This is the famous Stone of Scone, which never came
back to Ireland, but was removed to England by Edward I. in 1297, and is
now the Coronation Stone in Westminster Abbey. Nor has the old prophecy
been falsified, since through the Stuarts and Fergus mac Erc the descent
of the British royal family can be traced from the historic kings of
Milesian ireland.

The second treasure of the Danaans was the invincible sword of Lugh of
the Long Arm, of whom we shall hear later, and this sword came from the
city of

\[105\]

Gorias. From Finias came a magic spear, and from Murias the Cauldron of
the Dagda, a vessel which had the property that it could feed a host of
men without ever being emptied.

With these possession; according to the version given in the "Book of
Invasions," the People of Dana came into Ireland.

  
  
**The Danaans and the Firbolgs**

They were wafted into the land in a magic cloud, making their first
appearance in Western Connacht. When the cloud cleared away, the
Firbolgs discovered them in a camp which they had already fortified at
Moyrein.

The Firbolgs now sent out one of their warriors, named Sreng, to
interview the mysterious newcomers; and the People of Dana, on their
side, sent a warrior named Bres to represent them. The two ambassadors
examined each other's weapons with great interest. The spears of the
Danaans, we are told, were light and sharp-pointed; those of the
Firbolgs were heavy and blunt. To contrast the power of science with
that of brute force is here the evident intention of the legend, and we
are reminded of the Greek myth of the struggle of the Olympian deities
with the Titans.

Bres proposed to the Firbolg that the two races should divide Ireland
equally between them, and join to defend it against all comers for the
future. They then exchanged weapons and returned each to his own camp.

 

The First Battle of Moytura

The Firbolg, however, were not impressed with the the superiority of the
Danaans and decided to refuse their offer. The battle was joined on the
Plain of Moytura \["Moytura" means "The Plain of the Towers" - *i.e.*
sepulchral monuments\]

\[106\]

in the south of Co. Mayo, near the spot now called Cong*.* The Firbolgs
were Ied by their king, mac Erc, and the Danaans by Nuada of the Silver
Hand, who got his name from an incident in this battle. His hand, it is
said, was cut off in the fight, and one of the skilful artificers who
abounded in the ranks of the Danaans made him a new one of silver. By
their magical and healing arts the Danaans gained the victory, and the
Firbolg king was slain. But a reasonable agreement followed : the
Firbolgs were allotted the province of Connacht for their territory,
while the Danaans took the rest of Ireland. So late as the seventeenth
century the annalist Mac Firbis discovered that many of the inhabitants
of Connacht traced their descent to these same Firbolgs. Probably they
were a veritable historic race, and the conflict between them and the
People of Dana may be a piece of actual history invested with some of
the features of a myth.

 

**The Expulsion of King Bres**

Nuada of the Silver Hand should now have been ruler of the Danaans, but
his mutilation forbade it, for no blemished man might be a king in
Ireland. The Danaans therefore chose Bres, who was the son of a Danann
woman named Eri, but whose father was unknown, to reign over them
instead. This was another Bres, not the envoy who had treated with the
Firbolgs and who was slain in the battle of Moytura. Now Bres, although
strong and beautiful to look on, had no gift of kingship, for he not
only allowed the enemy of Ireland, the Fomorians, to renew their
oppression and taxation in the land, but he himself taxed his subjects
heavily too; and was so niggardly that he gave no hospitality to chiefs
and nobles and harpers. Lack of generosity and hospitality was always
reckoned the worst of vices

\[107\]

in an Irish prince. One day it is said that there came to his court the
poet Corpry, who found himself housed in a small, dark chamber without
fire or furniture, where, after long delay, he was served with three dry
cakes and no ale. In revenge he composed a satirical quatrain on his
churlish host :

"Without food quickly served,  
Without a cow's milk, whereon a calf can grow,  
Without a dwelling fit for a man under the gloomy night,  
Without means to entertain a bardic company, -  
Let such he the condition of Bres."

Poetic satire in Ireland was supposed to have a kind of magical power.
Kings dreaded it; even rats could be exterminated by it. \[Shakespeare
alludes to this in "As You Like It." "I never was so be-rhymed," says
Rosalind, "since Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat-which I can
hardly remember."\] This quatrain of Corpry's was repeated with delight
among the people, and Bres had to lay down his sovranty. This was said
to be the first satire ever made in Ireland. Meantime, because Nuada had
got his silver hand through the art of his physician Diancecht, or
because, as some versions of the legend say, a still greater healer, the
son of Diancecht, had made the veritable hand grow again to the stump,
he was chosen to be king in place of Bres.

The latter now betook himself in wrath and resentment to his mother Eri,
and begged her to give him counsel and to tell him of his lineage. Eri
then declared to him that his father was Elatha, a king of the
Fomorians, who had come to her secretly from over sea, and when he
departed had given her a ring, bidding her never bestow it on any man
save him whose finger it would fit. She now brought forth the ring, and
it fitted the finger of Bres, who went

\[108\]

down with her to the strand where the Fomorian lover had landed, and
they sailed togethcr for his father's home.

 

The Tyranny of the Formorians

Elatha recognised the ring, and gave his son an army wherewith to
reconquer Ireland, and also sent him to seek further aid from the
greatest of the Fomorian kings, Balor. Now Balor was surnamed "of the
Evil Eye," because the gaze of his one eye could slay like a thunderbolt
those on whom he looked in anger. He was now, however, so old and feeble
that the vast eyelid drooped over the death-dealing eye, and had to be
lifted up by his men with ropes and pulleys when the time came to turn
it on his foes. Nuada could make no more head against him than Bres had
done when king ; and the country still groaned under the oppression of
the Fomorians and longed for a champion and redeemer.

 

The Coming of Lugh

A new figure now comes into the myth, no other than Lugh son of Kian,
the Sun-god *par excellance* of all Celtica, whose name we can still
identify in many historic sites on the Continent. \[Lyons, Leyden, Laon
were all in ancient times known as *Lug-dunum,* the Fortress of Lugh.
*Luguvallum* was the name of a town near Hadrian's: Wall in Roman
Britain.\] To explain his appearance we must desert for a moment the
ancient manuscript authorities, which are here incomplete, and have to
be supplemented by a folk-tale which was fortunately discovered and
taken down orally so late as the nineteenth century by the great Irish
antiquary, O'Donovan. \[It is given by him in a note to the " Four
Master:," vol. i. P. 18, and is also reproduced by de Jubainville.\]

\[109\]

In this folk-tale the names of Balor and his daughter Ethlinn (the
latter in the form "Ethnea") are preserved, as well as those of some
other mythical personages, but that of the father of Lugh is faintly
echoed in MacKineely; Lugh's own name is forgotten, and the death of
Balor is given in a manner inconsistent with the ancient myth. In the
story as I give it here the antique names and mythical outline are
preserved, but are supplemented where required from the folk-tale,
omitting from the latter those modern features which are not
reconcilable with the myth.

The story, then, goes that Balor, the Formorian king, heard in a Druidic
prophecy that he would be slain by his grandson. His only child was an
infant daughter named Ethlinn. To avert the doom he, like Acrisios,
father of Danae, in the Greek myth, had her imprisoned in a high tower
which he caused to be built on a precipitous headland, the Tor Mōr, in
Tory Island. He placed the girl in charge of twelve matrons, who were
strictly charged to prevent her from ever seeing the face of man, or
even learning that there were any beings of a different sex from her
own. In this seclusion Ethlinn grew up as all sequestered princesses do
- into a maiden of surpassing beauty.

Now it happened that there were on the mainland three brothers, namely,
Kian, Sawan, and Goban the Smith, the great armourer and artificer of
Irish myth, who corresponds to Wayland Smith in Germanic legend. Kian
had a magical cow, whose milk was so abundant that every one longed to
possess her, and he had to keep her strictly under protection.

Balor determined to possess himself of this cow. One day Kian and Sawan
had come to the forge to have some weapons made for them, bringing fine
steel for that purpose. Kian went into the forge, leaving

\[110\]

Sawan in charge of the cow. Balor now appeared on the scene, taking on
himself the form of a little red-headed boy, and told Sawan that he had
overheard the brothers inside the forge concocting a plan for using all
the fine steel for their own swords, leaving but common metal for that
of Sawan. The latter, in a great rage, gave the cow's halter to the boy
and rushed into the forge to put a stop to this nefarious scheme. Balor
immediately carried off the cow, and dragged her across ,the sea to Tory
Island.

Kian now determined to avenge himself on Balor, and to this end sought
the advice of a Druidess named Birōg. Dressing himself in woman's garb,
he was wafted by magical spells across the sea, where Birag, who
accompanied him, represented to Ethlinn's guardians that they were two
noble ladies cast upon the shore in escaping from an abductor, and
begged for shelter. They were admitted; Kian found means to have access
to the Princess Ethlinn while the matrons were laid by Birog under the
spell of an enchanted slumber, and when they awoke Kian and the Druidess
had vanished as they came. But Ethlinn had given Kian her love, arid
soon her guardians found that she was with child. Fearing Balor's wrath,
the matrons persuaded her that the whole transaction was but a dream,
and said nothing about it; but in due time Ethlinn was delivered of
three sons at a birth.

News of this event came to Balor, arid in anger and fear he commanded
the three infants to be drowned in a whirlpool off the Irish coast. The
messenger who was charged with this command rolled up the children in a
sheet, but in carrying them to the appointed place the pin of the sheet
came loose, and one of the children dropped out and fell into a little
bay, called to this day *Port na Delig*, or the Haven of the Pin. The
other two

\[111\]

were duly drowned, and the servant reported his mission accomplished.

But the child who had fallen into the bay was guarded by the Druidess,
who wafted it to the home of its father, Kian, and Kian gave it in
fosterage to his brother the smith, who taught the child his own trade
and made it skilled in every manner of craft and handiwork This child
was Lugh. When he was grown to a youth the Danaans placed him in charge
of Duach, "The Dark," king of the Great Plain (Fairyland, or the "Land
of the Living," which is also the Land of the Dead), and here he dwelt
till he reached manhood.

Lugh was, of course, the appointed redeemer of the Danann people from
their servitude. His coming is narrated in a story which brings out the
solar attributes of universal power, and shows him, like Apollo, as the
presiding deity of all human knowledge and of all artistic and medicinal
skill. He came, it is told, to take service with Nuada of the Silver
Hand, and when the doorkeeper at the royal palace of Tara asked him what
he could do, he answered that he was a carpenter -

"We are in no need of a carpenter," said the doorkeeper; "we have an
excellent one in Luchta son Luchad." "I am a smith too," said Lugh. "We
have a master-smith," said the doorkeeper, "already." "Then I am a
warrior," said Lugh. "We do not need one," said the doorkeeper, "while
we have Ogma." Lugh goes on to name all the occupations and arts he can
think of - he is a poet, a harper, a man of science, a physician, a
spencer, and so forth, always receiving the answer that a man of supreme
accomplishment in that art is already installed at the court of Nuada/
"Then ask the King," said Lugh, "if he has in his service any one man
who is accomplished in every one of these arts, and if he have, I shall
stay here no

\[112\]

longer, nor seek to enter his palace." Upon this Lugh is received, and
the surname Ildánach is conferred upon him, meaning "The All-Craftsman,"
Prince of all the Sciences; while another name that he commonly bore was
Lugh Lamfada, or Lugh of the Long Arm. We are reminded here, as de
Jubainville points out, of the Gaulish god whom Caesar identifies with
Mercury, inventor of all the arts," and to whom the Gauls put up many
statues. The Irish myth supplements this information and tells us the
Celtic name of this deity.

When Lugh came from the Land of the Living he brought with him many
magical gifts. There was the Boat of Mananan, son of Lir the Sea God,
which knew a man's thoughts and would travel whithersoever he would, and
the Horse of Mananan, that could go alike over land and sea, and a
terrible sword named *Fragarach* ("The Answerer"), that could cut
through any mail. So equipped, he appeared one day before an assembly Of
the Danaan chiefs who were met to pay their tribute to the envoys of the
Formorian oppressors; and when the Danaans saw him, they felt, it is
said, as if they beheld the rising of the sun on a dry summer's day.
Instead of paying the tribute, they, under Lugh's leadership, attacked
the Fomorians, all of whom were slain but nine men, and these were sent
back to tell Balor that the Danaans defied him and would pay no tribute
henceforward. Balor then made him ready for battle; and bade his
captains, when they had subdued the Danaans, make fast the island by
cables to their ships and tow it far northward to the Fomorian regions
of ice and gloom, where it would trouble them no longer.

 

The Quest of the Sons of Turenn

Lugh, on his side, also prepared for the final combat; but to ensure
victory certain magical instruments were

\[113\]

still needed for him, and these had now to be obtained. The story of the
quest of these objects, which incidentally tells us also of the end of
Lugh's father, Kian, is one of the most valuable and curious in Irish
legend, and formed one of a triad of mythical tales which were reckoned
as the flower of Irish romance. \[The other two were "The Fate of the
Children of Lir" and "The Fate of the Sons of Usna." The stories of the
Quest of the Sons of Turenn and that of the Children of Lir have been
told in full by the author in his "High Deeds of Finn and other Bardic
Romances," and that of the "Sons of Usna" (the Deirdre Legend) by Miss
Eleanor Hull in her "Cuchulain," both published by Harrap and Co.\]

Kian, the story goes, was sent northward by Lugh to summon the fighting
men of the Danaans in Ulster to the hosting against the Fomorians. On
his way, as he crosses the Plain of Murthemney, near Dundalk, he meets
with three brothers, Brian, luchar, and Iucharba, sons of Turenn,
between whose house and that of Kian there was a blood-feud. He seeks to
avoid them by changing into the form of a pig and joining a herd which
is rooting in the plain, but the brothers detect him and Brian wounds
him with a cast from a spear. Kian, knowing that his end is come, begs
to be allowed to change back into human form be fore he is slain. "I had
liefer kill a man than a pig," says Brian, who takes throughout the
leading part in all the brothers' adventures. Kian then stands before
them as a man, with the blood from Brian's spear trickling from his
breast. "I have outwitted ye," he cries, "for if ye had slain a pig ye
would have paid but the eric \[blood fine\] of a pig, but now ye shall
pay the eric of a man; never was greater eric than that which ye shall
pay; and the weapons ye slay me with shall tell the tale to. the avenger
of blood."

"Then you shall be slain with no weapons at all,"

\[114\]

says Brian, and he and the brothers stone him to death and bury him in
the ground as deep as the height of a man.

But when Lugh shortly afterwards passes that way the stones on the plain
cry out and tell him of his brother's murder at the hands of the sons of
Turenn. He uncovers the body, and, vowing vengeance, returns to Tara.
Here he accuses the sons of Turenn before the High King, and is
permitted to have them executed, or to name the eric he will accept in
remission of that sentence. Lugh chooses to have the eric, and he names
it as follows, concealing things of vast price, and involving unheard-of
toils, under the names of common objects Three apples, the skin of a
pig, a spear, a chariot with two horses, seven swine, a hound, a
cooking-spit, and, finally, to give three shouts on a hill. The brothers
bind themselves to pay the fine, and Lugh then declares the meaning of
it. The three apples are those which grow in the Garden of the Sun the
pig-skin is a magical skin which heals every wound arid sickness if it
can be laid on the sufferer, and it is a possession of the King of
Greece ; the spear is a magical weapon owned by the King of Persia
(these names, of course, are mere fanciful appellations for places in
the world of Faery) ; the seven swine belong to King Asal of the Golden
Pillars, and may be killed and eaten every night and yet be found whole
next day the spit belongs to the sea-nymphs of the sunken Island of
Finchory; and the three shouts are to be given on the hill of a fierce
warrior, Mochaen, who, with his sons, are under vows to prevent any man
from raising his voice on that hill. To fulfil any one of these
enterprises would be an all but impossible task, and the brothers must
accomplish them all before they can clear them-selves of the guilt and
penalty of Kian's death.

\[115\]

The story then goes on to tell how with infinite daring and resource the
sons of Turenn accomplish one by one all their tasks, but when all are
done save the capture of the cooking-spit and the three shouts on the
Hill of Mochaen, Lugh, by magical arts, causes forgetfulness to fall
upon them, and they return to Ireland with their treasures. These,
especially the spear and the pig-skin, are just what Lugh needs to help
him against the Fomorians; but his vengeance is not complete, and after
receiving the treasures he reminds the brothers of what is yet to be
won. They, in deep dejection, now begin to understand how they are
played with, and go forth sadly to win, if they can, the rest of the
eric. After long wandering they discover that the Island of Finchory is
not above, but under the sea. Brian in a magical "water-dress" goes down
to it, sees the thrice fifty nymphs in their palace, and seizes the
golden spit from their hearth. The ordeal of the Hill of Mochaen is the
last to be attempted. After a desperate combat which ends in the slaying
of Mochaen and his sons, the brothers, mortally wounded, uplift their
voices in three faint cries, and so the eric is fulfilled. The life is
still in them, however, when they return to Ireland, and their aged
father, Turenn, implores Lugh for the loan of the magic pig-skin to heal
them; but the implacable Lugh refuses, and the brothers and their father
die together. So ends the tale.

 

The Second Battle of Moytura

The Second Battle of Moytura took place on a plain in the north of Co.
Sligo, which is remarkable for the number of sepulchral monuments still
scattered over it. The first battle, of course, was that which the
Danaans had waged with the Firbolgs, and the Moytura there referred to
was much further south, in Co. Mayo.

\[116\]

The battle with the Fomorians is related with an astounding wealth of
marvellous incident. The crafts-men of the Danaans, Goban the smith,
Credné the artificer (or goldsmith), and Luchta the carpenter, keep
repairing the broken weapons of the Danaans with magical speed - three
blows of Goban's hammer make a spear or sword, Luchta flings a handle at
it and it sticks on at once, and Credné jerks the rivets at it with his
tongs as fast as he makes them and they fly into their places. The
wounded are healed by the magical pig-skin The plain resounds with the
clamour of battle:

"Fearful indeed was the thunder which rolled over the battlefield; the
shouts of the warriors, the breaking of the shields, the flashing and
clashing of the swords, of the straight, ivory-hilted swords, the music
and harmony of the 'belly-darts' and the sighing and winging of the
spears and lances."  
\[O'Curry's translation from the bardic tale, "The Battle of Moytura."\]

 

The Death of Balor

The Fomonans bring on their champion, Balor, before the glance of whose
terrible eye Nuada of the Silver Hand and others of the Danaans go down.
But Lugh, seizing an opportunity when the eyelid drooped through
weariness, approached close to Balor, and as it began to lift once more
he hurled into the eye a great stone which sank into the brain, and
Balor lay dead, as the prophecy had foretold, at the hand of his
grandson. The Fomorians were then totally routed, and it is not recorded
that they ever again gained any authority or committed any extensive
depredations in Ireland. Lugh, the Ildánach, was then enthroned in place
of Nuada, and the myth of the victory of the solar

\[117\]

hero over the powers of darkness and brute force is complete.

 

The Harp of the Dagda

A curious little incident bearing on the power which the Danaans could
exercise by the spell of music may here be inserted. The flying
Fomorians, it is told, had made prisoner the harper of the Dagda and
carried him off with them. Lugh, the Dagda, and the warrior Ogma
followed them, and came unknown into the banqueting-hall of the Fomorian
camp. There they saw the harp hanging on the wall. The Dagda called to
it, and immediately it flew into his hands, killing nine men of the
Fomorians on its way. The Dagda's invocation of the harp is very
singular, and not a little puzzling:

"Come, apple-sweet murmurer,' he cries, "come, four-angled frame of
harmony, come, Summer, come, Winter, from the mouths of harps and bags
and pipes."  
\[O'Curry, "Manners and Customs," iii. 214.\]

The allusion to summer and winter suggests the practice in Indian music
of allotting certain musical modes to the different seasons of the year
(and even to different times of day) and also an Egyptian legend
referred to in Burney's "History of Music" where the three strings of
the lyre were supposed to answer respectively to the three seasons,
spring, summer, and winter. \[The ancient Irish division of the year
contained only these three seasons, including autumn in summer (O'Curry,
"Manners and Customes," iii. 217.\]

When the Dagda got possession of the harp, the tale goes on, he played
on it the "three noble strains"

\[118\]

which every great master of the harp should command, namely, the Strain
of Lament, which caused the hearers to weep, the Strain of Laughter,
which made them merry, and the Strain of Slumber, or Lullaby, which
plunged them all in a profound sleep. And under cover of that sleep the
Danaan champion stole out and escaped. It may be observed that
throughout the whole of the legendary literature of Ireland skill in
music, the art whose influence most resembles that of a mysterious spell
or gift of Faery, is the prerogative of the People of Dana and their
descendants. Thus in the "Colloquy of the Ancients," a collection of
tales made about the thirteenth or fourteenth century, St. Patrick is
introduced to a minstrel, Cascorach, "a handsome, curly-headed,
dark-browed youth," who plays so Sweet a strain that the saint and his
retinue all fall asleep. Cascorach, we are told, was son of a minstrel
of the Danaan folk. St. Patrick's scribe, Brogan, remarks, "A good cast
of thine art is that thou gavest us."

"Good indeed it were," said Patrick, "but for a twang of the fairy spell
that infests it; barring which nothing could more nearly resemble
heaven's harmony." \[S. H. O'Grady, "Silva Gadelica," p. 191\]

Some of the most beautiful of the antique Irish folk-medlodies, - *e.g.*
the *Coulin -* are traditionally supposed to have been overheard by
mortal harpers at the revels of the Fairy Folk.

 

Names and Characteristics of the Danaan Deities

I may conclude this narrative of the Danaan conquest some account of the
principal Danaan gods and attributes, which will be useful to readers of
the subsequent pages. The best with which I am acquainted is to be found
in Mr. Standish O'Grady's "Critical

\[119\]

History of Ireland." \[Pp. 104 *sqq*., and *passim*\] his work is no
less remark-able for its critical insight - it was published in 1881,
when scientific study of the Celtic mythology was little heard of - than
for the true bardic imagination, kindred to that of the ancient
myth-makers themselves, which recreates the dead forms of the past and
dilates them with the breath of life. The broad outlines in which Mr.
O'Grady has laid down the typical characteristics of the chief
personages in the Danaan cycle hardly need any correction at this day,
and have been of much use to me in the following summary of the subject.

 

The Dagda

The Dagda Mōr was the father and chief of the People of Dana. A certain
conception of vastness attaches to him and to his doings. In the Second
Battle of Moytura his blows sweep down whole ranks of the enemy, and his
spear, when he trails it on the march, draws a furrow in the ground like
the fosse which marks the mearing of a province. An element of grotesque
humour is present in some of the records about this deity. When the
Fomorians give him food on his visit to their camp, the porridge and
milk are poured into a great pit in the ground, and he eats it with a
spoon big enough, it was said, for a man and a woman to lie together in
it. With this spoon he scrapes the pit, when the porridge is done, and
shovels earth and gravel unconcernedly down his throat. We have already
seen that, like all the Danaans, he is a master of music, as well as of
other magical endowments, and owns a harp which comes flying through the
air at his call. "The tendency to attribute life to inanimate things is
apparent in the Homeric literature, but exercises a very great influence
in the mythology

\[120\]

of this country. The living, fiery spear of Lugh; the magic ship of
Mananan ; the sword of Conary Mōr, which sang; Cuchulain's sword, which
spoke; the Lia Fail, Stone of Destiny, which roared for joy beneath the
feet of rightful kings; the waves of the ocean, roaring with rage and
sorrow when such kings are in jeopardy ; the waters of the Avon Dia,
holding back for fear at the mighty duel between Cuchulain and Ferdia,
are but a few out of many examples." \[O'Grady, *loc. cit.*\] A legend
of later times tells how once, at the death of a great scholar, all the
books in Ireland fell from their shelves upon the floor.

 

Angus Og

Angus Og (Angus the Young), son of the Dagda, by Boanna (the river
Boyne), was the Irish god of love. His palace was supposed to be at New
Grange, on the Boyne. Four bright birds that ever hovered about his head
were supposed to be his kisses taking shape in this lovely form, and at
their singing love came springing up in the hearts of youths and
maidens. Once he fell sick of love for a maiden whom he had seen in a
dream. He told the cause of his sickness to his mother Boanna, who
searched all Ireland for the girl, but could not find her. Then the
Dagda was called in, but he too was at a loss, till he called to his aid
Bōv the Red, king of the Danaans of Munster - the same whom we have met
with in the tale of the Children of Lir, and who was skilled in all
mysteries and enchantments. Bōv undertook the search, and after a year
had gone by declared that he had found the visionary maiden at a lake
called the Lake of the Dragon's Mouth.

\[121\]

Angus goes to Bōv, and, after being entertained by him three days, is
brought to the lake shore, where he sees thrice fifty maidens walking in
couples, each couple linked by a chain of gold, but one of them is
taller than the rest by a head and shoulders. "That is she !" cries
Angus. "Tell us by what name she is known." Bōv answers that her name is
Caer, daughter of Ethal Anubal, a prince of the Danaans of Connacht.
Angus laments that he is not strong enough to carry her off from her
companions, but, on Bōv's advice, betakes himself to Ailell and Maev,
the mortal King and Queen of Connacht, for assistance. The Dagda and
Angus then both repair to the palace of Ailell, who feasts them for a
week, and then asks the cause of their coming. When it is declared he
answers, " We have no authority over Ethal Anubal." They send a message
to him, however, asking for the hand of Caer for Angus, but Ethal
refuses to give her up. In the end he is besieged by the combined forces
of Ailell and the Dagda, and taken prisoner. When Caer is again demanded
of him he declares that he cannot comply, "for she is more powerful than
I." He explains that she lives alternately in the form of a maiden and
of a swan year and year about, "and on the first of November next," he
says, "you will see her with a hundred and fifty other swans at the Lake
of the Dragon's Mouth."

Angus goes there at the appointed time, and cries to her, "Oh, come and
speak to me !" "Who calls me?" asks Caer. Angus explains who he is, and
then finds himself transformed into a swan. This is an indication of
consent, and he plunges in to join his love in the lake. After that they
fly together to the palace on the Boyne, uttering as they go a music so
divine that all hearers are lulled to sleep for three days and nights.

Angus is the special deity and friend of beautiful

\[122\]

youths and maidens. Dermot of the Love-spot, a follower of Finn mac
Cumhal, and lover of Grania, of whom we shall hear later, was bred up
with Angus in the palace on the Boyne. He was the typical lover of Irish
legend. When he was slain by the wild boar of Ben Bulben, Angus revives
him and carries him off to share his immortality in his fairy palace.

 

Lea of Killarney

Of Bōv the Red, brother of the Dagda, we have already heard. He had, it
is said, a goldsmith named Len, who "gave their ancient name to the
Lakes of Killarney, once known as Locha Lein, the Lakes of Len of the
Many Hammers. Here by the lake he wrought, surrounded by rainbows and
showers of fiery dew." \[O'Grady, *loc. cit.*\]

 

Lugh

Lugh has already been described. \[p. 112\] He has more distinctly solar
attributes than any other Celtic deity; and, as we know, his worship was
spread widely over Continental Celtica. In the tale of the Quest of the
Sons of Turenn we are told that Lugh approached the Fomorians from the
west. Then Bres, son of Balor, arose and said: "I wonder that the sun is
rising in the west today, and in the east every other day." "Would were
so," said his Druids. "Why, what else but the sun is it?" said Bres. "It
is the radiance of the of Lugh of the Long Arm," they replied.

Lugh was the father, by the Milesian maiden Dectera, of Cuchulain, the
most heroic figure in Irish legend, in whose story there is evidently a
strong element of the solar myth. \[Miss Hull has described this subject
fully in the introduction to her invaluable work, "The Cuchullin
Saga."\]

\[123\]

  
Midir the Proud

Midir the Proud is a son of the Dagda. His fairy palace is at *Bri
Leith,* or Slieve CaIlary,in Co. Longford. He frequently appears in
legends dealing partly with human, partly with Danaan personages, and is
always represented as a type of splendour in his apparel and in personal
beauty. When he appears to King Eochy on the Hill of Tara he is thus
described : \[See the tale of "Etain and Midir," in Chap. IV.\]

"It chanced that Eochaid Airemm, the King of Tara, arose upon a certain
fair day in the time of summer; and he ascended the high ground of Tara
\[The name of Tara is derived from an oblique case of the nominative
*Teamhair*, meaning "the place of the wide prospect." It is now a broad
grassy hill, in Co. Meath, covered with earthworks representing the
sites of the ancient royal buildings, which can all be clearly located
from ancient descriptions.\] to behold the plain of Breg; beautiful was
the colour of that plain, and there was upon it excellent blossom
glowing with all hues that are known. And as the aforesaid Eochy looked
about and around him, he saw a young strange warrior upon the high
ground at his side. The tunic that the warrior wore was purple in
colour, his hair was of a golden yellow, and of such length that it
reached to the edge of his shoulders. The eyes of the young warrior were
lustrous and grey; in the one hand he held a fine pointed spear, in the
other a shield with a white central boss, and with gems of gold upon it.
And Eochaid held his peace, for he knew that none such had been in Tara
on the night before, and the gate that led ,into the Liss had not at
that time been thrown open." \[A.H. Leahy, "Heroic Romances," i. 27\]

\[124\]

 

Lir and Mananan

Lir, as Mr. O'Grady remarks, "appears in two distinct forms. In the
first he is a vast, impersonal presence commensurate with the sea; in
fact, the Greek Oceanus. In the second, he is a separate person dwelling
invisibly on Slieve Fuad," in Co. Armagh. We hear little of him in Irish
legend, where the attributes of the sea-god are mostly conferred on his
son, Mananan.

This deity is one of the most popular in Irish mythology. He was lord of
the sea, beyond or under which the Land of Youth or Islands of the Dead
were supposed to lie; he therefore was the guide of man to this country.
He was master of tricks and illusions, and owned all kinds of magical
possessions - the boat named Ocean-sweeper, which obeyed the thought of
those who sailed in it and went without oar or sail, the steed Aonbarr,
which could travel alike on sea or land, and the sword named The
Answerer, which no armour could resist. White-crested waves were called
the Horses of Mananan, and it was forbidden *(tabu)* for the solar hero,
Cuchulain, to perceive them - this indicated the daily death of the sun
at his setting in the western waves. Mananan wore a great cloak which
was capable of taking on every kind of colour, like the widespread field
of the sea as looked on from a height; and as the protector of the
island of Erin it was said that when any hostile force invaded it they
heard his thunderous tramp and the flapping of his mighty cloak as he
marched angrily round and round their camp at night. The Isle of Man,
seen dimIy from the Irish coast, was supposed to be the throne of
Mananan, and to take its name from this deity.

\[125\]

 

The Goddess Dana

The greatest of the Danaan goddesses was Dana, "mother of the Irish
gods," as she is called in an early text. She was daughter of the Dagda,
and, like him, associated with ideas of fertility and blessing.
According to d'Arbois de Jubainville, she was identical with the goddess
Brigit, who was so widely worshipped in Celtica. Brian, luchar, and
lucharba are said to have been her sons - these really represent but one
person, in the usual Irish fashion of conceiving the divine power in
triads. The name of Brian, who takes the in all the exploits of the
brethren, \[p. 114\] is a derivation from a more ancient form, Brenos,
and under this form was the god to whom the Celts attributed their
victories at the Allia and at Delphi, mistaken by Roman and Greek
chroniclers for an earthly leader.

 

The Morrigan

There was also an extraordinary goddess named the Morrigan, \[I cannot
agree with Mr. O' Grady's identi6cation of this goddess with Dana,
though the name appears to mean "The Great Queen"\] who appears to
embody all that is perverse and horrible among supernatural powers. She
delighted in setting men at war, and fought among them herself, changing
into many frightful shapes and often hovering above fighting armies in
the aspect of a crow. She met Cuchulain once and proffered him her love
in the guise of a human maid. He refused it, and she persecuted him
thenceforward for the most of his life. Warring with him once in the
middle of the stream, she turned herself into a water-serpent, and then
into a mass of water-weeds, seeking to entangle and drown him. But he
conquered and wounded her, and she afterwards

\[126\]

became his friend. Before his last battle she passed through Emain Macha
at night, and broke the pole of his chariot as a warning.

 

Cleena's Wave

One of the most notable landmarks of Ireland was the *Tonn Cliodhna,* or
"Wave of Cleena," on the seashore at Glandore Bay, in Co. Cork. The
story about Cleena exists in several versions, which do not agree with
each other except in so far as she seems to have been a Danaan maiden
once living in Mananan's country, the Land of Youth beyond the sea.
Escaping thence with a mortal lover, as one of the versions tells, she
landed on the southern coast of Ireland, and her lover, Keevan of the
Curling Locks, went off to hunt in the woods. Cleena, who remained on
the beach, was lulled to sleep by fairy music played by a minstrel of
Mananan, when a great wave of the sea swept up and carried her back to
Fairyland, leaving her lover desolate. Hence the place was called the
Strand of Cleena's Wave.

 

The Goddess Ainé

Another topical goddess was Ainé, the patroness of Munster, who is still
venerated by the people of that county. She was the daughter of the
Danaan Owel, a foster-son of Mananan and a Druid. She is in some sort a
love-goddess, continually inspiring mortals with passion. She was
ravished, it was said, by Ailill Olum, King of Munster, who was slain in
consequence by her magic arts, and the story is reed in far later times
about another mortal lover, who was not, however, slain, a Fitzgerald,
to whom she the bore the famous wizard Earl. \[Gerald, the fourth Earl
of Desmond. He disappeared, it is said, in 1398, and the legend goes
that he still lives beneath the waters of Loch Gur, and may be seen
riding round its banks on his, white steed once every seven years. He
was surnamed a "Gerald the Poet" from the "witty and ingenious" verses
he composed in Gaelic. Wizardry, poetry, and science were all united in
one conception in the mind the ancient Irish/\] Many of the aristocratic

\[127\]

families of Munster claimed descent from this union. His name still
clings to the "Hill of Ainé" (Knockainey), near Loch Gur, in Munster.
All the Danaan deities in the popular imagination were earth-god; *dei
terreni,* associated with ideas of fertility and increase. Ainé is not
heard much of in the bardic literature, but she is very prominent in the
folk-lore of the neighbourhood. At the bidding of her son, Earl Gerald,
she planted all Knockainey with pease in a single night. She was, and
perhaps still is, worshipped on Midsummer Eve by the peasantry, who
carried torches of hay and straw, tied on poles and lighted, round her
hill at night. Afterwards they dispersed themselves among their
cultivated fields and pastures, waving the torches over the crops and
the cattle to bring luck and increase for the following year. On one
night, as told by Mr. D. Fitzgerald, \["Popular Tales of Ireland." by D.
Fitzgerald, in Revue Celtique," vol iv.\] who has collected the local
traditions about her, the ceremony was omitted owing to the death of one
of the neighbours. Yet the peasantry at night saw the torches in greater
number than ever circling the hill, and Ainé herself in front, directing
and ordering the procession.

"On another St. John's Night a number of girls had stayed late on the
Hill watching the *cliars* (torches) and joining in the games. Suddenly
Ainé appeared among them, thanked them for the honour they had done he;
but said she now wished them to go home, as *they wanted the hill to
themselves.* She let them understand whom she

\[128\]

 

meant by *they,* for calling some of the girls she made them look
through a ring, when behold, the hill appeared crowded with people
before invisible."

"Here," observed Mr. Alfred Nutt, "we have the antique ritual carried
out on a spot hallowed to one of the antique powers, watched over and
shared in by those powers themselves. Nowhere save in Gaeldom could be
found such a pregnant illustration of the identity of the fairy class
with the venerable powers to ensure whose goodwill rites and sacrifices,
originally fierce and bloody, now a mere simulacrum of their pristine
form, have been performed for countless ages." \["The Voyage of Bran,"
vol. Ii, p. 219\]

 

Sinend and the Well of Knowledge

There is a singular myth which, while intended to account for the name
of the river Shannon, expresses the Celtic veneration for poetry and
science, combined with the warning that they may not be approached
without danger. The goddess Sinend, it was said, daughter of Lodan son
of Lir, went to a certain well named Connla's Well, which is under the
sea - *i.e.,* in the Land of Youth in Fairyland. "That is a well," says
the bardic narrative, "at which are the hazels wisdom and inspirations,
that is, the hazels of the science of poetry, and in the same hour their
fruit and their blossom and their foliage break forth, and then fall
upon the well in the same shower, which raises upon the water a royal
surge of purple." When Sinend came to the well we are not told what
rites or preparation she had omitted, but the angry waters broke and
overwhelmed her, and washed her up on the Shannon shore, where she died,
giving to the river its name. \[In Irish, Sionnain.\] This myth of the
hazels of inspiration and

\[129\]

knowledge and their association with springing water runs through all
Irish legend, and has been finely treated by a living Irish poet, Mr. G.
W. Russell, in the following verses:

"A cabin on the mountain-side hid in a grassy nook,  
With door and window open wide, where friendly stars may look;  
The rabbit shy may patter in, the winds may enter free  
Who roam around the mountain throne in living ecstasy.

"And when the sun sets dimmed in eve, and purple fills the air,  
I think the sacred hazel-tree is dropping berries there,  
From starry fruitage, waved aloft where Connla's Well o'erflows  
For sure, the immortal waters run through every wind that blows.

"I think when Night towers up aloft and shakes the trembling dew,  
How every high and lonely thought that thrills my spirit through  
Is but a shining berry dropped down through the purple air,  
And from the magic tree of life the fruit falls everywhere."

 

The Coming of the Milesians

After the Second Battle of Moytura the Danaans held rule in Ireland
until the coming of the Milesians, the sons of Miled. These are
conceived in Irish legend as an entirely human race, yet in their origin
they, like the other invaders of Ireland, go back to a divine and
mythical ancestry. Miled, whose name occurs as a god in a Celtic
inscription from Hungary, is represented as a son of Bilé. Bilé, like
Balor, is one of the names of the god of Death, *i.e.,* of the
Underworld. They come from "Spain "- the usual term employed by the
later rationalising historians for the Land of the Dead.

The manner of their coming into Ireland was as follows: Ith, the
grandfather of Miled, dwelt in a great tower which his father, Bregon,
had built in "Spain." One clear winter's day, when looking out westwards
from this lofty tower, he saw the coast of Ireland in the distance, and
resolved to sail to the unknown land.

\[130\]

He embarked with ninety warriors, and took land at Corcadyna, in the
south-west. In connexion with this episode I may quote a passage of
great beauty and interest from de Jubainville's "irish Mythological
Cycle : \[Translation by R. I. Best\]

"According to an unknown writer cited by Plutarch, who died about the
year 120 of the present era, and also by Procopius, who wrote in the
sixth century A.D., 'the Land of the Dead' is the western extremity of
Great Britain, separated from the eastern by an impassable wall. On the
northern coast of Gaul, says the legend, is a populace of mariners whose
business is to carry the dead across from the continent to their last
abode in the island of Britain. The mariners, awakened in the night by
the whisperings of some mysterious voice, arise and go down to the
shore, where they find ships awaiting them which are not their own,
\[The solar vessels found in dolmen carvings. See Chap. II. P. 71 *sqq.*
Note that the Celtic spirits, though invisible, are material and have
weight; not so those in Vergil and Dante.\] and, in these, invisible
beings, under whose weight the vessels sink almost to the gunwales. They
go on board, and with a single stroke of the oar, says one text, in one
hour, says another, they arrive at their destination, though with their
own vessels, aided by sails, it would taken them at least a day and a
night to reach the coast of Britain. When they come to the other shore
invisible passengers land, and at the same time the unloaded ships are
seen to rise above the waves, and a is heard announcing the names of the
new arrivals, who have just been added to the inhabitants of the of the
Dead.

"One stroke of the oar, one hour's voyage at most, for the midnight
journey which transfers the

\[131\]

Dead from he Gaulish continent to their final abode. Some mysterious
law, indeed, brings together in the night the great spaces which divide
the domain of the living from that of the dead in daytime. It was the
same law which enabled Ith one fine winter evening to perceive from the
Tower of Bregon, in the Land of the Dead, the shores of Ireland, or the
land of the living. The phenomenon took place in winter; for winter is a
sort of night; winter, like night, lowers the barriers between the
regions of Death and those of Life ; like night, winter gives to life
the semblance of death, and suppresses, as it were, the dread abyss that
lies between the two.''

At this time, it is said, Ireland was ruled by three Danaan kings,
grandsons of the Dagda. Their names were MacCuill, MacCecht, and
MacGrené, and their wives were named respectively Banba, Fohla, and
Eriu. The Celtic habit of conceiving divine persons in triads is here
illustrated. These triads represent one person each, and the mythical
character of that personage is. evident from the name of one of them,
MacGrené, Son of the Sun. The names of the three goddesses have; each at
different times been applied to Ireland, but that of the third, Eriu,
has alone persisted, and in the dative form, Erinn, is a poetic name for
the country to this day. That Eriu is the wife of MacGrené means, as de
Jubainville observes, that the Sun-god, the god of Day, Life, and
Science, has wedded the land and is reigning over it.

Ith, on landing, finds that the Danaan king, Neit, has just been slain
in a battle with the Fomorians, and the three sons, MacCuill and the
others, are at the fortress of Aileach, in Co. Donegal, arranging for a
division of the land among themselves. At first they.

\[132\]

welcome Ith, and ask him to settle their inheritance. Ith gives his
judgment, but, in concluding, big admiration for the newly discovered
country breaks out: "Act," he says, "according to the laws of justice,
for the country you dwell in is a good one, it is rich in fruit and
honey, in wheat and in fish; and in heat and cold it is temperate." From
this panegyric the Danaans conclude that Ith has designs upon their
land, and they seize him and put him to death. His companions, however,
recover his body and hear it back with them in their ships to "Spain";
when the children of Miled resolve to take vengeance for the outrage and
prepare to invade Ireland.

They were commanded by thirty-six chiefs, each having his own ship with
his family and his followers. Two of the company are said to have
perished on the way. One of the sons of Miled, having climbed to the
masthead of his vessel to look out or the coast of Ireland, fell into
the sea and was drowned. The other was Skena, wife of the poet Amergin,
son of Miled, who died on the way. The Milesians buried her when they
landed, and called the place "Inverskena" after her; this was the
ancient name of the Kenmare River Co*.* Kerry.

"It was on a Thursday, the first of May, and the seventeenth day of the
moon, that the sons of Miled arrived in Ireland. Partholan also landed
in Ireland the first of May, but on a different day of the week of the
moon ; and it was on the first day of May, that the pestilence came
which in the space of one destroyed utterly his race. The first of May
was sacred to Beltené, one of the names of the god of Death, the god who
gives life to men and takes it away from them again. Thus it was on the
feast day

\[133\]

of this god that the sons of Miled began their conquest of Ireland."

\[De Jubainville, "Irish Mythological Cycle," p.136. Beltené is the
modern Irish name for the month of May, and is derived from an ancient
root preserved in the Old Irish compound *epelta*, "dead".\]

 

The Poet Amergin

When the poet Amergin set foot upon the soil of Ireland it is said that
he chanted a strange and mystical lay:

I am the Wind that blows over the sea,  
I am the Wave of the Ocean;  
I am the Murmur of the billows;  
lam the Ox ofthe Seven Combats;  
lam the Vulture upon the rock;  
I am a Ray of the Sun;  
I am the fairest of Plants;  
I am a Wild Boar in valour;  
I am a Salmon in the Water;  
I am a Lake in the plain;  
lam the Craft of the artificer;  
I am a Word of Science;  
I am the Spear-point that gives battle;  
I am the god that creates in the head of man the fire of thought.  
Who is it that enlightens the assembly upon the mountain, if not I?  
Who telleth the ages of the moon, if not I?  
Who showeth the place where the sun goes to rest, if not I?"

De Jubainville, whose translation I have in the main followed, observes
upon this strange utterance:

"There is a lack of order in this composition, the ideas, fundamental
and subordinate, are jumbled together without method; but there is no
doubt as to the meaning: the *filé* \[poet\] is the Word of Science, he
is the god who gives to man the fire of thought; and as science is not
distinct from its object, as God and Nature are but one, the being of
the *filé* is mingled with the

\[134\]

winds and the waves, with the wild animals and the warrior's arms."  
\["Irish Mythological Cycle," p. 138\]

Two other poems are attributed to Amergin, in which he invokes the land
and physical features of Ireland to aid him:

"I invoke the land of Ireland,  
Shining, shining sea,  
Fertile, fertile Mountain;  
Gladed, gladed wood !  
Abundant river, abundant in water !  
Fish-abounding lake!"  
  
\[I have again followed de Jubainville's translation; but in connexion
with this and the previous poems see also Ossianic Society's
"Transactions," vol. V.\]

 

The Judgment of Amergin

The Milesian host, after landing, advance to Tara, where they find the
three kings of the Danaans awaiting them, and summon them to deliver up
the island. The Danaans ask for three days' time to consider whether
they shall quit Ireland, or submit, or give battle; and they propose to
leave the decision, upon request, to Amergin. Amergin pronounces
judgement - "the first judgment which was delivered in Ireland." He
agrees that the Milesians must not take foes by surprise - they are to
withdraw the length nine waves from the shore, and then return; if then
conquer the Danaans the land is to be fairly by right of battle.

The Milesians submit to this decision and embark their ships. But no
sooner have they drawn off for this mystical distance of the nine waves
than a mist and storm are raised by the sorceries of the Danaan - the
coast of Ireland is hidden from their sight, and they wander dispersed
upon the ocean. To ascertain if it is

\[135\]

a natural or a Druidic tempest which afflicts them, a man named Aranan
is sent up to the masthead to see if the wind is blowing there also or
not He is flung from the swaying mast, but as he falls to his death he
cries his message to his shipmates: "There is no storm aloft." Amergin,
who as poet - that is to say, Druid - takes the lead in all critical
situations, thereupon chants his incantation to the land of Erin. The
wind falls, and they turn their prows, rejoicing, towards the shore. But
one of the Milesian lords, Eber Donn, exults in brutal rage at the
prospect of putting all the dwellers in Ireland to the sword; the
tempest immediately springs up again, and many of the Milesian ships
founder, Eber Donn's being among them. At last a remnant of the
Milesians find their way to shore, and land in the estuary of the Boyne.

 

The Defeat of the Danaans

A great battle with the Danaans at Telltown \[Teltin; so named after the
goddess Telta. See p. 103\] then follows. The three kings and three
queens of the Danaans, with many of their people, are slain, and the
children of Miled - the last of the mythical invaders of Ireland - enter
upon the sovranty of Ireland. But the People of Dana do not withdraw. By
their magic art they cast over themselves a veil of invisibility, which
they can put on or off as they choose. There are two Irelands
henceforward, the spiritual and the earthly. The Danaans dwell in the
spiritual Ireland, which is portioned out among them by their great
overlord, the Dagda. Where the human eye can see but green mounds and
ramparts, the relics of ruined fortresses or sepulchres, there rise the
fairy palaces of the defeated divinities; there they hold their revels
in eternal sun-shine, nourished by the magic meat and ale that give

\[136\]

them undying youth and beauty ; and thence they come forth at times to
mingle with mortal men in love or in war. The ancient mythical
literature conceives them as heroic and splendid in strength and beauty.
In later times, and as Christian influences grew stronger, they dwindle
into fairies, the People of the Sidhe; \[Pronounced "Shee". It means
literally the People of the \[Fairy\] Mounds\] but they have never
wholly perished; to this day the Land of Youth and its inhabitants live
in the imagination of the Irish peasant.

 

The Meaning of the Danaan Myth

All myths constructed by a primitive people are symbols, and if we can
discover what it is that they symbolise, we have a valuable clue to the
spiritual character and sometimes even to the history, of the people
from whom they sprang. Now the meaning of the Danaan myth as it appears
in the bardic literature, though it has undergone much distortion before
it reached us, is perfectly clear. The Danaans represent the Celtic
reverence for science, poetry, and artistic skill, blended, of course,
with the earlier conception of the divinity of the powers of Light. In
their combat with the Firbolgs the victory of the intellect over
dullness and ignorance is plainly portrayed - the comparison of the
heavy, blunt weapon of the Firbolgs with the light and penetrating
spears of the People of Dana is an indication which it is impossible to
mistake. Again, in their struggle with a far more powerful and dangerous
enemy, the Fomorians, we are evidently to see the combat of the powers
of Light with evil of a more positive kind than that represented by the
Firbolgs. The Fomorians stand not for mere dullness or

\[137\]

stupidity, but for the forces of tyranny, cruelty, and greed - for moral
rather than for intellectual darkness.

 

The Meaning of the Milesian Myth

But the myth of the struggle of the Danaans with the sons of Miled is
more difficult to interpret. How does it come that the lords of light
and beauty, wielding all the powers of thought (represented by magic and
sorcery), succumbed to a human race, and were dispossessed by them of
their hard-won inheritance? What is the meaning of this shrinking of
their powers which at once took place when the Milesians came on the
scene? The Milesians were not on the side of the powers of darkness.
They were guided by Amergin, a clear embodiment of the idea of poetry
and thought. They were regarded with the utmost veneration, and the
dominant families of Ireland all traced their descent to them. Was the
Kingdom of Light, then, divided against itself? Or, if not, to what
conception in the Irish mind are we to trace the myth of the Milesian
invasion and victory?

The only answer I can see to this puzzling question is to suppose that
the Milesian myth originated at a much later time than the others, and
was, in its main features, the product of Christian influences. The
People of Dana were in possession of the country, but they were pagan
divinities they could not stand for the progenitors of a Christian
Ireland. They had somehow or other to be got rid of, and a race of less
embarrassing antecedents substituted for them. So the Milesians were
fetched from "Spain" and endowed with the main characteristics, only
more humanised, of the People of Dana. But the latter, in
contradistinction to the usual attitude of early Christianity, are
treated very tenderly in the story of their overthrow.

\[138\]

One of them has the honour of giving her name to the island, the
brutality of one of the conquerors towards them is punished with death,
and while dispossessed Of the lordship of the soil they still enjoy life
in the fair world which by their magic art they have made invisible to
mortals. They are no longer gods, but they are more than human, and
frequent instances occur in which they are shown as coming forth from
their fairy world, being embraced in the Christian fold, and entering
into heavenly bliss. With two cases of this redemption of the Danaans we
shall close this chapter on the Invasion Myths of Ireland.

The first is the strange and beautiful tale of the Transformation of the
Children of Lir.

 

The Children of Lir

Lir was a Danaan divinity, the father of the sea-god Mananan who
continually occurs in magical tales of the Milesian cycle. He had
married in succession two sisters, the second of whom was named Aoife.
\[Pronounced "Eefa"\] She was childless, but the former wife of Lir had
left him four children, a girl named Fionuala \[This name means "The
Maid of the Fair Shoulder"\] and three boys. The intense love of Lir for
the children made the step-mother jealous, and she ultimately resolved
on their destruction. It will be observed, by the way, that the ;People
of Dana, though conceived as unaffected by time, and naturally immortal,
are nevertheless subject to violent death either at the hands of each
other or even of mortals.

With her guilty object in view, Aoife goes on a journey to a
neighbouring Danaan king, Bov the Red, taking the four children with
her. Arriving at a lonely place by Lake Derryvaragh, in Westmeath, she

\[139\]

orders her attendants to slay the children. They refuse, and rebuke her.
Then she resolves to do it herself; but, says the legend, "her womanhood
overcame her," and instead of killing the children she transforms them
by spells of sorcery into four white swans, and lays on them the
following doom: three hundred years they are to spend on the waters of
Lake Derryvaragh, three hundred on the Straits of Moyle (between Ireland
and Scotland), and three hundred on the Atlantic by Erris and
Inishglory. After that, "when the woman of the South is mated with the
man of the North," the enchantment is to have an end.

When the children fail to arrive with Aoife at the palace of Bov her
guilt is discovered, and Bov changes her into "a demon of the air." She
flies forth shrieking, and is heard of no more in the tale. But Lir and
Bov seek out the swan-children, and find that they have not only human
speech, but have preserved the characteristic Danaan gift of making
wonderful music. From all parts of the island companies of the Danaan
folk resort to Lake Derryvaragh to hear this wondrous music and to
converse with the swans, and during that time a great peace and
gentleness seemed to pervade the land.

But at last the day came for them to leave the fellowship of their kind
and take up their life by the wild cliffs and ever angry sea of the
northern coast. Here they knew the worst of loneliness, cold, and storm.
Forbidden to land, their feathers froze to the rocks in the winter
nights, and they were often buffeted and driven apart by storms. As
Fionuala sings:

Cruel to us was Aoife  
Who played her magic upon us,  
And drove us out on the water -  
Four wonderful snow-white swans.

\[140\]

 

"Our bath is the frothing brine,  
In bays by red rocks guarded;  
For mead at our father's table  
We drink of the salt, blue sea.

Three sons and a single daughter,  
In clefts of the cold rocks dwelling,  
The hard rocks, cruel to mortals -  
We are full of keening to-night."

Fionuala, the eldest of the four, takes the lead in all their doings,
and mothers the younger children most tenderly, wrapping her plumage
round them on nights of frost. At last the time comes to enter on the
third and last period of their doom, and they take flight for the
western shores of Mayo. Here too they suffer much hardship; but the
Milesians have now come into the land, and a young farmer named Evric,
dwelling on the shores of Erris Bay, finds out who and what the swans
are, and befriends them. To him they tell their story, and through him
it is supposed to have been preserved and handed down. When the final
period of their suffering is close at hand they resolve to fly towards
the palace of their father Lir, who dwells, we are told, at the Hill of
the White Field, in Armagh, to see how things have fared with him. They
do so; but not knowing what has happened on the coming of the Milesians,
they are shocked and bewildered to find nothing but green mounds and
whin-bushes and nettles where once stood - and still stands, only that
they cannot see it - the palace of their father. Their eyes are holden,
we are to understand, because a higher destiny was in Store for them
than to return to the Land of Youth.

On Erris Bay they hear for the first time the sound of a Christian beIl
It comes from the chapel of a hermit who has established himself there.
The swans are at first startled and terrified by the "thin, dreadful

\[141\]

sound," but afterwards approach and make themselves known to the hermit,
who instructs them in the faith, and they join him in singing the
offices of the Church.

Now it happens that a princess of Munster, Deoca, (the "woman of the
South") became betrothed to a Connacht chief named Lairgnen, and begged
him as wedding gift to procure for her the four wonderful singing swans
whose fame had come to her. He asks them of the hermit, who refuses to
give them up, where-upon the "man of the North" seizes them violently by
the silver chains with which the hermit had coupled them, and drags them
off to Deoca. This is their last trial. Arrived in her presence, an
awful transformation befalls them. The swan plumage falls off; and
reveals, not, indeed, the radiant forms of the Danaan divinities, but
four withered, snowy-haired, and miserable human beings, shrunken in the
decrepitude of their vast old age. Lairgnen flies from the place in
horror, but the hermit prepares to administer baptism at once, as death
is rapidly approaching them. "Lay us in one grave, says Fionuala, "and
place Conn at my right hand and Fiachra at my left, and Hugh before my
face, for there they were wont to be when I sheltered them many a winter
night upon the seas of Moyle." And so it was done, and they went to
heaven; but the hermit, it is said, sorrowed for them to the end of his
earthly days. \[The story here summarised is given in full in the
writer's "High Deeds of Finn" (Harrap and Co.\]

In all Celtic legend there is no more tender and beautiful tale than
this of the Children of Lir.

 

The Tale of Ethné

But the imagination of the Celtic bard always played with delight on the
subjects of these transition tales,

\[142\]

where the reconciling of the pagan order with the Christian was the
theme. The same conception is embodied in the tale of Ethné, which we
have now to tell.

It is said that Mananan mac Lir had a daughter who was given in
fosterage to the Danaan prince Angus, whose fairy palace was at Brugh na
Boyna. This is the great sepulchral tumulus now called New Grange, on
the Boyne. At the same time the steward of Angus had a daughter born to
him whose name was Ethné, and who was allotted to the young princess as
her handmaiden.

Ethné grew up into a lovely and gentle maiden, but it was discovered one
day that she took no nourishment of any kind, although the rest of the
household fed as usual on the magic swine of Mananan, which might be
eaten to-day and were alive again for the feast to-morrow. Mananan was
called in to penetrate the mystery, and the following curious story came
to light. One of the chieftains of the Danaans who had been on a visit
with Angus, smitten by the girl's beauty, had endeavoured to possess her
by force. This woke in Ethné's pure spirit the moral nature which is
proper to man, and which the Danaan divinities know not. As the tale
says, her "guardian demon " left her, and an angel of the true God took
its place. After that event she abstained altogether from the food of
Faery, and was miraculously nourished by the will of God. After a time,
however, Mananan and Angus, who had been on a voyage to the East,
brought back thence two cows whose milk never ran dry, and as they were
supposed to have come from a sacred land Ethné lived on their milk
thenceforward.

All this is supposed to have happened during the reign of Eremon, the
first Milesian king of all Ireland,

\[143\]

who was contemporary with King David. At the time of the coming of St.
Patrick, therefore, Ethné would have been about fifteen hundred years of
age. The Danaan folk grow up from childhood to maturity, but then they
abide unaffected by the lapse of time.

Now it happened one summer day that the Danaan princess whose handmaid
Ethné was went down with all her maidens to bathe in the river Boyne.
When arraying themselves afterwards Ethné discovered, to her dismay -and
this incident was, of course, an instance of divine interest in her
destiny - that she had lost the Veil of Invisibility, conceived here as
a magic charm worn on the person, which gave her the entrance to the
Danaan fairyland and hid her from mortal eyes. She could not find her
way back to the palace of Angus, and wandered up and down the banks of
the river seeking in vain for her companions and her home. At last she
came to a walled garden, and, looking through the gate, saw inside a
stone house of strange appearance and a man in a long brown robe. The
man was a Christian monk, and the house was a little church or oratory.
He beckoned her in, and when she had told her story to him he brought
her to St. Patrick, who completed her adoption into the human family by
giving her the rite of baptism.

Now comes in a strangely pathetic episode which reveals the tenderness,
almost the regret, with which early Irish Christianity looked back on
the lost world of paganism. As Ethné was one day praying in the little
church by the Boyne she heard suddenly a rushing sound in the air, and
innumerable voices, as it seemed from a great distance, lamenting and
calling her name. It was her Danaan kindred, who were still seeking for
her in vain. She sprang up to reply, but was so overcome with emotion
that she fell in a swoon

\[144\]

on the floor. She recovered her senses after a while, but from that day
she was struck with a mortal sickness, and in no long time she died,
with her head upon the breast of St. Patrick, who administered to her
the last rites, and ordained that the church should be named after her,
Kill Ethné - a name doubtless borne, at the time the story was composed,
by some real church on the banks of Boyne. \[It may be mentioned that
the syllable "Kill," which enters into so many Irish place-names
(Kilkenny, Killiney, Kilcooley, &c.), usually represents the Latin
*cella*, a monastic cell, shrine, or church.\]

 

Christianity and Paganism in Ireland

These, taken together with numerous other legendary incidents which
might be quoted, illustrate well the attitude of the early Celtic
Christians, in Ireland at least, towards the divinities of the older
faith. They seem to preclude the idea that at the time of the conversion
of Ireland the pagan religion was associated with cruel and barbarous
practices, on which the national memory would look back with horror and
detestation.

\[145\]

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: The Early Milesian Kings](mlcr04)
