[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mlcr06)  [Next](mlcr08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter VII: The Voyage of Maldun

BESIDES the legends which cluster round great heroic names, and have, or
at least pretend to have, the character of history, there are many
others, great and small, which tell of adventures lying purely in
regions of romance) and out of earthly space and time. As a specimen of
these I give here a summary of the "Voyage of Maeldun," a most curious
and brilliant piece of invention, which is found in the manuscript
entitled the "Book of the Dun Cow" (about 1100) and other early sources,
and edited, with a translation (to which I owe the following extracts),
by Dr. Whitley Stokes in the " Revue Celtique" for 1888 and 1889. It is
only one of a number of such wonder-voyages found in ancient Irish
literature, but it is believed to have been the earliest of them all and
model for the rest, and it has had the distinction, in the abridged and
modified form given by Joyce in his "Old Celtic Romances," of having
furnished the theme for the "Voyage of Maeldune ' to Tennyson, who made
it into a wonderful creation of rhythm and colour, embodying a kind of
allegory of Irish history. It will be noticed at the end that we are in
the unusual position of knowing the name of the author of this piece of
primitive literature, though he does not claim to have composed, but
only to have "put in order," the incidents of the "Voyage."
Unfortunately we cannot tell when he lived, but the tale as we have it
probably dates from the ninth century. Its atmosphere is entirely
Christian, and it has no mythological significance except in so far as
it teaches the lesson that the oracular injunctions of wizards should be
obeyed. No adventure or even detail, of importance is omitted in

\[309\]

the following summary of the story, which is given thus fully because
the reader may take it as representing a large and important section of
Irish legendary romance. Apart from the source to which I am indebted,
the "Revue Celtique," I know no other faithful reproduction in English
of this wonderful tale.

The "Voyage of Maeldun" begins, as Irish tales often do, by telling us
of the conception of its hero.

There was a famous man of the sept of the Owens of Aran, named Ailill
Edge-of-Battle, who went with his king on a foray into another
territory. They encamped one night near a church and convent of nuns. At
midnight Ailill, who was near the church, saw a certain nun come out to
strike the bell for nocturns, and caught her by the hand. In ancient
Ireland religious persons were not much respected in time of war, and
Ailill did not respect her. When they parted, she said to him: "Whence
is thy race, and what is thy name ?" Said the hero : "Ailill of the
Edge-of\~Battle's my name, and I am of the Owenacht of Aaan, in
Thomond."

Not long afterwards Ailill was slain by reavers from Leix; who burned
the church of Doocloone over his head.

In due time a son was born to the woman and she called his name Maeldun.
He was taken secretly to her friend, the queen of the territory, and by
her Maeldun was reared. "Beautiful indeed was his form, and it is
doubtful if there hath been in flesh any one so beautiful as he. So he
grew up till he was a young warrior and fit to use weapons. Great, then
was his brightness and his gaiety and his playfulness. In his play he
outwent all his comrades in throwing balls, and in runnig and leaping
and putting stones and racing horses."

One day a proud young warrior who had been

\[310\]

defeated by him taunted him with his lack of knowledge of his kindred
and descent. Maeldun went to his foster-mother, the queen, and said : "I
will not eat nor drink till thou tell me who are my mother and my
father." "I am thy mother," said the queen, "for none ever loved her son
more than I love thee." But Maeldun insisted on knowing all, and the
queen at last took him to his own mother, the nun, who told him: "Thy
father was Ailill of the Owens of Aran." Then Maeldun went to his own
kindred, and was well received by them ; and with him he took as guests
his three beloved foster-brothers, sons of the king and queen who had
brought him up.

After a time Maeldun happened to be among a company of young warriors
who were contending at putting the stone in the graveyard of the ruined
church of Doocloone. Maeldun's foot was planted, as he heaved the stone,
on a scorched and blackened flagstone; and one who was by, a monk named
Briccne, \[here we have evidently a reminiscence of Briccriu of the
Poisoned Tongue, the mischief-maker of the Ultonians\] said to him : "It
were better for thee to avenge the man who was burnt there than to cast
stones over his burnt bones."

"Who was that?" asked Maeldun.

"Ailill, thy father," they told him.

"Who slew him?" said he.

"Reavers from Leix," they said, "and they destroyed him on this spot."

Then Maeldun threw down the stone he was about to cast, and put his
mantle round him and went home; and he asked the way to Leix. They told
him he could only go there by sea. \[the Arans are three islands at the
entrance of Galway Bay. They are a perfect museum of mysterious ruins,\]

\[311\]

At the advice of a Druid he then built him a boat, or coracle, of skins
lapped threefold one over the other; and the wizard also told him that
seventeen men only must accompany him, and on what day he must begin the
boat and on what day he must put out to sea.

So when his company was ready he put out and hoisted the sail, but had
gone only a little way when his three foster-brothers came down to the
beach and entreated him to take them. "Get you home," said Maeldun, "for
none but the number I have may go with me." But the three youths would
not be separated from Maeldun, and they flung themselves into the sea.
He turned back, lest they should be drowned, and brought them into his
boat. All, as we shall see, were punished for this transgression, and
Maeldun condemned to wandering until expiation had been made.

Irish bardic tales excel in their openings. In this case, as usual, the
*mise-en-scène* is admirably contrived. The narrative which follows
tells how, after seeing his father's slayer on an island, but being
unable to land there, Maeldun and his party are blown out to sea, where
they visit a great number of islands and have many strange adventures on
them. The tale becomes, in fact, a *cento* of stories and incidents,
some not very interesting, while in others, as in the adventure of the
Island of the Silver Pillar, or the Island of the Flaming Rampart, or
that where the episode of the eagle takes place, the Celtic sense of
beauty, romance, and mystery find an expression unsurpassed, perhaps, in
literature.

In the following rendering I have omitted the verses given by Joyce at
the end of each adventure. They merely recapitulate the prose narrative,
and are not found in the earliest manuscript authorities.

\[312\]

  
The Island of the Slayer

Maeldun and his crew had rowed all day and half the night when they came
to two small bare islands with two forts in them, and a noise was heard
from them of armed men quarrelling. "Stand off from me, cried one of
them, "for I am a better man than thou. 'Twas I slew Ailill of the
Edge-of-Battle and burned the church of Doocloone over him, and no
kinsman has avenged his death on me. And *thou* hast never done the like
of that."

Then Maeldun was about to land, and German \[pronounced "Ghermawn " -
the "G" hard\] and Diuran the Rhymer cried that God had guided them to
the spot where they would be. But a great wind arose suddenly and blew
them off into the boundless ocean, and Maeldun said to his
foster-brothers : "Ye have caused this to be, casting yourselves on
board in spite of the words of the Druid." And they had no answer, save
only to be silent for a little space.

 

The Island of the Ants

They drifted three days and three nights, not knowing whither to row,
when at the dawn of the third day they heard the noise of breakers, and
came to an island as soon as the sun was up. Here, ere they could land,
they met a swarm of ferocious ants, each the size of a foal, that came
down the strand and into the sea to get at them ; so they made off
quickly, and saw no land for three days more.

 

The Island of the Great Birds

This was a terraced island, with trees all round it, and great birds
sitting on the trees. Maeldun landed first alone, and care fully
searched the island for any

\[313\]

evil thing, but finding none, the rest followed him, and killed and ate
many of the birds, bringing others on board their boat.

 

The Island of the Fierce Beast

A great sandy island was this, and on it a beast like a horse, but with
clawed feet like a hound's. He flew at them to devour them, but they put
off in time, and were pelted by the beast with pebbles from the shore as
they rowed away.

 

The Island of the Giant Horses

A great, flat island, which it fell by lot to German and Diuran to
explore first. They found a vast green racecourse, on which were the
marks of horses' hoofs, each as big as the sail of a ship, and the
shells of nuts of monstrous size were lying about, and much plunder. So
they were afraid, and took ship hastily again, and from the sea they saw
a horse-race in progress and heard the shouting of a great multitude
cheering on the white horse or the brown, and saw the giant horses
running swifter than the wind. \[Horse-racing was a particular delight
to the ancient Irish, and ii mentioned in a ninth-century poem in praise
of May as one of the attractions of that month. The name of the month of
May given in an ancient Gaulish calendar means "the month of
horse-racing."\] So they rowed away with all their might, thinking they
had come upon an assembly of demons.

 

The Island of the Stone Door

A full week passed, and then they found a great, high island with a
house standing on the shore. A door with a valve of stone opened into
the sea, and through it the sea-waves kept hurling salmon into the
house. Maeldun and his party entered, and found the house

\[314\]

empty of folk, but a great bed lay ready for the chief to whom it
belonged, and a bed for each three of his company, and meat and drink
beside each bed. Maeldun and his party ate and drank their fill, and
then sailed off again.

 

The Island of the Apples

By the time they had come here they had been a long time voyaging, and
food had failed them, and they were hungry. This island had precipitous
sides from which a wood hung down, and as they passed along the cliffs
Maeldun broke off a twig and held it in his hand. Three days and nights
they coasted the cliff and found no entrance to the island, but by that
time a cluster of three apples had grown on the end of Maeldun's rod,
and each apple sufficed the crew for forty days.

 

The Island of the Wondrous Beast

This island had a fence of stone round it, and within the fence a huge
beast that raced round and round the island. And anon it went to the top
of the island, and then performed a marvellous feat, viz., it turned its
body round and round inside its skin, the skin remaining unmoved, while
again it would revolve its skin round and round the body. When it saw
the party it rushed at them, but they escaped, pelted with stones as
they rowed away. One of the stones pierced through Maeldun': shield and
lodged in the keel of the boat.

 

The Island of the Biting Horses

Here were many great beasts resembling horses, that tore continually
pieces of flesh from each other's sides, So that all the island ran with
blood. They rowed hastily away, and were now disheartened and full of

\[315\]

complaints, for they knew not where they were, nor how to find guidance
or aid in their quest.

 

The Island of the Fiery Swine

With great weariness, hunger, and thirst they arrived at the tenth
island, which was full of trees loaded with golden apples. Under the
trees went red beasts, like fiery swine, that kicked the trees with
their legs, when the apples fell and the beasts consumed them. The
beasts came out at morning only, when a multitude of birds left the
island, and swam out to sea till nones, when they turned and swam inward
again till vespers, and ate the apples all night.

Maeldun and his comrades landed at night, and felt the soil hot under
their feet from the fiery swine in their caverns underground. They
collected all the apples they could, which were good both against hunger
and thirst, and loaded their boat with them and put to sea once more,
refreshed.

 

The Island of the Little Cat

The apples had failed them when they came hungry and thirsting to the
eleventh island. This was, as it were, a tall white tower of chalk
reaching up to the clouds, and on the rampart about it were great houses
white as snow. They entered the largest of them, and found no man in it,
but a small cat playing on four stone pillars which were in the midst of
the house, leaping from one to the other. It looked a little on the
Irish warriors, but did not cease from its play. On the walls of the
houses there were three rows of objects hanging up one row of brooches
of gold and silver, and one of' neck-torques of gold and silver, each as
big as the hoop of a cask, and one of great swords with gold and silver
hilts. Quilts and shining garments lay in the

\[316\]

room, and there, also, were a roasted ox and a flitch of bacon and
abundance of liquor. "Hath this been left for us?" said Maeldun to the
cat. It looked at him a moment, and then continued its play. So there
they ate and drank and slept, and stored up what remained of the food.
Next day, as they made to leave the house, the youngest of Maeldun's
foster-brothers took a necklace from the wall, and was bearing it out
when the cat suddenly "leaped through him like a fiery arrow," and he
fell, a heap of ashes, on the floor. Thereupon Maeldun, who had
forbidden the theft of the jewel, soothed the cat and replaced the
necklace, and they strewed the ashes of the dead youth on the sea-shore,
and put to sea again.

 

The Island of the Black and the White Sheep

This had a brazen palisade dividing it in two, and a flock of black
sheep on one side and of white sheep on the other. Between them was a
big man who tended the flocks, and sometimes he put a white sheep among
the black, when it became black at once, or a black sheep among the
white, when it immediately turned white. \[the same phenomenon is
recorded as being witnessed by Peredur in the Welsh tale of that name in
the "Mabinogion,"\] By way of an experiment Maeldun flung a peeled white
wand on the side of the black sheep. It at once turned black, whereat
they left the place in terror, and without landing.

 

The Island of the Giant Cattle

A great and wide island with a herd of huge swine on it. They killed a
small pig and roasted it on the spot, as it was too great to carry on
board. The island rose up into a very high mountain, and Diuran and
German went to view the country from the top of it.

\[317\]

On their way they met a broad river. To try the depth of the water
German dipped in the haft of his spear, which at once was consumed as
with liquid fire. On the other bank was a huge man guarding what seemed
a herd of oxen. He called to them not to disturb the calves, so they
went no further and speedily sailed away.

 

The Island of the Mill

Here they found a great and grim-looking mill, and a giant miller
grinding corn in it. "Half the corn of your country, he said, "is ground
here. Here comes to be ground all that men begrudge to each other."
Heavy and many were the loads they saw going to it, and all that was
ground in it was carried away west wards. So they crossed themselves and
sailed away.

 

The Island of the Black Mourners

An island full of black people continually weeping and lamenting. One of
the two remaining foster-brothers landed on it, and immediately turned
black and fell to weeping like the rest. Two others went to fetch him;
the same fate befell them. Four others then went with their heads
wrapped in cloths, that they should not look on the land or breathe the
air of the place, and they seized two of the lost ones and brought them
away perforce, but not the foster-brother. The two rescued ones could
not explain their conduct except by saying that they had to do as they
saw others doing about them.

 

The Island of the Four Fences

Four fences of gold, silver, brass, and crystal divided this island into
our parts, kings in one, queens in another, warriors in a third, maidens
in the fourth.

\[318\]

On landing, a maiden gave them food like cheese, that tasted to each man
as he wished it to be, and an Intoxicating liquor that put them asleep
for three days. When they awoke they were at sea in their boat, and of
the island and its inhabitants nothing was to be seen.

 

The Island of the Glass Bridge

Here we come to one of the most elaborately wrought and picturesque of
all the incidents of the voyage. The island they now reached had on it a
fortress with a brazen door, and a bridge of glass leading to it. When
they sought to cross the bridge it threw them backward. \[like the
bridge to Skatha's dūn, p. 188\] A woman came out of the fortress with a
pail in her hand, and lifting from the bridge a slab of glass she let
down her pail into the water beneath, and returned to the fortress. They
struck on the brazen portcullis before them to gain admittance, but the
melody given forth by the smitten metal plunged them in slumber till the
morrow morn. Thrice over this happened, the woman each time making an
ironical speech about Maeldun. On the fourth day, however, she came out
to them over the bridge, wearing a white mantle with a circlet of gold
on her hair, two silver sandals on her rosy feet, and a filmy silken
smock next her skin.

"My welcome to thee, O Maeldun," she said, and she welcomed each man of
the crew by his own name. Then she took them into the great house and
allotted a couch to the chief, and one for each three of his men. She
gave them abundance of food and drink, all out of her one pail, each man
finding in it what he most desired. When she had departed they asked
Maeldun if they should woo the maiden for him. "How would

\[319\]

it hurt you to speak with her?" says Maeldun. They do so, and she
replies: "I know not, nor have ever known, what sin is. Twice over this
is repeated. "To-morrow," she says at last, "you shall have your
answer." When the morning breaks, however, they find themselves once
more at sea, with no sign of the island or fortress or lady.

 

The Island of the Shouting Birds

They hear from afar a great cry and chanting, as it were a singing of
psalms, and rowing for a day and night they come at last to an island
full of birds, black, brown, and speckled, all shouting and speaking.
They sail away without landing.

 

The Island of the Anchorite

Here they found a wooded island full of birds, and on it a solitary man,
whose only clothing was his hair. They asked him of his country and kin.
He tells them that he was a man of Ireland who had put to sea \[probably
we are to understand that he was an anchorite seeking for an islet on
which to dwell in solitude and contemplation. The western islands of
Ireland abound in the ruins of hut, and oratories built by single monks
or little communities.\] with a sod of his native country under his
feet. God had turned the sod into an island, adding a foot's breadth to
it and one tree for every year. The birds are his kith and kin, and they
all wait there till Doomsday, miraculously nourished by angels. He
entertained them for three nights, and then they sailed away.

 

The Island of the Miraculous Fountain

This island had a golden rampart, and a soft white soil like down. In it
they found another anchorite clothed only in his hair. There was a
fountain in it

\[320\]

which yields whey or water on Fridays and Wednesdays, milk on Sundays
and feasts of martyrs, and ale and wine on the feasts of Apostles, of
Mary, of John the Baptist, and on the high tides of the year.

 

The Island of the Smithy

As they approached this they heard from afar as it were the clanging of
a tremendous smithy, and heard men talking of themselves. " Little boys
they seem, said one, "in a little trough yonder." They rowed hastily
away, but did not turn their boat, so as not to seem to be flying ; but
after a while a giant smith came out of the forge holding in his tongs a
huge mass of glowing iron, which he cast after them, and all the sea
boiled round it, as it fell astern of their boat.

 

The Sea of Clear Glass

After that they voyaged until they entered a sea that resembled green
glass. Such was its purity that the gravel and the sand of the sea were
clearly visible through it; and they saw no monsters or beasts therein
among the crags, but only the pure gravel and the green sand. For a long
space of the day they were voyaging in that sea, and great was its
splendour and its beauty. \[Tennyson has been particularly happy in his
description of these undersea islands\]

 

 

The Undersea Island

They next found themselves in a sea, thin like mist, that seemed as if
it would not support their boat. In the depths they saw roofed
fortresses, and a fair land around them. A monstrous beast lodged in a
tree there, with droves of cattle about it, and beneath it an armed
warrior. In spite of the warrior, the beast ever and

\[321\]

anon stretched down a long neck and seized one of the cattle and
devoured it. Much dreading lest they should sink through that mist-like
sea, they sailed over it and away.

 

The Island of the Prophecy

When they arrived here they found the water rising in high cliffs round
the island, and, looking down, saw on it a crowd of people, who screamed
at them, " It is they, it is they," till they were out of breath. Then
came a woman and pelted them from below with large nuts, which they
gathered and took with them. As they went they heard the folk crying to
each other:

"Where are they now?" "They are gone away. "They are not." " It is
likely," says the tale, "that there was some one concerning whom the
islanders had a prophecy that he would ruin their country and expel them
from their land."

 

The Island of the Spouting Waters

Here a great stream spouted out of one side of the island and arched
over it like a rainbow, falling on the strand at the further side. And
when they thrust their spears into the stream above them they brought
out salmon from it as much as they could and the island was filled with
the stench of those they could not carry away.

 

The Island of the Silvern Column

The next wonder to which they came forms one of the most striking and
imaginative episodes of the voyage. It was a great silvern column,
four-square, rising from the sea. Each of its four sides was as wide as
two oar-strokes of the boat. Not a sod of earth was at its foot, but it
rose from the boundless

\[322\]

ocean and its summit was lost in the sky. From that summit a huge silver
net was flung far away into the sea, and through a mesh of that net they
sailed. As they did so Diuran hacked away a piece of the net.

"Destroy it not," said Maeldun, "for what we see is the work of mighty
men. Diuran said: "For the praise of God's name I do this, that our tale
may be believed, and if I reach Ireland again this piece of silver shall
be offered by me on the high altar of Armagh." Two ounces and a half it
weighed when it was measured afterwards in Armagh.

"And then they heard a voice from the summit of yonder pillar, mighty,
clear, and distinct. But they knew not the tongue it spake, or the words
it uttered."

 

The Island of the Pedestal

The next island stood on a foot, or pedestal, which rose from the sea,
and they could find no way of access to it. In the base of the pedestal
was a door, closed and locked, which they could not open, so they sailed
away, having seen and spoken with no one.

 

The Island of the Women

Here they found the rampart of a mighty dūn, enclosing a mansion. They
landed to look on it, and sat on a hillock near by. Within the dūn they
saw seventeen maidens busy at preparing a great bath. In a little while
a rider, richly clad, came up swiftly on a racehorse, and lighted down
and went inside, one of the girls taking the horse. The rider then went
into the bath, when they saw that it was a woman. Shortly after that one
of the maidens came out and invited them to enter, saying: "The Queen
invites you. They went into the fort and bathed, and then sat down to
meat, each man with a maiden over against him, and

\[323\]

Maeldun opposite to the queen. And Maeldun was wedded to the queen, and
each of the maidens to one of his men, and at nightfall canopied
chambers were allotted to each of them. On the morrow morn they made
ready to depart, but the queen would not have them go, and said: "Stay
here, and old age will never fall on you, but ye shall remain as ye are
now for ever and ever, and what ye had last night ye shall have always.
And be no longer a-wandering from island to island on the ocean."

She then told Maeldun that she was the mother of the seventeen girls
they had seen, and her husband had been king of the island. He was now
dead, and she reigned in his place. Each day she went into the great
plain in the interior of the island to judge the folk, and returned to
the dūn at night.

So they remained there for three months of winter; but at the end of
that time it seemed they had been there three years, and the men wearied
of it, and longed to set forth for their own country.

"What shall we find there," said Maeldun, "that is better than this?"

But still the people murmured and complained, and at last they said:
"Great is the love which Maeldun has for his woman. Let him stay with
her alone if he will, but we will go to our own country." But Maeldnn
would not be left after them, and at last one day, when the queen was
away judging the folk, they went on board their bark and put out to sea.
Before they had gone far, however, the queen came riding up with a clew
of twine in her hand, and she flung it after them. Maeldun caught it in
his hand, and it clung to his hand so that he could not free himself and
the queen, holding the other end, drew them back to land. And they
stayed on the island another three months.

\[324\]

Twice again the same thing happened, and at last the people averred that
Maeldun held the clew on purpose, so great was his love for the woman.
So the next time another man caught the clew, but it clung to his hand
as before; so Diuran smote off his hand, and it fell with the clew into
the sea. "When she saw that she at once began to wail and shriek, so
that all the land was one cry, wailing and shrieking." And thus they
escaped from the Island of the Women.

 

The Island of the Red Berries

On this island were trees with great red berries which yielded an
intoxicating and slumbrous juice. They mingled it with water to moderate
its power, and filled their casks with it, and sailed away.

 

The Island of the Eagle

A large island, with woods of oak and yew on one side of it, and on the
other a plain, whereon were herds of sheep, and a little lake in it ;
and there also they found a small church and a fort, and an ancient grey
cleric, clad only in his hair. Maeldun asked him who he was.

"I am the fifteenth man of the monks of St. Brennan of Birr," he said.
"We went on our pilgrimage into the ocean, and they have all died save
me alone.' He showed them the tablet (?calendar) of the Holy Brennan,
and they prostrated themselves before it, and Maeldun kissed it. They
stayed there for a season, feeding on the sheep of the island.

One day they saw what seemed to be a cloud coming up from the
south-west. As it drew near, however, they saw the waving of pinions,
and perceived that it was an enormous bird. It came into the island,
and, alighting very wearily on a hill near the lake, it began

\[325\]

eating the red berries, like grapes, which grew on a huge tree-branch as
big as a full-grown oak, that it had brought with it, and the juice and
fragments of the berries fell into the lake, reddening all the water.
Fearful that it would seize them in its talons and bear them out to sea,
they lay hid in the woods and watched it. After a while, however,
Maeldun went out to the foot of the hill, but the bird did him no harm,
and then the rest followed cautiously behind their shields, and one of
them gathered the berries off the branch which the bird held in its
talons, but it did them no evil, and regarded them not at all. And they
saw that it was very old, and its plumage dull and decayed.

At the hour of noon two eagles came up from the south-west and alit in
front of the great bird, and after resting awhile they set to work
picking off the insects that infested its jaws and eyes and ears. This
they continued till vespers, when all three ate of the berries again. At
last, on the following day, when the great bird had been completely
cleansed, it plunged into the lake, and again the two eagles picked and
cleansed it. Till the third day the great bird remained preening and
shaking its pinions, and its feathers became glossy and abundant, and
then, soaring upwards, it flew thrice round the island, and away to the
quarter whence it had come, and its flight was now swift and strong;
whence it was manifest to them that this had been its renewal from old
age to youth, according as the prophet said, *Thy youth is renewed like
the eagle's*. \[Ps. Ciii, 5\]

Then Diuran said : "Let us bathe in that lake and renew ourselves where
the bird hath been renewed." "Nay," said another, "for the bird hath
left his venom in it." But Diuran plunged in and drank of the water.
From that time so long as he lived his eyes were strong

\[326\]

and keen, and not a tooth fell from his jaw nor a hair from his head,
and he never knew illness or infirmity.

Thereafter they bade farewell to the anchorite, and fared forth on the
ocean once more.

 

The Island of the Laughing Folk

Here they found a great company of men laughing and playing incessantly.
They drew lots as to who should enter and explore it, and it fell to
Maeldun's foster-brother. But when he set foot on it he at once began to
laugh and play with the others, and could not leave off; nor would he
come back to his comrades. So they left him and sailed away. \[this
disposes of the last of the foster-brothers, who should not have joined
the party.\]

 

The Island of the Flaming Rampart

They now came in sight of an island which was not large, and it had
about it a rampart of flame that circled round and round it continually.
In one part of the rampart there was an opening, and when this opening
came opposite to them they saw through it the whole island, and saw
those who dwelt therein, even men and women, beautiful, many, and
wearing adorned garments, with vessels of gold in their hands. And the
festal music which they made came to the ears of the wanderers. For a
long time they lingered there, watching this marvel, "and they deemed it
delightful to behold."

 

The Island of the Monk of Tory

Far off among the waves they saw what they took to be a white bird on
the water. Drawing near to it they found it to be an aged man clad only
in the white hair

\[327\]

of his body, and he was throwing himself in prostrations on a broad
rock.

"From Torach \[Tory Island, off the Donegal coast. There was there a
monastery and a church dedicated to St. Columba\] have come hither," he
said, "and there I was reared. I was cook in the monastery there, and
the food of the Church I used to sell for myself, so that I had at last
much treasure of raiment and brazen vessels and gold-bound books and all
that man desires. Great was my pride and arrogance.

"One day as I dug a grave in which to bury a churl who had been brought
on to the island, a voice came from below where a holy man lay buried,
and he said: 'Put not the corpse of a sinner on me, a holy, pious person
!' "

After a dispute the monk buried the corpse elsewhere, and was promised
an eternal reward for doing so. Not long thereafter he put to sea in a
boat with all his accumulated treasures, meaning apparently to escape
from the island with his plunder. A great wind blew him far out to sea,
and when he was out of sight of land the boat stood still in one place.
He saw near him a man (angel) sitting on the wave. "Whither goest thou?"
said the man. "On a pleasant way, whither I am now looking," said the
monk. "It would not be pleasant to thee if thou knewest what is around
thee," said the man. " So far as eye can see there is one crowd of
demons all gathered around thee, because of thy covetousness and pride,
and theft, and other evil deeds. Thy boat hath stopped, nor will it move
until thou do my will, and the fires of hell shall get hold of thee."

He came near to the boat, and laid his hand on the arm of the fugitive,
who promised to do his will.

"Fling into the sea," he said, "all the wealth that is in thy boat."

\[328\]

" It is a pity," said the monk, " that it should go to loss."

"It shall in nowise go to loss. There will be one man whom thou wilt
profit."

The monk thereupon flung everything into the sea save one little wooden
cup, and he cast away oars and rudder. The man gave him a provision of
whey and seven cakes, and bade him abide wherever his boat should stop.
The wind and waves carried him hither and thither till at last the boat
came to rest upon the rock where the wanderers found him. There was
nothing there but the bare rock, but remembering what he was bidden he
stepped out upon a little ledge over which the waves washed, and the
boat immediately left him, and the rock was enlarged for him. There he
remained seven years, nourished by otters which brought him salmon out
of the sea, and even flaming firewood on which to cook them, and his cup
was filled with good liquor every day. "And neither wet nor heat nor
cold affects me in this place."

At the noon hour miraculous nourishment was brought for the whole crew,
and thereafter the ancient man said to them :

"Ye will all reach your country, and the man that slew thy father, O
Maeldun, ye will find him in a fortress before you. And slay him not,
but forgive him because God hath saved you from manifold great perils,
and ye too are men deserving of death."

Then they bade him farewell and went on their accustomed way.

 

The Island of the Falcon

This is uninhabited save for herds of sheep and oxen. They land on it
and eat their fill, and one of them sees there a large falcon. "This
falcon," he says, " is

\[329\]

like the falcons of Ireland." "Watch it," says Maddun, "and see how it
will go from us." It flew off to the south-east, and they rowed after it
all day till vespers.

 

The Home-corning

At nightfall they sighted a land like Ireland ; and soon came to a small
island, where they ran their prow ashore. It was the island where dwelt
the man who had slain Ailill.

They went up to the dūn that was on the island, and heard men talking
within it as they sat at meat. One man said :

"It would be ill for us if we saw Maeldun now."

"That Maeldun has been drowned," said another.

"Maybe it is he who shall waken you from sleep to-night," said a third.

"If he should come now," said a fourth, "what should we do?"

"Not hard to answer that," said the chief of them.

"Great welcome should he have if he were to come, for he hath been a
long space in great tribulation."

Then Maeldun smote with the wooden clapper against the door. "Who is
there?" asked the door-keeper.

" Maeldun is here," said he.

They entered the house in peace, and great welcome was made for them,
and they were arrayed in new garments. And then they told the story of
all the marvels that God had shown them, according to the words of the
"sacred poet," who said, *Haec olim meminisse juvabit*. \["One day we
shall delight in the remembrance of these things." The quotation is from
Vergil, " Aen." i 203 "Sacred poet" is a translation of the *vates
sacer*, of Horace.\]

\[330\]

Then Maeldun went to his own home and kindred, and Diuran the Rhymer
took with him the piece of silver that he had hewn from the net of the
pillar, and laid it on the high altar of Armagh in triumph and
exultation at the miracles that God had wrought for them. And they told
again the story of all that had befallen them, and all the marvels they
had seen by sea and land) and the perils they had endured.

The story ends with the following words :

"Now Aed the Fair \[Aed Finn \[This sage and poet has nor been
identified from any other record. Praise and thanks to him, whoever he
may have been.\]\], chief sage of Ireland, arranged this story as it
standeth here ; and he did so for a delight to the mind, and for the
folks of Ireland after him."

 

 \[331\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Myths and Tales of the Cymry](mlcr08.md)
