[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks02)  [Next](lks04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# GOETIA

### THE LESSER KEY OF SOLOMON

###### THE INITIATED INTERPRETATION OF CEREMONIAL MAGIC.

It is loftily amusing to the student of *Magical* literature who is not
quite a fool--and rare is such a combination!--to note the criticism
directed by the Philistine against the citadel of his science. Truly,
since our childhood has ingrained into us not only literal belief in the
Bible, but also substantial belief in *Alf Laylah* wa *Laylah*, and only
adolescence can cure us, we are only too liable, in the rush and energy
of dawning manhood, to overturn roughly and rashly both these classics,
to regard them both on the same level, as interesting documents from the
standpoint of folk-lore and anthropology, and as nothing more.

Even when we learn that the Bible, by a profound and minute study of the
text, may be forced to yield up *Qabalistic* arcana of cosmic scope and
importance, we are too often slow to apply a similar restorative to the
companion volume, even if we are the luck holders of Burton's veritable
edition.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

To me, then, it remains to raise the *Alf Laylah* wa Laylah into its
proper place once more.

I am not concerned to deny the objective reality of all "*magical*"
phenomena; if they are illusions, they are at least as real as many
unquestioned facts of daily life; and, if we follow Herbert Spencer,
they are at least evidence of some cause. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

Now, this fact is our base. What is the cause of my illusion of seeing a
spirit in the triangle of Art?

Every smatterer, every expert in psychology, will answer: "That cause
lies in your brain."

English children (*pace* the Education Act) are taught that the Universe
lies in infinite Space; Hindu children, in the Akasa, which is the same
thing.

Those Europeans who go a little deeper learn from Fichte, that the
phenomenal Universe is the creation of the Ego; Hindus, or Europeans
studying under Hindu Gurus, are told, that by Akasa is meant the
Chitakasa. The Chitakasa is situated in the "Third Eye," *i.e.*, in the
brain. By assuming higher dimensions of space, we can assimilate this
fact to Realism; but we have no need to take so much trouble.

This being true for the ordinary Universe, that all sense-impressions
are dependent on changes in the brain, <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4)
we must include illusions, which are after all sense-impressions as much
as "realities" are, in the class of "phenomena dependent on
brain-changes."

Magical phenomena, however, come under a special sub-class, since they
are willed, and their cause is the series of "real" phenomena, called
the operations of ceremonial Magic.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

These consist of

\(1\) Sight.  
The circle, square, triangle, vessels, lamps, robes, implements, etc.

\(2\) Sound.  
The invocations.

\(3\) Smell.  
The perfumes.

\(4\) Taste.  
The Sacraments.

\(5\) Touch.  
As under (1).

\(6\) Mind.

The combination of all these and reflection on their significance.

These unusual impressions (1-5) produce unusual brain-changes; hence
their summary (6) is of unusual kind. Its projection back into the
apparently phenomenal world is therefore unusual.

Herein then consists the reality of the operations and effects of
ceremonial magic, <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) and I conceive that
the apology is ample, as far as the "effects" refer only to those
phenomena which appear to the magician himself, the appearance of the
spirit, his conversation, possible shocks from imprudence, and so on,
even to ecstasy on the one hand, and death or madness on the other.

But can any of the effects described in this our book Goetia be
obtained, and if so, can you give a rational explanation of the
circumstances? Say you so?

I can, and will.

The spirits of the Goetia are portions of the human brain.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Their seals therefore represent (Mr. Spencer's projected cube) methods
of stimulating or regulating those particular spots (through the eye).

The names of God are vibrations calculated to establish:

(*a*) General control of the brain., (Establishment of functions
relative to the subtle world.)

(*b*) Control over the brain in detail. (Rank or type of the Spirit.)

(*c*) Control of one special portion. (Name of the Spirit.)

The perfumes aid this through smell. Usually the perfume will only tend
to control a large area; but there is an attribution of perfumes to
letters of the alphabet enabling one, by a Qabalistic formula, to spell
out the Spirit's name.

I need not enter into more particular discussion of these points; the
intelligent reader can easily fill in what is lacking.

If, then, I say, with Solomon:

"The Spirit Cimieries teaches logic," what I mean is:

"Those portions of my brain which subserve the logical faculty may be
stimulated and developed by following out the processes called 'The
Invocation of Cimieries.'"

And this is a purely materialistic rational statement; it is independent
of any objective hierarchy at all. Philosophy has nothing to say; and
Science can only suspend judgment, pending a proper and methodical
investigation of the facts alleged.

Unfortunately, we cannot stop there. Solomon promises us that we can (1)
obtain information; (2) destroy our enemies; (3) understand the voices
of nature; (4) obtain treasure; (5) heal diseases, etc. I have taken

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

these five powers at random; considerations of space forbid me to
explain all.

\(1\) Brings up facts from sub-consciousness.

\(2\) Here we come to an interesting fact. It is curious to note the
contrast between the noble means and the apparently vile ends of magical
rituals. The latter are disguises for sublime truths. "To destroy our
enemies" is to realize the illusion of duality, to excite compassion.

(Ah! Mr. Waite, the world of Magic is a mirror, wherein who sees muck is
muck.)

\(3\) A careful naturalist will understand much from the voices of the
animals he has studied long. Even a child knows the difference of a
cat's miauling and purring. The faculty may be greatly developed.

\(4\) Business capacity may be stimulated.

\(5\) Abnormal states of the body may be corrected, and the involved
tissues brought back to tone, in obedience to currents started from the
brain.

So for all other phenomena. There is no effect which is truly and
necessarily miraculous.

Our Ceremonial Magic fines down, then, to a series of minute, though of
course empirical, physiological experiments, and whoso, will carry them
through intelligently need not fear the result.

I have all the health, and treasure, and logic, I need; I have no time
to waste. "There is a lion in the way." For me these practices are
useless; but for the benefit of others less fortunate I give them to the
world, together with this explanation of, and apology for, them.

I trust that the explanation will enable many students who have
hitherto, by a puerile objectivity in their view of the question,
obtained no results, to succeed; that the apology may impress upon our
scornful men of science that the study of the bacillus should give place
to that

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

of the baculum, the little to the great--how great one only realizes
when one identifies the wand with the Mahalingam, up which Brahma flew
at the rate of 84,000 yojanas a second for 84,000 mahakalpas, down which
Vishnu flew at the rate of 84,000 croces of yojanas a second for 84,000
crores of mahakalpas--yet neither reached an end.

But I reach an end.

Boleskine House,  
    Foyers, N.B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[10:1](lks03.htm#fr_3) This, incidentally, is
perhaps the greatest argument we possess, pushed to its extreme, against
the Advaitist theories.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[10:2](lks03.htm#fr_4) Thought is a secretion of
the brain (Weissmann). Consciousness is a function of the brain
(Huxley).

<span id="fn_5"></span>[11:1](lks03.htm#fr_5) Apart from its value in
obtaining one-pointedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preliminary Definition Of Magic](lks04)
