[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks07)  [Next](lks09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MAGICAL CIRCLE.

This is the Form of the Magical Circle of King Solomon, the which he
made that he might preserve himself therein from the malice of these
Evil Spirits. (See *Frontispiece, Figure* 153 <span
id="img_fig153-4"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig153-4.jpg)) This
Magical Circle is to be made 9 feet across, and the Divine Names are to
be written around it, beginning at EHYEH, and ending at LEVANAH, Luna.

(Colours.--The space between the outer and inner circles, where the
serpent is coiled, with the Hebrew names written along his body, is
bright deep yellow. The square in the centre of the circle, where the
word "Master" is written, is filled in with red. All names and letters
are in black. In the Hexagrams the outer triangles where the letters A,
D, O, N, A, I, appear are filled in with bright yellow, the centres,
where the T-shaped crosses are, blue or green. In the Pentagrams outside
the circle, the outer triangles where "Te, tra, gram, ma, ton," is
written, are filled in bright yellow, and the centres with the T crosses
written therein are red. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[49:1](lks08.htm#fr_30) The coiled serpent is
only shown in one private codex, the Hebrew names being in most cases
simply written round in a somewhat spiral arrangement within the double
circle. It is to be remembered that Hebrew is always written from right
to left, <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> instead of from left to right
like ordinary European languages. The small Maltese crosses are placed
to mark the conclusion of each separate set of Hebrew names. These names
are those of Deity Angels and Archangels allotted by the Qabalists to
each of the 9 first Sephiroth or Divine Emanations. In English letters
they run thus, beginning from the head of the serpent: ✠ Ehyeh Kether
Metatron Chaioth Ha-Qadehs Rashith Ha-Galgalim S.P.M. (for "Sphere of
the Primum Mobile") ✠ Iah Chokmah Ratziel Auphanim Masloth S.S.F (for
"Sphere of the Fixed Stars," or S.Z. for "Sphere of the Zodiac") ✠
Iehovah Eolhim, Binah Tzadquiel Aralim Shabbathai S. (for "Sphere") of
Saturn ✠ El Chesed Tzadquiel Chaschmalim Tzedeq S. of Jupiter ✠ Elohim
Gibor Geburah Kamael Seraphim Madim S. of Mars ✠ Iehovah Eloah Va-Daäth
Tiphereth Raphaêl Malakim Shemesh S. of the Sun ✠ Iehovah Tzabaoth
Netzach Haniel Elohim Nogah S. of Venus. ✠ Elohim Tzabaoth Hod Michaêl
Beni Elohim Kokav S. of Mercury ✠ Shaddaï El Chai Iesod Gabriel Cherubim
Levanah S. of the Moon ✠.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Magical Triangle Of Solomon](lks09)
