[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks04)  [Next](lks06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

# SHEMHAMPHORASH.

(1.) <span id="img_fig001"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig001.jpg)
BAEL.--The First Principal Spirit is a King ruling in the East, called
Bael. He maketh thee to go Invisible. He ruleth over 66 Legions of
Infernal Spirits. He appeareth in divers shapes, sometimes like a Cat,
sometimes like a Toad, and sometimes like a Man, and sometimes all these
forms at once. He speaketh hoarsely. This is his character which is used
to be worn as a Lamen before him who calleth him forth, or else he will
not do thee homage.

(2.) <span id="img_fig002"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig002.jpg)
AGARES.--The Second Spirit is a Duke called Agreas, or Agares. He is
under the Power of the East, and cometh up in the form of an old fair
Man, riding upon a Crocodile, carrying a Goshawk upon his fist, and yet
mild in appearance. He maketh them to run that stand still, and bringeth
back runaways. He teaches all Languages or Tongues presently. He hath
power also to destroy Dignities both Spiritual and Temporal, and causeth
Earthquakes. He was of the Order of Virtues. He hath under his
government 31 Legions of Spirits. And this is his Seal or Character
which thou shalt wear as a Lamen before thee.

(3.) <span id="img_fig003"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig003.jpg)
VASSAGO.--The Third Spirit is a Mighty Prince, being of the same nature
as Agares. He is called Vassago. This Spirit is of a Good Nature, and
his office is to declare things Past and to Come, and to discover all
things Hid or Lost. And he governeth 26 Legions of Spirits, and this is
his Seal.

(4.) <span id="img_fig004"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig004.jpg)
SAMIGINA, or GAMIGM.--The Fourth Spirit is Samigina, a Great Marquis. He
appeareth in the form

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of a little Horse or Ass, and then into Human shape doth he change
himself at the request of the Master. He speaketh with a hoarse voice.
He ruleth over 30 Legions of Inferiors. He teaches all Liberal Sciences,
and giveth account of Dead Souls that died in sin. And his Seal is this,
which is to be worn before the Magician when he is Invocator, etc.

(5.) <span id="img_fig005"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig005.jpg)
MARBAS.--The fifth Spirit is Marbas. He is a Great President, and
appeareth at first in the form of a Great Lion, but afterwards, at the
request of the Master, he putteth on Human Shape. He answereth truly of
things Hidden or Secret. He causeth Diseases and cureth them. Again, he
giveth great Wisdom and Knowledge in Mechanical Arts; and can change men
into other shapes. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is
this, which is to be worn as aforesaid.

(6.) <span id="img_fig006"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig006.jpg)
VALEFOR.--The Sixth Spirit is Valefor. He is a mighty Duke, and
appeareth in the shape of a Lion with an Ass's Head, bellowing. He is a
good Familiar, but tempteth them he is a familiar of to steal. He
governeth 10 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which is to be worn,
whether thou wilt have him for a Familiar, or not.

(7.) <span id="img_fig007"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig007.jpg)
AMON.--The Seventh Spirit is Amon. He is a Marquis great in power, and
most stern. He appeareth like a Wolf with a Serpents tail, vomiting out
of his mouth flames of fire; but at the command of the Magician he
putteth on the shape of a Man with Dog's teeth beset in a head like a
Raven; or else like a Man with a Raven's head (simply). He telleth all
things Past and to Come. He procureth feuds and reconcileth
controversies between friends. He governeth 40 Legions of Spirits. His
Seal is this which is to be worn as aforesaid, etc.

(8.) <span id="img_fig008"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig008.jpg)
BARBATOS.--The Eighth Spirit is Barbatos. He is a Great Duke, and
appeareth when the Sun is in Sagittary,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

with four noble Kings and their companies of great troops. He giveth
understanding of the singing of Birds, and of the Voices of other
creatures, such as the barking of Dogs. He breaketh the Hidden Treasures
open that have been laid by the Enchantments of Magicians. He is of the
Order of Virtues, of which some part he retaineth still; and he knoweth
all things Past, and to come, and conciliateth Friends and those that be
in Power. He ruleth over 30 Legions of Spirits. His Seal of Obedience is
this, the which wear before thee as aforesaid.

\(9\) <span id="img_fig009"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig009.jpg) <span id="img_fig010"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig010.jpg) PAIMON.--The Ninth Spirit in this
Order is Paimon, a Great King, and very obedient unto LUCIFER. He
appeareth in the form of a Man sitting upon a Dromedary with a Crown
most glorious upon his head. There goeth before him also an Host of
Spirits, like Men with Trumpets and well sounding Cymbals, and all other
sorts of Musical Instruments. He hath a great Voice, and roareth at his
first coming, and his speech is such that the Magician cannot well
understand unless he can compel him. This Spirit can teach all Arts and
Sciences, and other secret things. He can discover unto thee what the
Earth is, and what holdeth it up in the Waters; and what Mind is, and
where it is; or any other thing thou mayest desire to know. He giveth
Dignity, and confirmeth the same. He bindeth or maketh any man subject
unto the Magician if he so desire it. He giveth good Familiars, and such
as can teach all Arts. He is to be observed towards the West. He is of
the Order of Dominations. <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) He hath
under him 200 Legions of Spirits, and part of them are of the Order of
Angels, and the other part of Potentates. Now if thou callest this
Spirit Paimon alone, thou must make him some offering; and

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

there will attend him two Kings called LABAL and ABALIM, and also other
Spirits who be of the Order of Potentates in his Host, and 25 Legions.
And those Spirits which be subject unto them are not always with them
unless the Magician do compel them. His Character is this which must be
worn as a Lamen before thee, etc.

(10.) <span id="img_fig011"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig011.jpg) BUER.--The Tenth Spirit is Buer, a
Great President. He appeareth in Sagittary, and that is his shape when
the Sun is there. He teaches Philosophy, both Moral and Natural, and the
Logic Art, and also the Virtues of all Herbs and Plants. He healeth all
distempers in man, and giveth good Familiars. He governeth 50 Legions of
Spirits, and his Character of obedience is this, which thou must wear
when thou callest him forth unto appearance.

(11.) <span id="img_fig012"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig012.jpg) GUSION.--The Eleventh Spirit in
order is a great and strong Duke, called Gusion. He appeareth like a
Xenopilus. He telleth all things, Past, Present, and to Come, and
showeth the meaning and resolution of all questions thou mayest ask. He
conciliateth and reconcileth friendships, and giveth Honour and Dignity
unto any. He ruleth over 40 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, the
which wear thou as aforesaid.

(12.) <span id="img_fig013"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig013.jpg) SITRI.--The Twelfth Spirit is
Sitri. He is a Great Prince and appeareth at first with a Leopard's head
and the Wings of a Gryphon, but after the command of the Master of the
Exorcism he putteth on Human shape, and that very beautiful. He
enflameth men with Women's love, and Women with Men's love; and causeth
them also to show themselves naked if it be desired. He governeth 60
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, to be worn as a Lamen before thee,
etc.

(13.) <span id="img_fig014"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig014.jpg) <span id="img_fig015"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig015.jpg) BELETH.--The Thirteenth Spirit is
called Beleth

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

(or Bileth, or Bilet). He is a mighty King and terrible. He rideth on a
pale horse with trumpets and other kinds of musical instruments playing
before him. He is very furious at his first appearance, that is, while
the Exorcist layeth his courage; for to do this he must hold a Hazel
Wand in his hand, striking it out towards the South and East Quarters,
make a triangle, △, without the Circle, and then command him into it by
the Bonds and Charges of Spirits as hereafter followeth. And if he doth
not enter into the triangle, △, at your threats, rehearse the Bonds and
Charms before him, and then he will yield Obedience and come into it,
and do what he is commanded by the Exorcist. Yet he must receive him
courteously because he is a Great King, and do homage unto him, as the
Kings and Princes do that attend upon him. And thou must have always a
Silver Ring on the middle finger of the left hand held against thy
face, <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) as they do yet before AMAYMON.
This Great King Beleth causeth all the love that may be, both of Men and
of Women, until the Master Exorcist hath had his desire fulfilled. He is
of the Order of Powers, and he governeth 85 Legions of Spirits. His
Noble Seal is this, which is to be worn before thee at working.

(14.) <span id="img_fig016"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig016.jpg) <span id="img_fig017"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig017.jpg) LERAJE, or LERAIKHA.--The
Fourteenth Spirit is called Leraje (or Leraie). He is a Marquis Great in
Power, showing himself in the likeness of an Archer clad in Green, and
carrying a Bow and Quiver. He causeth all great Battles and Contests;
and maketh wounds to putrefy that are made with Arrows by Archers. This
belongeth unto Sagittary. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, and this
is his Seal, etc.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

(15.) <span id="img_fig018"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig018.jpg) ELIGOS.--The Fifteenth Spirit in
Order is Eligos, a Great Duke, and appeareth in the form of a goodly
Knight, carrying a Lance, an Ensign, and a Serpent. He discovereth
hidden things, and knoweth things to come; and of Wars, and how the
Soldiers will or shall meet. He causeth the Love of Lords and Great
Persons. He governeth 60 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(16.) <span id="img_fig019"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig019.jpg) ZEPAR.--The Sixteenth Spirit is
Zepar. He is a Great Duke, and appeareth in Red Apparel and Armour, like
a Soldier. His office is to cause Women to love Men, and to bring them
together in love. He also maketh them barren. He governeth 26 Legions of
Inferior Spirits, and his Seal is this, which he obeyeth when he seeth
it.

(17.) <span id="img_fig020"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig020.jpg) BOTIS.--The Seventeenth Spirit is
Botis, a Great President, and an Earl. He appeareth at the first show in
the form of an ugly Viper, then at the command of the Magician he
putteth on a Human shape with Great Teeth, and two Horns, carrying a
bright and sharp Sword in his hand. He telleth all things Past, and to
Come, and reconcileth Friends and Foes. He ruleth over 60 Legions of
Spirits, and this is his Seal, etc.

(18.) <span id="img_fig021"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig021.jpg) <span id="img_fig022"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig022.jpg) BATHIN.--The Eighteenth Spirit is
Bathin. He is a Mighty and Strong Duke, and appeareth like a Strong Man
with the tail of a Serpent, sitting upon a Pale-Coloured Horse. He
knoweth the Virtues of Herbs and Precious Stones, and can transport men
suddenly from one country to another. He ruleth over 30 Legions of
Spirits. His Seal is this which is to be worn as aforesaid.

(19.) <span id="img_fig023"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig023.jpg) SALLOS.--The Nineteenth Spirit is
Sallos (or Saleos). He is a Great and Mighty Duke, and appeareth in the
form of a gallant Soldier riding on a Crocodile, with a Ducal Crown on
his head, but peaceably. He

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

causeth the Love of Women to Men, and of Men to Women; and governeth 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(20.) <span id="img_fig024"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig024.jpg) PURSON.--The Twentieth Spirit is
Purson, a Great King. His appearance is comely, like a Man with a Lion's
face, carrying a cruel Viper in his hand, and riding upon a Bear. Going
before him are many Trumpets sounding. He knoweth all things hidden, and
can discover Treasure, and tell all things Past, Present, and to Come.
He can take a Body either Human or Aërial, and answereth truly of all
Earthly things both Secret and Divine, and of the Creation of the World.
He bringeth forth good Familiars, and under his Government there be 22
Legions of Spirits, partly of the Order of Virtues and partly of the
Order of Thrones. His Mark, Seal, or Character is this, unto the which
he oweth obedience, and which thou shalt wear in time of action, etc.

(21.) <span id="img_fig025"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig025.jpg) MARAX.--The Twenty-first Spirit is
Marax. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) He is a Great Earl and
President. He appeareth like a great Bull with a Man's face. His office
is to make Men very knowing in Astronomy, and all other Liberal
Sciences; also he can give good Familiars, and wise, knowing the virtues
of Herbs and Stones which be precious. He governeth 30 Legions of
Spirits, and his Seal is this, which must be made and worn as aforesaid,
etc.

(22.) <span id="img_fig026"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig026.jpg) IPOS.--The Twenty-second Spirit is
Ipos. He is an Earl, and a Mighty Prince, and appeareth in the form of
an Angel with a Lion's Head, and a Goose's Foot, and Hare's Tail. He
knoweth all things Past, Present, and to Come. He maketh men witty and
bold.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which thou shalt
wear, etc.

(23.) <span id="img_fig027"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig027.jpg) AIM.--The Twenty-third Spirit is
Aim. He is a Great Strong Duke. He appeareth in the form of a very
handsome Man in body, but with three Heads; the first, like a Serpent,
the second like a Man having two Stars on his Forehead, the third like a
Calf. He rideth on a Viper, carrying a Firebrand in his Hand, wherewith
he setteth cities, castles, and great Places, on fire. He maketh thee
witty in all manner of ways, and giveth true answers unto private
matters. He governeth 26 Legions of Inferior Spirits; and his Seal is
this, which wear thou as aforesaid, etc.

(24.) <span id="img_fig028"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig028.jpg) NABERIUS.--The Twenty-fourth
Spirit is Naberius. He is a most valiant Marquis, and showeth in the
form of a Black Crane, fluttering about the Circle, and when he speaketh
it is with a hoarse voice. He maketh men cunning in all Arts and
Sciences, but especially in the Art of Rhetoric. He restoreth lost
Dignities and Honours. He governeth 19 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is
this, which is to be worn, etc.

(25.) <span id="img_fig029"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig029.jpg) GLASYA-LABOLAS.--The Twenty-fifth
Spirit is Glasya-Labolas. He is a Mighty President and Earl, and showeth
himself in the form of a Dog with Wings like a Gryphon. He teacheth all
Arts and Sciences in an instant, and is an Author of Bloodshed and
Manslaughter. He teacheth all things Past, and to Come. If desired he
causeth the love both of Friends and of Foes. He can make a Man to go
Invisible. And he hath under his command 36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal
is this, to be, etc.

(26.) <span id="img_fig030"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig030.jpg) <span id="img_fig031"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig031.jpg) BUNE, or BIMÉ.--The Twenty-sixth
Spirit is Buné (or Bim). He is a Strong, Great and Mighty Duke. He
appeareth in the form of a Dragon with

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

three heads, one like a Dog, one like a Gryphon, and one like a Man. He
speaketh with a high and comely Voice. He changeth the Place of the
Dead, and causeth the Spirits which be under him to gather together upon
your Sepulchres. He giveth Riches unto a Man, and maketh him Wise and
Eloquent. He giveth true Answers unto Demands. And he governeth 30
Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, unto the which he oweth Obedience.
He hath another Seal (which is the first of these, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) but the last is the best) <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16)

(27.) <span id="img_fig032"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig032.jpg) RONOVÉ.--The Twenty-seventh Spirit
is Ronové. He appeareth in the Form of a Monster. He teacheth the Art of
Rhetoric very well and giveth Good Servants, Knowledge of Tongues, and
Favours with Friends or Foes. He is a Marquis and Great Earl; and there
be under his command 19 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(28.) <span id="img_fig033"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig033.jpg) BERITH.--The Twenty-eighth Spirit
in Order, as Solomon bound them, is named Berith. He is a Mighty, Great,
and Terrible Duke. He hath two other Names given unto him by men of
later times, viz.: BEALE, or BEAL, and BOFRY or BOLFRY. He appeareth in
the Form of a Soldier with Red Clothing, riding upon a Red Horse, and
having a Crown of Gold upon his head. He giveth true answers, Past,
Present, and to Come. Thou must make use of a Ring in calling him forth,
as is before spoken of regarding Beleth. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[3](#fn_17) He can turn all metals into Gold. He can
give Dignities, and can confirm them unto Man. He speaketh with a very
clear and subtle Voice. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is
this, etc.

(29.) <span id="img_fig034"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig034.jpg) ASTAROTH.--The Twenty.--ninth
Spirit is Astaroth. He is a Mighty, Strong Duke, and appeareth in

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the Form of an hurtful Angel riding on an Infernal Beast like a Dragon,
and carrying in his right hand a Viper. Thou must in no wise let him
approach too near unto thee, lest he do thee damage by his Noisome
Breath. Wherefore the Magician must hold the Magical Ring near his face,
and that will defend him. He giveth true answers of things Past,
Present, and to Come, and can discover all Secrets. He will declare
wittingly how the Spirits fell, if desired, and the reason of his own
fall. He can make men wonderfully knowing in all Liberal Sciences. He
ruleth 40 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, which wear thou as a
Lamen before thee, or else he will not appear nor yet obey thee, etc.

(30.) <span id="img_fig035"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig035.jpg) FORNEUS.--The Thirtieth Spirit is
Forneus. He is a Mighty and Great Marquis, and appeareth in the Form of
a Great Sea-Monster. He teacheth, and maketh men wonderfully knowing in
the Art of Rhetoric. He causeth men to have a Good Name, and to have the
knowledge and understanding of Tongues. He maketh one to be beloved of
his Foes as well as of his Friends. He governeth 29 Legions of Spirits,
partly of the Order of Thrones, and partly of that of Angels. His Seal
is this, which wear thou, etc.

(31.) <span id="img_fig036"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig036.jpg) FORAS.--The Thirty-first Spirit is
Foras. He is a Mighty President, and appeareth in the Form of a Strong
Man in Human Shape. He can give the understanding to Men how they may
know the Virtues of all Herbs and Precious Stones. He teacheth the Arts
of Logic and Ethics in all their parts. If desired he maketh men
invisible, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) and to live long, and to
be eloquent. He

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

can discover Treasures and recover things Lost. He ruleth over 29
Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, which wear thou, etc.

(32.) <span id="img_fig037"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig037.jpg) ASMODAY.--The Thirty-second Spirit
is Asmoday, or Asmodai. He is a Great King, Strong, and Powerful. He
appeareth with Three Heads, whereof the first is like a Bull, the second
like a Man, and the third like a Ram; he bath also the tail of a
Serpent, and from his mouth issue Flames of Fire. His Feet are webbed
like those of a Goose. He sitteth upon an Infernal Dragon, and beareth
in his hand a Lance with a Banner. He is first and choicest under the
Power of AMAYMON, he goeth before all other. When the Exorcist bath a
mind to call him, let it be abroad, and let him stand on his feet all
the time of action, with his Cap or Headdress off; for if it be on,
AMAYMON will deceive him and call all his actions to be bewrayed. But as
soon as the Exorcist seeth Asmoday in the shape aforesaid, he shall call
him by his Name, saying: "Art thou Asmoday?" and he will not deny it,
and by-and-by he will bow down unto the ground. He giveth the Ring of
Virtues; he teacheth the Arts of Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry, and
all handicrafts absolutely. He giveth true and full answers unto thy
demands. He maketh one Invincible. He showeth the place where Treasures
lie, and guardeth it. He, amongst the Legions of AMAYMON governeth 72
Legions of Spirits Inferior. His Seal is this which thou must wear as a
Lamen upon thy breast, etc.

(33.) <span id="img_fig038"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig038.jpg) GAAP.--The Thirty-third Spirit is
Gaap. He is a Great President and a Mighty Prince. He appeareth when the
Sun is in some of the Southern Signs, in a Human Shape, going before
Four Great and Mighty Kings, as if he were a Guide to conduct them along
on their way. His Office is to make men Insensible or

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ignorant; as also in Philosophy to make them
Knowing, and in all the Liberal Sciences. He can cause Love or Hatred,
also he can teach thee to consecrate those things that belong to the
Dominion of AMAYMON his King. He can deliver Familiars out of the
Custody of other Magicians, and answereth truly and perfectly of things
Past, Present, and to Come. He can carry and re-carry men very speedily
from one Kingdom to another, at the Will and Pleasure of the Exorcist.
He ruleth over 66 Legions of Spirits, and he was of the Order of
Potentates. His Seal is this to be made and to be worn as aforesaid,
etc.

(34.) <span id="img_fig039"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig039.jpg) FURFUR.--The Thirty-fourth Spirit
is Furfur. He is a Great and Mighty Earl, appearing in the Form of an
Hart with a Fiery Tail. He never speaketh truth unless he be compelled,
or brought up within a triangle, △. Being therein, he will take upon
himself the Form of an Angel. Being bidden, he speaketh with a hoarse
voice. Also he will wittingly urge Love between Man and Woman. He can
raise Lightnings and Thunders, Blasts, and Great Tempestuous Storms. And
he giveth True Answers both of Things Secret and Divine, if commanded.
He ruleth over 26 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is this, etc.

(35.) <span id="img_fig040"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig040.jpg) MARCHOSIAS.--The Thirty-fifth
Spirit is Marchosias. He is a Great and Mighty Marquis, appearing at
first in the Form of a Wolf <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) having
Gryphon's Wings, and a Serpent's Tail, and Vomiting Fire out of his
mouth. But after a time, at the command of the Exorcist he putteth on
the Shape of a Man. And be is a strong fighter. He was of the Order of
Dominations. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits. He told his Chief,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

who was Solomon, that after 1,200 years he had hopes to return unto the
Seventh Throne. And his Seal is this, to be made and worn as a Lamen,
etc.

(36.) <span id="img_fig041"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig041.jpg) STOLAS, OR STOLOS.--The
Thirty-sixth Spirit is Stolas, or Stolos. He is a Great and Powerful
Prince, appearing in the Shape of a Mighty Raven at first before the
Exorcist; but after he taketh the image of a Man. He teacheth the Art of
Astronomy, and the Virtues of Herbs and Precious Stones. He governeth 26
Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is this, which is, etc.

(37.) <span id="img_fig042"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig042.jpg) PHENEX.--The Thirty-Seventh Spirit
is Phenex (or Pheynix). He is a great Marquis, and appeareth like the
Bird Phoenix, having the Voice of a Child. He singeth many sweet notes
before the Exorcist, which he must not regard, but by-and-by he must bid
him put on Human Shape. Then he will speak marvellously of all wonderful
Sciences if required. He is a Poet, good and excellent. And he will be
willing to perform thy requests. He hath hopes also to return to the
Seventh Throne after 1,200 years more, as he said unto Solomon. He
governeth 20 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is this, which wear thou,
etc.

(38.) <span id="img_fig043"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig043.jpg) HALPHAS, or MALTHUS.--The
Thirty-eighth Spirit is Halphas, or Malthous (or Malthas). He is a Great
Earl, and appeareth in the Form of a Stock-Dove. He speaketh with a
hoarse Voice. His Office is to build up Towers, and to furnish them with
Ammunition and Weapons, and to send Men-of-War <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) to places appointed. He ruleth over 26
Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(39.) <span id="img_fig044"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig044.jpg) MALPHAS.--The Thirty-ninth Spirit
is Malphas. He appeareth at first like a Crow, but after he will put on
Human Shape at the request of the Exorcist, and

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

speak with a hoarse Voice. He is a Mighty President and Powerful. He can
build Houses and High Towers, and can bring to thy Knowledge Enemies'
Desires and Thoughts, and that which they have done. He giveth Good
Familiars. If thou makest a Sacrifice unto him he will receive it kindly
and willingly, but he will deceive him that doth it. He governeth 40
Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(40.) <span id="img_fig045"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig045.jpg) RAUM.--The Fortieth Spirit is
Räum. He is a Great Earl; and appeareth at first in the Form of a Crow,
but after the Command of the Exorcist he putteth on Human Shape. His
office is to steal Treasures out King's Houses, and to carry it whither
he is commanded, and to destroy Cities and Dignities of Men, and to tell
all things, Past, and What Is, and what Will Be; and to cause Love
between Friends and Foes. He was of the Order of Thrones. He governeth
30 Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is this, which wear thou as
aforesaid.

(41.) <span id="img_fig046"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig046.jpg) FOCALOR.--The Forty-first Spirit
is Focalor, or Forcalor, or Furcalor. He is a Mighty Duke and Strong. He
appeareth in the Form of a Man with Gryphon's Wings. His office is to
slay Men, and to drown them in the Waters, and to overthrow Ships of
War, for he hath Power over both Winds and Seas; but he will not hurt
any man or thing if he be commanded to the contrary by the Exorcist. He
also hath hopes to return to the Seventh Throne after 1,000 years. He
governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(42.) <span id="img_fig047"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig047.jpg) <span id="img_fig048"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig048.jpg) VEPAR.--The Forty-second Spirit is
Vepar, or Vephar. He is a Duke Great and Strong and appeareth like a
Mermaid. His office is to govern the Waters, and to guide Ships laden
with Arms, Armour, and Ammunition, etc., thereon. And at the request of
the Exorcist he can cause the seas to be right stormy and to appear

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

full of ships. Also he maketh men to die in Three Days by Putrefying
Wounds or Sores, and causing Worms to breed in them. He governeth 29
Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(43.) <span id="img_fig049"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig049.jpg) SABNOCK.--The Forty-third Spirit,
as King Solomon commanded them into the Vessel of Brass, is called
Sabnock, or Savnok. He is a Marquis, Mighty, Great and Strong, appearing
in the Form of an Armed Soldier with a Lion's Head, riding on a
pale-coloured horse. His office is to build high Towers, Castles and
Cities, and to furnish them with Armour, etc. Also he can afflict Men
for many days with Wounds and with Sores rotten and full of Worms. He
giveth Good Familiars at the request of the Exorcist. He commandeth 50
Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is this, etc.

(44.) <span id="img_fig050"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig050.jpg) SHAN.--The Forty-fourth Spirit is
Shax, or Shaz (or Shass). He is a Great Marquis and appeareth in the
Form of a Stock-Dove, speaking with a voice hoarse, but yet subtle. His
Office is to take away the Sight, Hearing, or Understanding of any Man
or Woman at the command of the Exorcist; and to steal money out of the
houses of Kings, and to carry it again in 1,200 years. If commanded he
will fetch Horses at the request of the Exorcist, or any other thing.
But he must first be commanded into a Triangle, △, or else he will
deceive him, and tell him many Lies. He can discover all things that are
Hidden, and not kept by Wicked Spirits. He giveth good Familiars,
sometimes. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this,
etc.

(45.) <span id="img_fig051"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig051.jpg) VINÉ.--The Forty-fifth Spirit is
Viné, or Vinea. He is a Great King, and an Earl; and appeareth in the
Form of a Lion, <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) riding upon a Black
Horse, and bearing

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

a Viper in his hand. His Office is to discover Things Hidden, Witches,
Wizards, and Things Present, Past, and to Come. He, at the command of
the Exorcist will build Towers, overthrow Great Stone Walls, and make
the Waters rough with Storms. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits. And
his Seal is this, which wear thou, as aforesaid, etc.

(46.) <span id="img_fig052"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig052.jpg) BIFRONS.--The Forty-sixth Spirit
is called Bifrons, or Bifröus, or Bifrovs. He is an Earl, and appeareth
in the Form of a Monster; but after a while, at the Command of the
Exorcist, he putteth on the shape of a Man. His Office is to make one
knowing in Astrology, Geometry, and other Arts and Sciences. He teacheth
the Virtues of Precious Stones and Woods. He changeth Dead Bodies, and
putteth them in another place; also he lighteth seeming Candles upon the
Graves of the Dead. He hath under his Command 6 Legions of Spirits. His
Seal is this, which he will own and submit unto, etc.

(47.) <span id="img_fig053"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig053.jpg) <span id="img_fig054"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig054.jpg) UVALL, VUAL, or VOVAL.--The
Forty-seventh Spirit Uvall, or Vual, or Voval. He is a Duke, Great,
Mighty, and Strong; and appeareth in the Form of a Mighty Dromedary at
the first, but after a while at the Command of the Exorcist he putteth
on Human Shape, and speaketh the Egyptian Tongue, but not
perfectly. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) His Office is to procure
the Love of Woman, and to tell Things Past, Present, and to Come. He
also procureth Friendship between Friends and Foes. He was of the Order
of Potestates or Powers. He governeth 37 Legions of Spirits, and his
Seal is this, to be made and worn before thee, etc.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

(48.) <span id="img_fig055"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig055.jpg) HAAGENTI.--The Forty-eighth Spirit
is Haagenti. He is a President, appearing in the Form of a Mighty Bull
with Gryphon's Wings. This is at first, but after, at the Command of the
Exorcist he putteth on Human Shape. His Office is to make Men wise, and
to instruct them in divers things; also to Transmute all Metals into
Gold; and to change Wine into Water, and Water into Wine. He governeth
33 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(49.) <span id="img_fig056"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig056.jpg) CROCELL.--The Forty-ninth Spirit
is Crocell, or Crokel. He appeareth in the Form of an Angel. He is a
Duke Great and Strong, speaking something Mystically of Hidden Things.
He teacheth the Art of Geometry and the Liberal Sciences. He, at the
Command of the Exorcist, will produce Great Noises like the Rushings of
many Waters, although there be none. He warmeth Waters, and discovereth
Baths. He was of the Order of Potestates, or Powers, before his fall, as
he declared unto the King Solomon. He governeth 48 Legions of Spirits.
His Seal is this, the which wear thou as aforesaid.

(50.) <span id="img_fig057"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig057.jpg) FURCAS.--The Fiftieth Spirit is
Furcas. He is a Knight, and appeareth in the Form of a Cruel Old Man
with a long Beard and a hoary Head, riding upon a pale-coloured Horse,
with a Sharp Weapon in his hand. His Office is to teach the Arts of
Philosophy, Astrology, Rhetoric, Logic, Cheiromancy, and Pyromancy, in
all their parts, and perfectly. He hath under his Power 20 Legions of
Spirits. His Seal, or Mark, is thus made, etc.

(51.) <span id="img_fig058"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig058.jpg) BALAM.--The Fifty-first Spirit is
Balam or Balaam. He is a Terrible, Great, and Powerful King. He
appeareth with three Heads: the first is like that of a Bull; the second
is like that of a Man; the third is like that of a Ram. He hath the Tail
of a Serpent, and Flaming Eyes. He rideth upon a furious Bear, and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

carrieth a Boshawk upon his Fist. He speaketh with a hoarse Voice,
giving True Answers of Things Past, Present, and to Come. He maketh men
to go Invisible, and also to be Witty. He governeth 40 Legions of
Spirits. His Seal is this, etc.

(52.) <span id="img_fig059"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig059.jpg) ALLOCES.--The Fifty-second Spirit
is Alloces, or Alocas. He is a Duke, Great, Mighty, and Strong,
appearing in the Form of a Soldier <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)
riding upon a Great Horse. His Face is like that of a Lion, very Red,
and having Flaming Eyes. His Speech is hoarse and very big. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) His Office is to teach the Art of
Astronomy, and all the Liberal Sciences. He bringeth unto thee Good
Familiars; also he ruleth over 36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this,
which, etc.

(53.) <span id="img_fig060"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig060.jpg) CAMIO or CAIM.--The Fifty-third
Spirit is Camio, or Caim. He is a Great President, and appeareth in the
Form of the Bird called a Thrush at first, but afterwards he putteth on
the Shape of a Man carrying in his Hand a Sharp Sword. He seemeth to
answer in Burning Ashes, or in Coals of Fire. He is a Good Disputer. His
Office is to give unto Men the Understanding of all Birds, Lowing of
Bullocks, Barking of Dogs, and other Creatures; and also of the Voice of
the Waters. He giveth True Answers of Things to Come. He was of the
Order of Angels, but now ruleth over 30 Legions of Spirits Infernal. His
Seal is this, which wear thou, etc.

(54.) <span id="img_fig061"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig061.jpg) MURMUR, or MURMUS.--The
Fifty-fourth Spirit is called Murmur, or Murmus, or Murmux. He is a
Great Duke, and an Earl; and appeareth in the Form of a Warrior riding
upon a Gryphon, with a Ducal Crown upon his Head. There do go before him
those his Ministers

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

with great Trumpets sounding. His Office is to teach Philosophy
perfectly, and to constrain Souls Deceased to come before the Exorcist
to answer those questions which he may wish to put to them, if desired.
He was partly of the Order of Thrones, and partly of that of Angels. He
now ruleth 30 Legions of Spirits. And his Seal is this, etc.

(55.) <span id="img_fig062"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig062.jpg) OROBAS.--The Fifty-fifth Spirit is
Orobas. He is a great and Mighty Prince, appearing at first like a
Horse; but after the command of the Exorcist he putteth on the Image of
a Man. His Office is to discover all things Past, Present, and to Come;
also to give Dignities, and Prelacies, and the Favour of Friends and of
Foes. He giveth True Answers of Divinity, and of the Creation of the
World. He is very faithful unto the Exorcist, and will not suffer him to
be tempted of any Spirit. He governeth 20 Legions of Spirits. His Seal
is this, etc.

\(56\) <span id="img_fig063"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig063.jpg) GREMORY, or GAMORI.--The
Fifty-sixth Spirit is Gremory, or Gamori. He is a Duke Strong and
Powerful, and appeareth in the Form of a Beautiful Woman, with a
Duchess's Crown tied about her waist, and riding on a Great Camel. His
Office is to tell of all Things Past, Present, and to Come; and of
Treasures Rid, and what they lie in; and to procure the Love of Women
both Young and Old. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is
this, etc.

(57.) <span id="img_fig064"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig064.jpg) OSÉ, or VOSO.--The Fifty-seventh
Spirit is Oso, Osé, or Voso. He is a Great President, and appeareth like
a Leopard at the first, but after a little time he putteth on the Shape
of a Man. His Office is to make one cunning in the Liberal Sciences, and
to give True Answers of Divine and Secret Things; also to change a Man
into any Shape that the Exorcist pleaseth, so that

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

he that is so changed will not think any other thing than that he is in
verity that Creature or Thing he is changed into. He governeth 30  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) Legions of Spirits, and this is his Seal,
etc.

(58.) <span id="img_fig065"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig065.jpg) AMY, or AVNAS.--The Fifty-eighth
Spirit is Amy, or Avnas. He is a Great President, and appeareth at first
in the Form of a Flaming Fire; but after a while he putteth on the Shape
of a Man. His office is to make one Wonderful Knowing <span
id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) in Astrology and all the Liberal Sciences.
He giveth Good Familiars, and can bewray Treasure that is kept by
Spirits. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(59.) <span id="img_fig066"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig066.jpg) ORIAX, or ORIAS.--The Fifty-ninth
Spirit is Oriax, or Orias. He is a Great Marquis, and appeareth in the
Form of a Lion, <span id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27) riding upon a Horse
Mighty and Strong, with a Serpent's Tail; <span
id="fr_28"></span>[4](#fn_28) and he holdeth in his Right Hand two Great
Serpents hissing. His Office is to teach the Virtues of the Stars, and
to know the Mansions of the Planets, and how to understand their
Virtues. He also transformeth Men, and he giveth Dignities, Prelacies,
and Confirmation thereof; also Favour with Friends and with Foes. He
doth govern 30 Legions of Spirits; and his Seal is this, etc.

(60.) <span id="img_fig067"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig067.jpg) VAPULA, or NAPHULA.--The Sixtieth
Spirit is Vapula, or Naphula. He is a Duke Great, Mighty, and Strong;
appearing in the Form of a Lion with Gryphon's Wings. His Office is to
make Men Knowing in all Handcrafts and Professions, also in Philosophy,
and other Sciences. He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits, and

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

his Seal or Character is thus made, and thou shalt wear it as aforesaid,
etc.

(61.) <span id="img_fig068"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig068.jpg) ZAGAN.--The Sixty-first Spirit is
Zagan. He is a Great King and President, appearing at first in the Form
of a Bull with Gryphon's Wings; but after a while he putteth on Human
Shape. He maketh Men Witty. He can turn Wine into Water, and Blood into
Wine, also Water into Wine. He can turn all Metals into Coin of the
Dominion that Metal is of. He can even make Fools wise. He governeth 33
Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(62.) <span id="img_fig069"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig069.jpg) VOLAC, or VALAX, or VALU, or
UALAC.--The Sixty-second Spirit is Volac, or Valak, or Valu. He is a
President Mighty and Great, and appeareth like a Child with Angel's
Wings, riding on a Two-headed Dragon. His Office is to give True Answers
of Hidden Treasures, and to tell where Serpents may be seen. The which
he will bring unto the Exorciser without any Force or Strength being by
him employed. He governeth 38 Legions of Spirits, and his Seal is thus.

(63.) <span id="img_fig070"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig070.jpg) ANDRAS.--The Sixty-third Spirit is
Andras. He is a Great Marquis, appearing in the Form of an Angel with a
Head like a Black Night Raven, riding upon a strong Black Wolf, and
having a Sharp and Bright Sword flourished aloft in his hand. His Office
is to sow Discords. If the Exorcist have not a care, he will slay both
him and his fellows. He governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, and this is his
Seal, etc.

(64.) <span id="img_fig071"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig071.jpg) HAURES, or HAURAS, or HAVRES, or
FLAUROS.--The Sixty-fourth Spirit is Haures, or Hauras, or Havres, or
Flauros. He is a Great Duke, and appeareth at first like a Leopard,
Mighty, Terrible, and Strong, but after a while, at the Command of the
Exorcist, he putteth on Human Shape with Eyes Flaming and Fiery, and a

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

most Terrible Countenance. He giveth True Answers of all things,
Present, Past, and to Come. But if he be not commanded into a Triangle,
△, he will Lie in all these Things, and deceive and beguile the Exorcist
in these things, or in such and such business. He will, lastly, talk of
the Creation of the World, and of Divinity, and of how he and other
Spirits fell. He destroyeth and burneth up those who be the Enemies of
the Exorcist should he so desire it; also he will not suffer him to be
tempted by any other Spirit or otherwise. He governeth 36 Legions of
Spirits, and his Seal is this, to be worn as a Lamen, etc.

(65.) <span id="img_fig072"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig072.jpg) ANDREALPHUS.--The Sixty-fifth
Spirit is Andrealphus. He is a Mighty Marquis, appearing at first in the
form of a Peacock, with great Noises. But after a time he putteth on
Human shape. He can teach Geometry perfectly. He maketh Men very subtle
therein; and in all Things pertaining unto Mensuration or Astronomy. He
can transform a Man into the Likeness of a Bird. He governeth 30 Legions
of Infernal Spirits, and his Seal is this, etc.

(66.) <span id="img_fig073"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig073.jpg) CIMEJES, or CIMEIES, or
KIMARIS.--The Sixty-sixth Spirit is Cimejes, or Cimeies, or Kimaris. He
is a Marquis, Mighty, Great, Strong and Powerful, appearing like a
Valiant Warrior riding upon a goodly Black Horse. He ruleth over all
Spirits in the parts of Africa. His Office is to teach perfectly
Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, and to discover things Lost or Hidden, and
Treasures. He governeth 20 Legions of Infernals; and his Seal is this,
etc.

(67.) <span id="img_fig074"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig074.jpg) AMDUSIAS, or AMDUKIAS.--The
Sixty-seventh Spirit is Amdusias, or Amdukias. He is a Duke Great and
Strong, appearing at first like a Unicorn, but at the request of the
Exorcist he standeth before him in Human

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Shape, causing Trumpets, and all manner of
Musical Instruments to be heard, but not soon or immediately. Also he
can cause Trees to bend and incline according to the Exorcist's Will. He
giveth Excellent Familiars. He governeth 29 Legions of Spirits. And his
Seal is this, etc.

(68.) <span id="img_fig075"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig075.jpg) BELIAL.--The Sixty-eighth Spirit
is Belial. He is a Mighty and a Powerful King, and was created next
after LUCIFER. He appeareth in the Form of Two Beautiful Angels sitting
in a Chariot of Fire. He speaketh with a Comely Voice, and declareth
that he fell first from among the worthier sort, that were before
Michael, and other Heavenly Angels. His Office is to distribute
Presentations and Senatorships, etc.; and to cause favour of Friends and
of Foes. He giveth excellent Familiars, and governeth 50 Legions of
Spirits. Note well that this King Belial. must have Offerings,
Sacrifices and Gifts presented unto him by the Exorcist, or else he will
not give True Answers unto his Demands. But then he tarrieth not one
hour in the Truth, unless he be con. strained by Divine Power. And his
Seal is this, which is to be worn as aforesaid, etc.

(69.) <span id="img_fig076"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig076.jpg) DECARABIA.--The Sixty-ninth Spirit
is Decarabia. He appeareth in the Form of a Star in a Pentacle, at
first; but after, at the command of the Exorcist, he putteth on the
image of a Man. His Office is to discover the Virtues of Birds and
Precious Stones, and to make the Similitude of all kinds of Birds to fly
before the Exorcist, singing and drinking as natural Birds do. He
governeth 30 Legions of Spirits, being himself a Great Marquis. And this
is his Seal, which is to be worn, etc.

(70.) <span id="img_fig077"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig077.jpg) <span id="img_fig078"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig078.jpg) SEERE, SEAR, or SEIR.--The
Seventieth Spirit is Seere, Sear, or Seir. He is a Mighty Prince, and
Powerful, under AMAYMON, King of the East. He appeareth

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

in the Form of a Beautiful Man, riding upon a Winged Horse. His Office
is to go and come; and to bring abundance of things to pass on a sudden,
and to carry or recarry anything whither thou wouldest have it to go, or
whence thou wouldest have it from. He can pass over the whole Earth in
the twinkling of an Eye. He giveth a True relation of all sorts of
Theft, and of Treasure hid, and of many other things. He is of an
indifferent Good Nature, and is willing to do anything which the
Exorcist desireth. He governeth 26 Legions of Spirits. And this his Seal
is to be worn, etc.

(71.) <span id="img_fig079"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig079.jpg) DANTALION.--The Seventy-first
Spirit is Dantalion. He is a Duke Great and Mighty, appearing in the
Form of a Man with many Countenances, all Men's and Women's Faces; and
he hath a Book in his right hand. His Office is to teach all Arts and
Sciences unto any; and to declare the Secret Counsel of any one; for he
knoweth the Thoughts of all Men and Women, and can change them at his
Will. He can cause Love, and show the Similitude of any person, and show
the same by a Vision, let them be in what part of the World they Will.
He governeth 36 Legions of Spirits; and this is his Seal, which wear
thou, etc.

(72.) <span id="img_fig080"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig080.jpg) ANDROMALIUS.--The Seventy-second
Spirit in Order is named Andromalius. He is an Earl, Great and Mighty,
appearing in the Form of a Man holding a Great Serpent in his Hand. His
Office is to bring back both a Thief, and the Goods which be stolen; and
to discover all Wickedness, and Underhand Dealing; and to punish all
Thieves and other Wicked People and also to discover Treasures that be
Hid. He ruleth over 36 Legions of Spirits. His Seal is this, the which
wear thou as aforesaid, etc.

THESE be the 72 Mighty Kings and Princes which King

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Solomon Commanded into a Vessel of Brass,
together with their Legions. Of whom BELIAL, BILETH, ASMODAY, and GAAP,
were Chief. And it is to be noted that Solomon did this because of their
pride, for he never declared other reason why he thus bound them. And
when he had thus bound them up and sealed the Vessel, he by Divine Power
did chase them all into a deep Lake or Hole in Babylon. And they of
Babylon, wondering to see such a thing, they did then go wholly into the
Lake, to break the Vessel open, expecting to find great store of
Treasure therein. But when they had broken it open, out flew the Chief
Spirits immediately, with their Legions following them; and they were
all restored to their former places except BELIAL, who entered into a
certain Image, and thence gave answers unto those who did offer
Sacrifices unto him, and did worship the Image as their God, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[24:1](lks05.htm#fr_12) Or Dominions, as they
are usually termed.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[26:1](lks05.htm#fr_13) To protect him from the
flaming breath of the enraged Spirit; the design is given at the end of
the instructions for the Magical Circle, etc., later on in the Goetia.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[28:1](lks05.htm#fr_14) In some Codices written
Morax, but I consider the above the correct orthography.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[30:1](lks05.htm#fr_15) Figure 30.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[30:2](lks05.htm#fr_16) Figure 31.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[30:3](lks05.htm#fr_17) See *ante*, Spirit No.
13.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:1](lks05.htm#fr_18) One or two Codices have
"invincible," but "invisible" is given in the majority. Yet the form of
appearance of Foras as a strong man might warrant the former, though
from the nature of his offices the invincibility would probably be
rather on the mental than on the physical plane.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[33:1](lks05.htm#fr_19) On one Codex of the
seventeenth century, very badly written, it might be read "Ox" instead
of "Wolf."---TRANS. \[For me he appeared always like an ox, and very
dazed.--ED.\]

<span id="fn_20"></span>[34:1](lks05.htm#fr_20) Or Warriors, or
Men-at-Arms.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[36:1](lks05.htm#fr_21) Or with the Head of a
Lion, or having a Lion's Head, in some Codices.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[37:1](lks05.htm#fr_22) He can nowadays converse
in sound though colloquial Coptic.--ED.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[39:1](lks05.htm#fr_23) Or Warrior.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[39:2](lks05.htm#fr_24) Thus expressed in the
Codices.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[41:1](lks05.htm#fr_25) Should be 30. For these
72 Great Spirits of the Book Goetia are all Princes and Leaders of
numbers.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[41:2](lks05.htm#fr_26) Thus in the actual Text.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[41:3](lks05.htm#fr_27) Or "with the Face of a
Lion."

<span id="fn_28"></span>[41:4](lks05.htm#fr_28) The horse, or the
Markist?--ED.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Observations](lks06)
