[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks18)  [Next](lks20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CONSTRAINT.

I Do conjure thee, O thou Spirit N., by all the most glorious and
efficacious names of the MOST GREAT AND INCOMPREHENSIBLE LORD GOD op
HOSTS, that thou comest quickly and without delay from all parts and
places of the earth and world wherever thou mayest be, to make rational
answers unto my demands, and that visibly and affably, speaking with a
voice intelligible unto mine understanding as aforesaid. I conjure and
constrain thee, O thou Spirit N., by all the names aforesaid; and in
addition by these seven great names wherewith Solomon the Wise bound
thee and thy companions in a Vessel of Brass, ADONAI, PREYAI or PRERAI,
TETRAGRAMMATON, ANAPHAXETON or ANEPHENETON, INESSENFATOAL or
INESSENFATALL, PATHTUMON or PATHATUMON, and ITEMON; that thou appearest,
here before this Circle to fulfil my will in all things that seem good
unto me. And if thou be still so disobedient, and refusest still to
come, I will in the power and by the power of the name of the SUPREME
AND EVERLASTING LORD GOD WHO created both

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

thee and me and all the world in six days, and what is contained
therein, EIE, SARAYE, and by the power of this name PRIMEUMATON which
commandeth the whole host of Heaven, curse thee, and deprive thee of
thine office, joy, and place, and bind thee in the depths of the
Bottomless Pit or Abyss, there to remain unto the Day of the Last
Judgment. And I will bind thee in the Eternal Fire, and into the Lake of
Flame and of Brimstone, unless thou comest quickly and appearest here
before this Circle to do my will. Therefore, come thou! in and by the
holy names ADONAI, ZABAOTH, ADONAI, AMIORAN. Come thou! for it is ADONAI
who commandest thee.

IF THOU hast come thus far, and yet he appeareth not, thou mayest be
sure that he is sent unto some other place by his King, and cannot come;
and if it be so, invocate the King as here followeth, to send him. But
if he do not come still, then thou mayest be sure that he is bound in
chains in hell, and that he is not in the custody of his King. If so,
and thou still hast a desire to call him even from thence, thou must
rehearse the general curse which is called the Spirits' Chain.

Here followeth, therefore, the Invocation of the King: <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[60:1](lks19.htm#fr_34) It will depend on the
quarter to which the Spirit is attributed, which of the four chief kings
are to be invoked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Invocation Of The King](lks20)
