[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks13)  [Next](lks15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECRET SEAL OF SOLOMON.

<span id="img_fig161"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig161.jpg)

THIS is the Form of the Secret Seal of Solomon, wherewith he did bind
and seal up the aforesaid Spirits with their legions in the Vessel of
Brass.

This seal is to be made by one that is clean both inwardly and
outwardly, and that hath not defiled himself by any woman in the space
of a month, but hath in prayer and fasting desired of God to forgive him
all his sins, etc.

It is to be made on the day of Mars or Saturn (Tuesday or Saturday) at
night at 12 o'clock, and written upon virgin parchment with the blood of
a black cock that never trode hen. Note that on this night the moon must
be increasing in light (*i.e.*, going from new to full) and in the
Zodiacal Sign of Virgo. And when the seal is so made thou shalt perfume
it with alum, raisins dried in the sun, dates, cedar and lignum aloes.

Also, by this seal King Solomon did command all the aforesaid Spirits in
the Vessel of Brass, and did seal it up with this same seal. He by it
gained the love of all manner of persons, and overcame in battle, for
neither weapons, nor fire, nor water could hurt him. And this

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

privy seal was made to cover the vessel at the top withal, etc.

Note: Figures 162 to 174 inclusive are interesting as showing a marked
resemblance to the central design of the Secret Seal. It will be
observed that the evident desire is to represent hieroglyphically a
person raising his or her hands in adoration. Nearly all are stone
sepulchral steles, and the execution of them is rough and primitive in
the extreme. Most are in the Musëe du Louvre at Paris.

Figures 162 <span id="img_fig162"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig162.jpg) and 163 <span
id="img_fig163"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig163.jpg) are from
the district of Constantine and show a figure raising its arms in
adoration.

In Figure 164 <span id="img_fig164"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig164.jpg), also from Constantine, the person
bears a palm branch in the right hand. Above is a hieroglyphic
representing either the Lunar Disc or the Sun in the heavens; but more
probably the former.

Figure 165 <span id="img_fig165"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig165.jpg) is a more complicated stele. Above
is the symbol already mentioned, then comes the sign of the Pentagram,
represented by a five-pointed star, towards which the person raises his
or her hands. Besides the latter is a rude form of caduceus. A brief
inscription follows in the Punic character. The Punic or Carthaginian
language is usually considered to have been a dialect. of Phœnician, and
Carthage was of course a colony of Tyre. Beneath the Tunic inscription
is a horse's head in better drawing than the sculpture of the rest of
the stele, which would seem to imply that the rudeness of the
representation of the human figure is intentional. This and the
following stele are also from Constantine.

In Figure 166 <span id="img_fig166"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig166.jpg) again, the horse is best
delineated by far. In addition to the other symbols there is either a
hand or a foot, for it is almost impossible to distinguish which, at the
head of the stele, followed by an egg-and-tongue moulding. The figure of
the person with the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

arms raised is treated as a pure hieroglyphic and is placed between two
rude caducei. The Lunar or Solar Symbol follows.

Figure 167 <span id="img_fig167"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig167.jpg), also from Constantine, shows the
last-mentioned symbol above. The figure with the arms raised is simply a
hieroglyph, and is placed between an arm and hand on the one side, and a
rude caduceus on the other.

Figure 168 <span id="img_fig168"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig168.jpg)shows the person holding a rude
caduceus in the right hand, and standing above a dolphin. This latter,
as in the case of the horse in 165 and 166, is by far the best
delineated.

Figure 169 <span id="img_fig169"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig169.jpg), this also being from Constantine,
shows the usual human hieroglyph between a caduceus and a crescent.

Figure 170 <span id="img_fig170"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig170.jpg) is from the site of ancient
Carthage. It is very rough in workmanship, and the designs are mere
scratchings on the stone. The *ensemble* has the effect of an evil
Sigil.

Figure 171 <span id="img_fig171"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig171.jpg) is also from Carthage and the
various symbols appear to have become compressed into and synthesised in
the form of a peculiarly evil-looking caduceus.

Figure 172 <span id="img_fig172"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig172.jpg) is from the decoration of a
sepulchral urn found at Oldenburgh in Germany. It is remarkable as
showing the same hieroglyphic human form with the crescent above; the
latter in the Secret Seal of Solomon has a flattened top, and is
therefore more like a bowl, and is placed across the hieroglyph.

Figure 173 <span id="img_fig173"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig173.jpg) is an Egyptian design which would
show an analogy between the symbol and the idea of the force of the
creation.

Figure 174 <span id="img_fig174"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig174.jpg) is a stele from Phœnicia somewhat
similar to the others, except that the rudimentary caducei in Figures
166 <span id="img_fig166"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig166.jpg)
and 170 <span id="img_fig170"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig170.jpg) are here replaced by two roughly
drawn Ionic columns.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

These last three designs are taken from the work of the Chevalier Emile
Soldi-Colbert de Beaulieu, on the "*Langue Sacrée*."

In Figure 175 <span id="img_fig175"></span>
[![](tn/generic.jpg)](img/fig175.jpg) is given the Seal of the Spirit
HALAHEL. This Spirit is said to be under the rule of BAEL, and to be of
a mixed nature, partly good and partly evil, like the spirits of
Theurgia-Goetia which follow in the second book of the Lemegeton.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Other Magical Requisites](lks15)
