[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lks33)  [Next](lks35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### YE SECOUNDE CONJOURATIOUN

I invoke thee, and move thee, and stir thee up O Spirit N. appear unto
my eyes before the circle in the likeness of a man in the names and by
the name Iah and Vau, which Adam spake and in the name of God, Agla,
which Lot spake: and it was as pleasant deliverers unto him and his
house and in the name Ioth which Iacob spake in the voice

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

of the Holy ones who cast him down, and it was also as pleasant
deliverers in the anger of his brother and in the name Anaphaxeton,
which Aaron spake and it was as the Secret Wisdom and in the name
Zabaoth which Mosheh spake, and all things of water were as blood; and
in the name Asher Ehyeh Oriston, which Mosheh spake, and all waters were
bringing forth creatures who wax strong, which lifted up unto the
houses, which destroy all things and in the name of Elion which Mosheh
spake, and it was as stones from the firmament of wrath, such as was not
in the ages of Time the beginning of the Earth and in the name of Adni,
which Mosheh spake and there appeared creatures of earth who destroyed
what the big stones did not: and in the name Schema Amathia, which
Ioshua invoked, and the Sun remained over ye, O ye hills the seats of
Gibeon, and in the names Alpha and Omega which Daniel spake, and
destroyed Bel and the Dragon: and in the name Emmanuel which the sons of
God sang praises in the midst of the burning plain, and flourished in
conquest: and in the name Hagios, and by the Throne of Adni, and in
Ischyros, Athanatos, Paracletos: and in O Theos, Ictros, Athanatos. And
in these names of secret truth, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, do I invoke
and move thee. And in these names, and all things that are the names of
the God of Secret Truth who liveth for ever, the All-Powerful. I invoke
and stir thee up, O spirit N. Even by him who spake it was, to whom all
creatures are obedient and in the Extreme Justice and Anger of God; and
by the veil(?) that is before the glory of God, mighty; and by the
creatures of living breath before the Throne whose eyes are east and
west; by the fire in the fire of just Glory of the Throne; by the Holy
ones of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

Heaven; and by the secret wisdom of God, I, exalted in power, stir thee
up. Appear before this circle; obey in all things that I say; in the
seal Basdathea Baldachia; and in this Name Primeumaton, which Mosheh
spake, and the earth was divided, and Korah, Dathan, and Abiram fell in
the depth. Therefore obey in all things, O spirit N., obey thy creation.
Come thou forth: appear unto my eyes; visit us in peace, be friendly;
come forth in the 24th of a moment; obey my power, speaking the secrets
of Truth in voice and in understanding!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ye Constraynte](lks35)
