[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sig01)  [Next](sig03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0827600607/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Selected Religious Poems of Solomon ibn Gabirol*, tr. by Israel
Zangwill, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

### INTRODUCTION

POETRY, philosophy, and science, apparently three distinct fields of
intellectual endeavor, are essentially but three different
manifestations of the same spiritual force, which urges man onward to
search for the solution of the riddle of existence. Science attacks the
problem from the physical side; philosophy grapples with it from the
rational, or mental side; poetry tries to penetrate the mystery with its
vision.

Poetry need not necessarily reveal itself through the art of
versification. The astronomer whose eye sweeps through the vast
vacancies of space and whose ear catches the harmony of the spheres, the
mathematician who calculates the eons, and the physicist who measures
the electron and weighs the sun are indeed greater poets than those who
merely compose melodious lines. On the other hand, the great poet, who
ascends by the light of the divine fire within him to the heights of
Pisgah, whence he may look at life from a higher altitude and see it
more complete, more in its totality, often catches in a flash of
inspiration that which it takes the scientific investigator years of
painstaking labor to discover. The difference between those three

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

seekers after truth is only in the method. The aim is the same—to
penetrate the veil that hides from us the ultimate truth of life.

That none of them has ever succeeded, or is ever likely to succeed, in
lifting the veil that shrouds the great mystery, matters not. The effort
in itself is of the greatest moment to mankind. The ceaseless striving
and unquenchable yearning after the ultimate truth leaves us at least
nobler and purer for the attempt. It also matters little to us when the
poet or philosopher or investigator lived. Their achievements are ever
present, ever exerting their influences. If the law of motion holds good
in the physical world, it holds still stronger in the world of ideas. An
idea once set in motion will travel onward and onward and will gain in
momentum as it proceeds on its course down the ages. The great poet
therefore does not live for his own time. His mission is for all times.

The time and place of the poet are, however, of great moment to the poet
himself. More than the [philosopher](errata.htm#0) and the physicist, is
he affected by his surroundings. The soul of the poet is a most delicate
instrument, extremely susceptible to everything that comes in contact
with it. Like the harp that hung over David’s couch, the faintest breath
will play a tune upon it. The

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

coloring of the sunset, the rumbling of the thunder, the perfume of the
woods, are all reflected, echoed or exhaled by it. Of no less importance
to the poet are his social surroundings. Encouragement is the breath of
his nostrils; disparagement, the blasting wind that withers. In an
atmosphere of warm sympathy his genius will put forth the finest fruit
of his imagination. In an environment of cold criticism his soul will
shrink and shrivel up.

With these reflections in view, the personality of Solomon ibn Gabirol
becomes doubly interesting. For he was not only a great poet but also a
great philosopher. His vision was broad and his penetration keen. He saw
further than the ordinary poet and felt deeper than the ordinary
philosopher. He even cultivated science in his effort to grapple with
the riddle of existence. His genius flourished in an atmosphere of
exceptional instability—now warm, now cold; now hostile, now cordial;
and this constant change in the condition of his environment is not
without its corresponding change in the temper of his poems.

To obtain an adequately complete view of the life of this
poet-philosopher it would have been well to step out of the present and,
leaping over centuries and bounding over continents, transfer

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

ourselves to one of those delightful towns of Spain, of nine hundred
years ago. It would have been necessary to depict the past with such
vivid colors that we could visualize this man of the eleventh century as
he lived his daily life, as he feasted or fasted, as he communed with
his God or chatted with his neighbor, as he greeted his friends or raged
against his enemies, as he pored over his books or roamed in the
fields—as he suffered at times and at other times bubbled over with joy.
To know him more intimately we should have to enter his private study
and watch him work, look over his shoulder and see how he wrote and
polished what he wrote, how he passed all problems through the fiery
crucible of his brain ere he put them before the world. But to
accomplish such a feat one must have abundant material or else possess
the magic wand of the poet. I have only a few slender threads with which
to weave the story of his life. The biographical material is so scant
and, in certain instances, so contradictory that practically all that
can be said of him with certainty must be gathered from casual
utterances scattered through the multitude of his verses. And, since a
poet’s verses are often unintelligible until interpreted by the events
of his life, we are in danger here of moving in a vicious circle, trying

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

to make the verses yield up some facts of his life so that these facts,
in turn, may help us understand his verses. Under these circumstances,
the life of Solomon ibn Gabirol must remain obscure in parts. Still we
may succeed in drawing a picture in which the salient features of our
poet shall stand out clear and distinct in spite of the shadows of
uncertainty here and there.

To begin with, we must deal with the outstanding facts of Gabirol’s
life. Solomon ibn Gabirol was born in Malaga, a town in the south of
Spain, sometime during the period covering the end of 1021 and the
beginning of 1022. His father Judah hailed from Cordova whence he is
supposed to have emigrated to Malaga during the political upheaval of
1013. As far as we can gather from the poems of his son, he must have
been a scholar and a man of considerable repute, for Gabirol often signs
himself ‏בירבי‎ (a sign of distinction for the father) and in one of his
poems speaks of him as the "ornament of the world" (‏עדי תבל‎). From the
conclusion of

the same poem in which he speaks of his father’s death, we learn that
his father must have been the last of his near relations to depart from
life. "Enough," he says, "my fears have come true, but my soul will see
no further misfortune." That Solomon ibn Gabirol was left an orphan

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

early in life may be gathered from another poem in which he says:
"Grieved, without mother or father, inexperienced, lonely and poor, I am
alone without a brother and without friends, save my own thoughts." The
order of the words "without mother or father" is not required by the
meter and we should expect to find the biblical usage of mentioning the
father first. Hence, we may bring this as an additional argument that
his mother died first and his father later. The same verse states also
that he had no brothers. It is therefore safe to assume that, when his
father died, he was left without kith or kin.

In Malaga he remained only during his childhood. His formative years he
spent in Saragossa. For this we have the evidence of Moses ibn Ezra, in
his well-known Arabic work "Al-Muḥaḍarah wal-Muḍhakarah" (Discussions
and Memoirs). It is possible that his father migrated to Saragossa and
took his son with him, or that, on the death of his father, he was taken
by some friend to Saragossa, which was then an important center of
Jewish culture. It was the seat of Jonah ibn Ganaḥ, Joseph ibn Ḥasdai
and a host of other scholars. It was also the seat of a prominent man by
the name of Yekutiel who would have remained unknown in Jewish history
but for the fact that he befriended the

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

young poet who immortalized him in his poems. Through the kindness of
this Maecenas, Gabirol was able to develop his powers without having to
trouble about mundane matters.

Who were Gabirol’s masters? This question must remain unanswered. Among
all his poems there is only one place in which he speaks of himself as a
disciple. In his epistolary poem, addressed to R. Nissim of Kairwan, he
says: "Men of my counsel, bring greetings to my friend, and may he
accept blessing from his disciple." This would seem to support the
statement of Sa‘adya ibn Danan that, when R. Nissim came to Granada to
give his daughter in marriage to Joseph, the son of Samuel ha-Nagid,
Gabirol was one of his disciples. But aside from the fact that ibn Danan
is not quite reliable, the marriage of R. Nissim’s daughter took place
in 1049, when Gabirol was at least twenty-seven years of age, which
would make it rather improbable that at that age he sat at the feet of
any man. We must therefore consider the verse of Gabirol, mentioned
above, as a mere poetic compliment. His precocity undoubtedly kept him
from regarding anyone as his particular master.

His literary activity began at a remarkably early age. We know of five
poems which he composed at the age of sixteen and one of

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

these, according to the testimony of Sambari, was no less than his
versification of the six hundred and thirteen commandments, known as
*Azharot*, and it is not unlikely that the *Azharot*, beginning ‏אלהיך
אש אוכלה‎, which are written without meter, were composed at even an
earlier date.

Endowed with remarkable gifts, it is no wonder that Gabirol easily
acquired all the learning of the age. The only branch of knowledge into
which he did not inquire was that of medicine. Again and again he dwells
upon his devotion to learning for its own sake:

How can I forsake wisdom,  
And the spirit of God has made a covenant between me and her?  
Or how can she forsake me when she is to me like a  
mother and I to her as a child of old age?. . . .  
For my soul has sworn that I rest not until I find the knowledge of her
Maker.

Again:

From my youth I labored in the cause of wisdom, for her goal is
pleasant.  
She was my sister from my childhood, and of all men she chose me as her
friend.

As these two lines occur in a poem which he composed at the age of
sixteen, the expression "from my childhood" is significant, pointing to
a much earlier period of intellectual activity.

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

It is also not surprising to find that he was conscious of his powers
from the very beginning of his career. It must have produced a spirit of
antagonism among his contemporaries to hear a youth of sixteen proclaim
himself superior to anyone of his generation. One of his imaginary
interlocutors says:

Know that you are unique in your generation.

And in another poem he says:

I am the Mastersinger and Song is my slave. . . .  
Though I am but sixteen, I have the wisdom of a man of eighty.

This must have sounded to them as vain boasting. We, however, can see
that it is not vulgar boasting. It is rather the self-expression of
exuberant youth. The lines in which he sets forth his prowess remind one
of a young warrior issuing forth to challenge the enemy—Sohrab leaving
his tent to fight Rustum—and it is not so much himself that he exalts as
the weapons which God has given him.

I search out the secrets of Rhetoric and open the gates of knowledge and
understanding;  
I gather stray phrases into strings of thought, and  
from scattered words I collect pearls of wisdom. . . .  
I penetrate into places closed to all men of understanding,  
And sing songs that make the soul rejoice and deliver the heart from
sorrow. . . . <span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>  
My song is the legitimate offspring of poesy—  
Theirs the child of harlotry. . . .  
My song is as polished as pearls and through it I am exalted above all
men in all times.

We who are removed from him by nearly a millennium and know the true
merit of his work feel that he did not overestimate himself. He was
indeed the greatest poet of his day and one of the few great poets of
all times. Even critics like Moses ibn Ezra and Judah al-Ḥarizi, who
were removed from him only by one or two generations, felt the same way
about him and placed him above all his contemporaries. But his
contemporaries evidently did not relish his claims to superiority. Their
antagonism soon grew into resentment, and resentment turned into hatred.
Their hatred, in turn, only roused his anger and brought forth such
caustic lines as the following:

I am filled with wrath when I behold fools parading as wise men. . . .  
They deem their song superior to mine whereas they do not even
understand it. . . .  
Tiny little ants that they are, they venture to compare themselves with
me.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He certainly
understood the gentle art of making enemies. Moses ibn Ezra says of him:
"Although he was a philosopher as far as his intellectual attainments
were concerned,  yet his

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

anger always got the better of his understanding. He was unable to
control his temper and was easily led to ridicule great men and subject
them to contempt in his writings." In fact, he himself admits this
weakness on his part:

When my anger is roused,  
The heavens rumble with my thunder. . . .  
I am not like the man who speaks mellow words and bows and scrapes in
humility.

Again, in reproaching a friend, who proved false to him, he boldly tells
him that while he humbles himself to his friends it is by no means
because of his inferiority. He proclaims his own value in no doubtful
terms:

My light is diffused through the world,  
It has reached the confines of Shinar and Elam. . . .  
Yet I am dirt beneath the feet of my true friends,  
Dust to those who keep faith with me. . . .  
But to my enemies I am a sky raining fire upon their heads.  
They can sooner reach the sky with a ladder than they can reach me. . .
.  
Now that you have failed me I untie the bonds of friendship;  
I blot thy name from my speech, and will never stoop to mention it
again.

In an age when the execution of a happy couplet was considered an
achievement, when literary quarrels were taken seriously, such lines as
the above were bound to bring trouble to their

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

author. As long as Yekutiel lived, Gabirol’s enemies were unable to harm
him, but when, in 1039, Yekutiel himself fell at the hands of his
political enemies, Gabirol was at the mercy of his opponents. They
certainly could not r fight him with his own weapons, but they
embittered his life to such an extent that he had to leave Saragossa. In
the poem with which he took leave of this city he says:

My dwelling is amongst ostriches,  
Among the crooked and the fools who think they are very wise. . . .  
They are a people whose fathers I would disdain to set with the dogs of
my flock. . . .  
Woe unto knowledge, woe to me  
In the midst of such a people do I dwell.

But in spite of all his difficulties, his literary activity went on
apace and one masterpiece after another issued from his pen. Allusion
has already been made to the poems which he composed at the age of
sixteen. During that early period in his life he also wrote the various
panegyrics on Yekutiel, since the latter died before Gabirol was
eighteen. At the age of nineteen he composed a poem of four hundred
verses in which he set forth the rules of Hebrew grammar. In 1045,
before he left Saragossa, while still in the early twenties, he
completed his Arabic work on the "Improvement of the

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moral Qualities."
Graetz justly assumes that in depicting certain evil traits of
character, he had in mind some members of the Saragossa community and
that his characterization was so bold that it drew upon him the bitter
enmity of these people. Likewise, I do not think it farfetched to assume
that Moses the Miser, against whom he indited his famous satire ‏ככלות
ייני‎, was a native of Saragossa and that this Miser was one of those
instrumental in bringing about Gabirol’s departure from the city where
he had spent his youth. We do not know when he completed his collection
of Proverbs, "The Choice of Pearls," and his philosophic work, "The
Source of Life. " Nor can we give any definite dates for most of his
poems. These extended over the whole of his life, and even if we hold to
the opinion that he lived as late as 1069 or 1070, he lived his life
fully to produce, in the short space of forty-seven years, over three
hundred poetic compositions besides works on philosophy and ethics.

His productivity may have been enhanced by the fact that he never had to
engage in practical occupations. As Ḥarizi puts it, he was one of the
few fortunate who sold their pearls at high prices. When Yekutiel died,
Samuel ha-Nagid took up his cause, and while we frequently hear

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gabirol
complaining of ill-fortune, it is not unsafe to assume that his
complaints have no reference to material want. It is rather his
ill-health and the fickleness of friends that he has in mind. Thus, he
was free to devote all his energies to his literary pursuits. Another
fact that may have contributed to his large literary productivity was
that he had no one dependent upon him. It is quite safe to assume that
he never married. Nay, he boasts that he never loved. "Behold," he says,
"I have spent my life in search after truth while others have wasted
their substance on love." He had no other passion in life but the
passion for wisdom and truth. His sole ambition was to study and enjoy
the friendship of great men. That he realized his ambition cannot be
doubted, for he certainly numbered among his friends and admirers the
most exalted personages of his time, and his search after knowledge
resulted in the production of literary monuments that have withstood the
currents of a millennium and will undoubtedly remain on their high
pedestal for ages to come.

Of his life outside of his studies very little can be said. Even the
date of his death is a much mooted question. There is a brilliant array
of counsel on each side. Dukes, Steinschneider,

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Neubauer, and
Kaufmann are inclined to consider the statements of Moses ibn Ezra and
Ḥarizi as authentic that Gabirol died before he reached his thirtieth
year. On the other hand, Munk, Geiger, Graetz, and Sachs hold that he
lived at least as late as 1069 or 1070, which would bring his age to
about forty-seven or forty-eight years. I feel that the arguments on
both sides are equally balanced and that a decision must be reserved. We
must wait for further evidence.

Gabirol’s literary activity may be classified under the following
headings: Biblical Exegesis, Grammar, Philosophy and Ethics, and Poetry.
That he actually wrote a commentary on the Bible is doubtful, but there
are indications that he did not neglect the Bible entirely. Abraham ibn
Ezra cites him on three occasions in his commentary on the Pentateuch,
once in his commentary on Isaiah, twice in his commentary on Psalms, and
once in his commentary on Daniel. All these instances, however, are
examples of the allegorical method of interpretation, and it is possible
that they were taken from some philosophical work of Gabirol or from
some special work on the subject of biblical allegory. In fact we have
two citations from Gabirol in David Kimḥi’s commentary on Psalms (37-8,
23)

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

which are taken from his ethical work. But the biblical illustrations in
which this very work on ethics abounds lend countenance to the
suggestion that Gabirol also engaged in biblical exegesis.

Of his work in the field of Hebrew philology we happily possess more
tangible proof in the poem on Hebrew Grammar alluded to above, of which
Abraham ibn Ezra speaks in the highest terms of praise. Unfortunately,
only about one-fourth of the four hundred verses of this poem has come
down to us. Already in the time of R. Solomon Parḥon, in the twelfth
century, the remainder of this poem had been lost, and the greater part
of the fragment before us is given to remarks of a general nature.
Still, even this fragment is sufficient to show that he was a master of
the subject. We may look askance at compositions of this sort, but we
must remember that, in the days of Gabirol, the art of versification was
not limited to emotional subjects. Law, medicine, and even mathematics
were considered legitimate themes for the poet. And, in this particular
instance, Gabirol seems to have sensed the incongruity between the theme
and the form and justified himself by saying that he used the poetic
form so that it may be more easily remembered.

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

The introductory part of this poem has a special interest for us. His
plaintive lines on the neglect of the study of Hebrew seem to fit our
own times even more than his:

I know that the holy tongue has languished among them, nay, almost
perished.  
Their language is foreign to the Hebrew, strange to the Jewish speech;  
Half of them speak the language of Edom and half in obscure Kedar-tongue
hold discourse. . . .  
They know not the prophets, they know not the Book, How then should they
read secular writings? . . . .  
The Lord will call you to account, O remnant of Jacob, for forsaking the
most chosen of languages. . . .  
Is it fit that a mistress become a maid-servant, waiting upon the
concubine?  
Woe unto her who does not tend her own vineyard but nurses the vineyards
of others.

Gabirol’s more arduous labors, however, lay in the field of philosophy
and ethics for which he, in common with his contemporaries, employed
Arabic, the language of the country. And here it must be pointed out,
first of all, that what has come down to us of Gabirol’s philosophical
works represents but a small part of his labors in this field. To Senior
Sachs we are indebted for a more exact knowledge of Gabirol’s
philosophical activities. In a most ingenious as well as convincing
manner, Sachs showed that a number of pseudepigraphic compositions,

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

ascribed to King Solomon, really belonged to Solomon ibn Gabirol. This
is the story of his discovery: Johanan Allemano, the teacher of Pico
della Mirandola (fifteenth century), in the introduction to his
commentary on the Song of Songs, wherein he collected all sorts of
compositions, ascribed to King Solomon, cites in the name of an Arabic
philosopher, Abu Afláh, an older contemporary of Maimonides, seventeen
philosophical essays under the title "Essays of King Solomon, the Jew."
In the name of Apollonius, Allemano cites also four other compositions
ascribed to King Solomon, making twenty-one compositions in all. Sachs
showed that "King Solomon, the Jew" was none other than Solomon ben
Judah ibn Gabirol. How this poor poet was elevated to a kingdom was very
simple. Gabirol was often called The Malagan, after his native city,
Malaga. In fact, he occasionally signed himself so in the acrostics of
his poems. In Arabic this appellation would be written ‏אלמלאק‎ or
‏אלמלאך‎ which is but one step from ‏אל מלך‎, the king. In this way
Gabirol was elevated to the throne and was lost to us. Sachs also
pointed out that two of the works cited by Allemano are no other than
his "Improvement of the Moral Qualities" and the "Choice of Pearls"
under different titles. Nor

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

does this opinion rest on mere ingenious conjecture. Gabirol himself
remarks in one of his poems that he had written twenty books, a number
borne out by the titles cited by Allemano.

Unfortunately nothing but the titles of these books and essays has come
down to us, and our estimate of Gabirol as a philosopher must rest only
on two of his works which have survived the ravages of time. Even of
these two, the larger and more important one exists no longer in the
original and is to be studied only in a Latin version, and in an
eclectic Hebrew translation. We have seen how Gabirol travelled down the
ages under the disguise of King Solomon, we shall now see that Fate
cloaked him also with other disguises. The "Source of Life," his chief
work in philosophy, was translated from the Arabic into the Latin in the
middle of the twelfth century by Dominicus Gundissalvus, archdeacon of
Segovia, with the assistance of a converted Jewish physician, Ibn Daud,
afterwards called Johannes Hispalensis. Henceforth, the *Fons Vitae*, as
it is called in Latin, became a work to be reckoned with in the world of
scholasticism. And just "as Ibn Sina was corrupted by the Latin writers
into Avicena and Ibn Roshd into Averroes, so Ibn Gabirol became, in
turn, Avencebrol, Avicembron, Avicebron; and the

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

scholastics who fought about his philosophy had no idea he was a Jew and
celebrated as a writer of religious hymns used in the Synagogue." The
reason for this confusion is inherent in the work itself. "Gabirol
nowhere betrays his Judaism in the *Fons Vitae*. He never quotes a
Biblical verse or a Talmudic dictum . . . . . . . The treatise is purely
speculative." And so, for centuries, Gabirol marched through the
philosophic schools of Mediaeval Europe, some taking him for a Christian
and some for a Mohammedan, none suspecting that he was a Jew. It was on
November 12, 1846, that the learned world was startled by the
announcement of Solomon Munk, in the *Literaturblatt des Orients* that
the well-known scholastic Avicebron was identical with the still better
known Solomon ibn Gabirol.

The details of this discovery need not be gone into again, nor can I
enter here on a learned disquisition on all the various problems
connected with the *Fons Vitae*. Such investigation must be left to men
who have devoted their lives to this field of research. For quite
different reasons Gabirol’s other philosophic works need likewise not
detain us long. The "Improvement of the Moral Qualities" is a
meritorious work, but far from epoch-making, and the "Choice of Pearls,"
which may be grouped in this class,

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

lays no claim to originality. All that may be claimed for Gabirol in
connection with this work is that in the collecting and arranging of the
proverbs he showed a fine sense of discrimination and a fair skill of
classification. On the other hand, I regard it as my special privilege
to glean from Gabirol’s poetic compositions whatsoever bears upon his
philosophy. This is the ‏לקט שכחה ופאה‎, the poor man’s portion of the
harvest in the field of philosophic research to which I am justly
entitled.

While a philosophic strain may be detected in many of Gabirol’s poems,
we, on our part, need dwell here only on a few of them—those in which
the philosophic note is more strongly pronounced and which may really be
regarded as philosophic thoughts expressed in the measured cadences of
verse rather than poetic reflections with a philosophic coloring.

The first stanza of a Piyyuṭ recited in the Musaf service of the New
Year, according to the Sephardic ritual, begins:

He who dwelleth forever, exalted is He alone from of yore.  
Solitary in His royal grandeur is He, and there is none by His side.  
From the light in which He is cloaked He fashioned the universe  
In the manner of the three sealed books.

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

Here we see Gabirol giving expression to the fundamental principle of
Jewish philosophy—that God is the first cause, and that to Him the
conception of time and place does not apply. Furthermore, the universe
is but an emanation of God. What he meant by the last phrase, "in the
manner of the three sealed books," becomes clear in the light of one of
his remarks in the "Source of Life": "The active Will of God is
analogous to the Scribe; the Form resulting from the action of the Will
upon Matter can be compared to the Script, while Matter is analogous to
the tablet upon which the writing is engraved." By ‏שלשה ספרים‎,
therefore, he does not mean literally three books, but the threefold
etymological conception that may be attributed to the letters ‏ס-פ-ר‎,
namely ‏סופר‎, ‏ספור‎, and ‏ספר‎. In other words, the three entities
which are accountable for the creation of the universe, namely, Will,
Form, and Matter, may be compared to the three agencies involved in the
writing of a book, the Scribe, Script, and Scroll, an idea which Gabirol
very likely borrowed from the Sefer Yezirah.

The influence of the Sefer Yezirah is even more evident in the remaining
stanzas of this poem where he speaks of the ten *Sefirot*, the *’En
Sof*, and the twenty-two letters of the alphabet.

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

In fact, the poem gives the impression of being little more than a
versification of the Sefer Yezirah.

In another poem, for a long time known only through a quotation in Ibn
Daud’s *Emunah Ramah* and for the first time edited by Senior Sachs and
further elucidated by David Kaufmann, Gabirol sums up his theory of
Matter in two lines. Matter, according to him, is an emanation of God.
But as long as it is without form, it has only a pseudo-existence;
therefore, in order to make its existence real, Matter strives after
form as one friend longs for another. This idea is put in the following
two verses:

‏חכמים אמרו כי סור היות-כל למען כל אשר הכל בידו  
והוא נכסף לשומו יש כמו-יש כמו חושק אשר נכסף לדודו‎

This may be rendered freely as follows:

The wise men have said that the origin of all material existence lies in
the All-embracing-One who has everything in His hand.  
Like the lover seeking after the beloved, so does Matter long after the
Form, that its semblance of existence (‏כמרוש‎) may be turned into real
existence (‏יש‎).

The longest philosophic poem, however, is the well-known "Royal Crown."
In it Gabirol gives expression to his philosophic ideas in a clear and
lucid style.

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

It is simple in its grandeur and all-embracing in its simplicity. As
Gabirol himself has said, in the introductory couplet to this hymn, "The
wondrous ways of God inspired this song of praise that it may help
mankind find the path of right and worth. "

It is difficult to say which is to be admired the more—the exquisite
beauty of expression or the great depth of thought. He is a consummate
master of both. Indeed, we must agree with the poet that of all his
hymns this is the "Royal Crown".

We may now turn our attention to the other poems of Gabirol and endeavor
to estimate his achievements as a poet, pure and simple. From Moses ibn
Ezra and Judah Ḥarizi, themselves no mean poets, to the literary critics
of the present time, all agree that Gabirol has reached the pinnacle of
the Hebrew Parnassus, and it is no mean testimonial to have lived in the
hearts of men for nearly a thousand years. There must be something
perennial in him to have survived the turbulent torrents of taste and
the shifting currents of opinion through which Jewish culture has passed
since the golden days of the Spanish period. There must be that in his
poetry which makes a permanent appeal to the emotions, aspirations and
passions of mankind.

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is not the
style alone, it is not the skill in versification alone—it must be
something elemental, something that touches the spring of human nature,
human suffering, human exultation, which makes his poetry as inspiring
today as it was nine centuries ago. His real greatness lies in his
religious poems. Matthew Arnold has somewhere remarked that mankind will
discover more and more that we have to turn to poetry to interpret life
for us, to console us, to sustain us. And this is exactly what we find
in Gabirol’s religious lyrics. Sometimes he touches our heart-strings
and plays upon them the melody of eternal hope. Sometimes he lays bare
the wounded heart of Israel and lets the sacred fountain of consolation
play upon it a stream of healing waters that soothe and sustain, and
sometimes the agony of his people stabs his soul so deep that he raises
a piercing cry to heaven and we feel that in him we have a pleader whose
voice must be heard. He brings us nearer to God, and we feel that we
have a Father in heaven.

But while the religious poems of Gabirol are as fresh and full of
meaning to-day as they were when they were first written down, his
secular poems are at times difficult to understand. By reason of the
fact that we are far removed from the life of that period, these poems
do not appeal

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

to us as strongly as they did to Gabirol’s contemporaries. We are no
longer able to grasp fully the allusions and metaphors because they
were, in a great measure, borrowed from the Arabic. In our estimate of
these compositions, therefore, we must fall back for a true judgment
upon the opinions of the mediaeval critics who were better able to
appreciate them.

Moses ibn Ezra, in the afore-mentioned Arabic work, says:

Younger though he was than his contemporaries, he surpassed them in the
art of expression, although, in a general way, they were distinguished
for their language which was choice and full of sweetness. While they
may have differed in the order of merit, they all ranked alike for the
beauty of their style and charm of expression. But Abu Ayyub was an
accomplished author and an eloquent writer who made himself master of
that which poetry considers its aim. He attained the end in view and
reached the goal. In his writings he used the finest figures of speech,
imitating the modern Arabic poets. He was called the Knight of Style and
the Master of Verse because of the polish of his style, the fluency of
his expression and the charm of the subjects which he treated. All eyes
were directed to him and everyone pointed to him with admiration. It was
he who first opened the door of prosody to Jewish poets, and those who
entered after him upon the same road made their fabric from his
material. . . . In his poetry he embodied ideas which were based upon
the laws of the Torah and were in harmony with tradition.

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

In a more facetious style, Ḥarizi, in the chapter on the poets of Spain
written in rhymed prose, says:

Before the Song of Solomon, the Small—all great poets in our estimation
fall. Since the cradle of Hebrew speech—none did ever his station reach.
With unusual gifts dowered—he above his generation towered. Though
dubbed small, he surpassed them all. He alone to Parnassus’ pinnacle did
ascend--the wisdom of the Muses to comprehend. Art claimed him as her
first-born—and with a scarlet thread did his arm adorn. All the poets
that before him sang—like the wind upon the void their voices rang. None
like him has since arrived—no matter how much they may have strived. He
is the master of them all—and they in his footsteps fall. The Lord
anointed him his nation’s King of Songs—and his verse is the Song of
Songs. Even great poets find it hard—to grasp the meaning of this bard.
For his style is too profound—its depth none can sound."

The verdict of these two critics may be accepted without reservation,
and if some of the poems do not seem quite clear to us we must, with
Ḥarizi, ascribe it not to Gabirol’s ambiguity of style but to our
shortcoming; our inability to fathom the depth of meaning.

In the history of Hebrew poetry in Spain Gabirol belongs to the third
period. Begun by Menahem ben Saruḳ and Dunash ibn Labraṭ and

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

continued by their disciples, Isaac ben Kapron, Isaac ibn Gikatillah,
Jehudi ben Sheshet and others, such as Joseph ibn Abitur and Isaac ben
Saul of Lucena—Hebrew poetry in Spain had reached its highest form of
development in the age of Samuel Ha-Nagid, the older contemporary of Ibn
Gabirol. When Gabirol came upon the scene, there was already a
well-established literary tradition, both in secular as well as
religious poetry; still, because he brought the art of Hebrew poetry to
perfection, we may, with Moses ibn Ezra and Ḥarizi, regard him as the
founder of a new school. He surpassed his contemporaries not only by the
quality of his compositions but also by their quantity. He wrote upward
of three hundred poems, half of them secular and half religious, besides
the "Royal Crown" and the "Azharot" each of which would make a little
volume by itself. His secular poems are mostly of a personal nature; his
religious compositions cover nearly all religious occasions of the year.
If in the technique of his secular poetry, he was the path-finder of his
generation, in the structure of his religious poems, he followed the
trodden path. In his secular poetry he showed the influence of Arabic
culture; in his religious poems he displayed a wide acquaintance with
Jewish learning. One can easily see from

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

them that he was well versed in the Talmud and Midrash.

The fate which befell his poems, both secular and religious, is that
common to all our mediaeval classics. With the exception of the "Royal
Crown" and the "Azharot," which are well known, his religious poems are
scattered in scores of rituals, some of them so rare that they are as
inaccessible as manuscripts, while his secular poems are thus far so
badly edited that they are virtually as if they had never seen the light
of day.

In 1858 Leopold Dukes published a volume of Gabirol 's secular poems
which he gathered from manuscripts in Oxford, Parma, and Vienna. With
the exception of two poems which were in the possession of Carmoly, and
to which Dukes evidently had no access, this volume, though containing
only sixty-nine poems, represented almost all that was then known of
Gabirol’s secular poetry. Ten years later, in 1868, Senior Sachs made an
attempt to gather and elucidate the religious poetry of Gabirol. But his
method of elucidation was so comprehensive that a work of one hundred
and sixty-seven pages contained only twenty-nine poems, most of them
very short.

Neither Dukes nor Sachs made any reference

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

to having seen a complete, independent Diwan of Gabirol’s poems.
Steinschneider’s list of sixty-five poems is based on the Oxford MS.
‏מחנה הנשאר‎, which is only an appendix to the Diwan of Judah Ha-Levi
(‏מחנה יהודה‎), and contains the compositions of many other poets; while
Luzzatto, who began to make a list of Gabirol’s poems, likewise made no
mention of any special collection.

The first intimation of the existence of a Gabirol Diwan was given by
Harkavy in the prefatory note to four poems of Gabirol published by him
in 1893, although he did not emphasize this point. Then came the list of
one hundred and fourteen poems published by Neubauer from a Genizah
manuscript which seems to have been originally an index to a Diwan of
Gabirol. Further proof that the poems of Gabirol were at one time
gathered into a Diwan has been furnished by the thirty-three leaves from
the Genizah in the possession of E. N. Adler. This fragment, which has
been identified and edited by Brody, contains the greater part of
thirty-four poems of Gabirol, thirteen of which had been entirely lost
to us. And in 1913 I was so fortunate as to discover in the
Taylor-Schechter collection a fragment of a Diwan which furnishes
additional and conclusive evidence that

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

the poems of Gabirol had at one time been gathered in a complete
collection.

But no one can expect that such a collection will some day turn up in
its original completeness. The most we may look forward to is to find a
leaf here and a leaf there.

It is, therefore, meet and proper that we undertake the task anew, and
gather all the poetic compositions of Gabirol together, irrespective of
any similar effort that was made in the past. Such, in fact, is the plan
of the edition of Gabirol contemplated for the Classics Series which
this volume inaugurates. The edition under consideration will contain
upward of three hundred compositions, gathered from printed as well as
manuscript sources. And while it is not impossible that even in this
large collection one or more poems have been overlooked, it may be said,
with some degree of satisfaction, that it will contain the largest
number of compositions ever recorded under the name of Gabirol.
Luzzatto’s list (*Ozar Ṭob*, 1880, pp. 69-73), hitherto the largest
known, enumerated only 134 religious hymns, whereas the edition
contemplated will contain about 175 religious and 146 secular poems.
This complete collection of Gabirol’s poetry may indeed serve as a
fitting mausoleum on his grave, as a lasting monument of his great

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

personality, a monument built not out of common brick and mortar but out
of the treasures which he left behind him. His lyrics may indeed become
a sanctuary to which the weary at heart will turn for consolation, the
troubled in mind for guidance, and all who love the beautiful for the
participation of that which is a joy for ever.

ISRAEL DAVIDSON

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Translating Gabirol](sig03)
