[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_544) 
[Next](bh2_546) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:544

*Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :*

Once the Prophet sat on a pulpit and we sat around him. Then he said,
"The things I am afraid of most for your sake (concerning what will
befall you after me) is the pleasures and splendors of the world and its
beauties which will be disclosed to you." Somebody said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Can the good bring forth evil?" The Prophet remained silent for
a while. It was said to that person, "What is wrong with you? You are
talking to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he is not talking to you." Then
we noticed that he was being inspired divinely. Then the Prophet wiped
off his sweat and said, "Where is the questioner?" It seemed as if the
Prophet liked his question. Then he said, "Good never brings forth evil.
Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a water-stream which either
kill or make the animals sick, except if an animal eats its fill the
Khadira (a kind of vegetable) and then faces the sun, and then defecates
and urinates and grazes again. No doubt this wealth is sweet and green.
Blessed is the wealth of a Muslim from which he gives to the poor, the
orphans and to needy travelers. (Or the Prophet said something similar
to it) No doubt, whoever takes it illegally will be like the one who
eats but is never satisfied, and his wealth will be a witness against
him on the Day of Resurrection."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:545: 'Amr bin Al-Harith: Zainab, the wife of 'Abdullah said, I
was in the Mosque and saw the ...](bh2_546)
