[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_816.md) 
[Next](bh2_818.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:815

*Narrated 'Aisha:*

We set out with the Prophet with the intention of performing Hajj only.
The Prophet reached Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and between
Safa and Marwa and did not finish the Ihram, because he had the Hadi
with him. His companions and his wives performed Tawaf (of the Ka'ba and
between Safa and Marwa), and those who had no Hadi with them finished
their Ihram. I got the menses and performed all the ceremonies of Hajj.
So, when the Night of Hasba (night of departure) came, I said, "O
Allah's Apostle! All your companions are returning with Hajj and 'Umra
except me." He asked me, "Didn't you perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba (Umra)
when you reached Mecca?" I said, "No." He said, "Go to Tan'im with your
brother 'Abdur-Rahman, and assume Ihram for 'Umra and I will wait for
you at such and such a place." So I went with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im
and assumed Ihram for 'Umra. Then Safiya bint Huyay got menses. The
Prophet said, " 'Aqra Halqa! You will detain us! Didn't you perform
Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering)?" She said, "Yes, I
did." He said, "Then there is no harm, depart." So I met the Prophet
when he was ascending the heights towards Mecca and I was descending, or
vice-versa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:816: 'Abdul-Aziz bin Rufai: I asked Anas bin Malik, Tell me
something you have observed about the...](bh2_818.md)
