[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_93)  [Next](bh2_95) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:95

*Narrated Ibn Juraij:*

'Ata' told me that he had heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, "The Prophet
stood up to offer the prayer of the 'Id ul Fitr. He first offered the
prayer and then delivered the Khutba. After finishing it he got down
(from the pulpit) and went towards the women and advised them while he
was leaning on Bilal's hand. Bilal was spreading out his garment where
the women were putting their alms." I asked 'Ata' whether it was the
Zakat of 'Id ul Fitr. He said, "No, it was just alms given at that time.
Some lady put her finger ring and the others would do the same." I said,
(to 'Ata'), "Do you think that it is incumbent upon the Imam to give
advice to the women (on 'Id day)?" He said, "No doubt, it is incumbent
upon the Imams to do so and why should they not do so?" Al-Hasan bin
Muslim told me that Ibn Abbas had said, "I join the Prophet, Abu Bakr,
Umar and 'Uthman in the 'Id ul Fitr prayers. They used to offer the
prayer before the Khutba and then they used to deliver the Khutba
afterwards. Once the Prophet I came out (for the 'Id prayer) as if I
were just observing him waving to the people to sit down. He, then
accompanied by Bilal, came crossing the rows till he reached the women.
He recited the following verse: 'O Prophet! When the believing women
come to you to take the oath of fealty to you . . . (to the end of the
verse) (60.12).' After finishing the recitation he said, "O ladies! Are
you fulfilling your covenant?" None except one woman said, "Yes." Hasan
did not know who was that woman. The Prophet said, "Then give alms."
Bilal spread his garment and said, "Keep on giving alms. Let my father
and mother sacrifice their lives for you (ladies)." So the ladies kept
on putting their Fatkhs (big rings) and other kinds of rings in Bilal's
garment." Abdur-Razaq said, " 'Fatkhs' is a big ring which used to be
worn in the (Pre-lslamic) period of ignorance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:96: Aiyub: Hafsa bint Sirin said, On Id we used to forbid our
girls to go out ...](bh2_95)
