[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_195.md) 
[Next](bh2_197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:197

*Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:*

"I saw Allah's Apostle delaying the Maghrib prayer till he offered it
along with the 'Isha' prayer whenever he was in a hurry during the
journey." Salim narrated, "Ibn 'Umar used to do the same whenever he was
in a hurry during the journey." And Salim added, "Ibn 'Umar used to pray
the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together in Al-Muzdalifa." Salim said,
"Ibn 'Umar delayed the Maghrib prayer because at that time he heard the
news of the death of his wife Safiya bint Abi 'Ubaid. I said to him,
'The prayer (is due).' He said, 'Go on.' Again I said, 'The prayer (is
due).' He said, 'Go on,' till we covered two or three miles. Then he got
down, prayed and said, 'I saw the Prophet praying in this way, whenever
he was in a hurry during the journey.' 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) added,
"Whenever the Prophet was in a hurry, he used to delay the Maghrib
prayer and then offer three Rakat (of the Maghrib) and perform Taslim,
and after waiting for a short while, Iqama used to be pronounced for the
'Isha' prayer when he would offer two Rakat and perform Taslim. He would
never offer any optional prayer till the middle of the night (when he
used to pray the Tahajjud)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:198: 'Abdullah bin 'Amir from his father who said: I saw the
Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the prayer on his mount (Rahila)
...](bh2_197.md)
