[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_559) 
[Next](bh2_561) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:559

*Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi*

We took part in the holy battle of Tabuk in the company of the Prophet
and when we arrived at the Wadi-al-Qura, there was a woman in her
garden. The Prophet asked his companions to estimate the amount of the
fruits in the garden, and Allah's Apostle estimated it at ten Awsuq (One
Wasaq = 60 Sa's) and 1 Sa'= 3 kg. approximately). The Prophet said to
that lady, "Check what your garden will yield." When we reached Tabuk,
the Prophet said, "There will be a strong wind to-night and so no one
should stand and whoever has a camel, should fasten it." So we fastened
our camels. A strong wind blew at night and a man stood up and he was
blown away to a mountain called Taiy, The King of Aila sent a white mule
and a sheet for wearing to the Prophet as a present, and wrote to the
Prophet that his people would stay in their place (and will pay Jizya
taxation.) (1) When the Prophet reached Wadi-al-Qura he asked that woman
how much her garden had yielded. She said, "Ten Awsuq," and that was
what Allah's Apostle had estimated. Then the Prophet said, "I want to
reach Medina quickly, and whoever among you wants to accompany me,
should hurry up." The sub-narrator Ibn Bakkar said something which
meant: When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw Medina he said, "This is Taba."
And when he saw the mountain of Uhud, he said, "This mountain loves us
and we love it. Shall I tell you of the best amongst the Ansar?" They
replied in the affirmative. He said, "The family of Bani-n-Najjar, and
then the family of Bani Sa'ida or Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj. (The
above-mentioned are the best) but there is goodness in all the families
of Ansar."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:560: Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father: The Prophet said, On
a land irrigated by rain water or by natural ...](bh2_561)
