[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_94)  [Next](bh2_96) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:96

*Narrated Aiyub:*

Hafsa bint Sirin said, "On Id we used to forbid our girls to go out for
'Id prayer. A lady came and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and I
went to her. She said, 'The husband of my sister took part in twelve
holy battles along with the Prophet and my sister was with her husband
in six of them. My sister said that they used to nurse the sick and
treat the wounded. Once she asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! If a woman has no
veil, is there any harm if she does not come out (on 'Id day)?' The
Prophet said, 'Her companion should let her share her veil with her, and
the women should participate in the good deeds and in the religious
gatherings of the believers.' " Hafsa added, "When Um-'Atiya came, I
went to her and asked her, 'Did you hear anything about so-and-so?'
Um-'Atlya said, 'Yes, let my father be sacrificed for the Prophet
(p.b.u.h). (And whenever she mentioned the name of the Prophet she
always used to say, 'Let my father be' sacrificed for him). He said,
'Virgin mature girls staying often screened (or said, 'Mature girls and
virgins staying often screened--Aiyub is not sure as which was right)
and menstruating women should come out (on the 'Id day). But the
menstruating women should keep away from the Musalla. And all the women
should participate in the good deeds and in the religious gatherings of
the believers'." Hafsa said, "On that I said to Um-'Atiya, 'Also those
who are menstruating?' " Um-'Atiya replied, "Yes. Do they not present
themselves at 'Arafat and elsewhere?".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:97: Um-'Atiya: We were ordered to go out (for 'Id) and also to
take along with us the...](bh2_96)
