[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_383.md) 
[Next](bh2_385.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:383

*Narrated 'Amir bin Sad bin Abi Waqqas:*

That his father said, "In the year of the last Hajj of the Prophet I
became seriously ill and the Prophet used to visit me inquiring about my
health. I told him, 'I am reduced to this state because of illness and I
am wealthy and have no inheritors except a daughter, (In this narration
the name of 'Amir bin Sad is mentioned and in fact it is a mistake; the
narrator is 'Aisha bint Sad bin Abi Waqqas). Should I give two-thirds of
my property in charity?' He said, 'No.' I asked, 'Half?' He said, 'No.'
then he added, 'One-third, and even one-third is much. You'd better
leave your inheritors wealthy rather than leaving them poor, begging
others. You will get a reward for whatever you spend for Allah's sake,
even for what you put in your wife's mouth.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle!
Will I be left alone after my companions have gone?' He said, 'If you
are left behind, whatever good deeds you will do will up-grade you and
raise you high. And perhaps you will have a long life so that some
people will be benefited by you while others will be harmed by you. O
Allah! Complete the emigration of my companions and do not turn them
renegades.' But Allah's Apostle felt sorry for poor Sad bin Khaula as he
died in Mecca." (but Sad bin Abi Waqqas lived long after the Prophet
(p.b.u.h).)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:384: 'Abdullah: The Prophet said, He who slaps the cheeks,
tears the clothes and ...](bh2_385.md)
