[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_125.md) 
[Next](bh2_127.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:127

*Narrated Sharik:*

Anas bin Malik said, "A person entered the Mosque on a Friday through
the gate facing the Daril-Qada' and Allah's Apostle was standing
delivering the Khutba (sermon). The man stood in front of Allah's
Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle, livestock are dying and the roads
are cut off; please pray to Allah for rain.' So Allah's Apostle
(p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with rain.
O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain!" Anas added,
"By Allah, there were no clouds in the sky and there was no house or
building between us and the mountain of Silas'. Then a big cloud like a
shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Silas Mountain) and when it came in
the middle of the sky, it spread and then rained. By Allah! We could not
see the sun for a week. The next Friday, a person entered through the
same gate and Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday Khutba and the
man stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock
are dying and the roads are cut off; Please pray to Allah to withhold
rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Apostle raised both his hands and said, 'O
Allah! Round about us and not on us. O Allah!' On the plateaus, on the
mountains, on the hills, in the valleys and on the places where trees
grow.' " Anas added, "The rain stopped and we came out, walking in the
sun." Sharik asked Anas whether it was the same person who had asked for
rain the previous Friday. Anas replied that he did not know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:128: Qatada: Anas I said, While Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was
delivering the ...](bh2_127.md)
