[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_327) 
[Next](bh2_329) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:326

*Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi :*

The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani'Amr bin 'Auf
reached Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along with some of his
companions to affect a reconciliation between them. Allah's Apostle was
delayed there, and the time of the prayer was due. Bilal went to Abu
Bakr and said to him, "Allah's Apostle has been delayed (there) and the
time of prayer is due. So will you lead the people in prayer?" Abu Bakr
said, "Yes, if you wish." Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr, went
forward and said Takbir for the people. In the mean-time Allah's Apostle
came crossing the rows (of the praying people) and stood in the (first)
row and the people started clapping. Abu Bakr, would never glance
side-ways in his prayer but when the people clapped much he looked back
and (saw) Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle beckoned him to carry on the
prayer. Abu Bakr raised his hands and thanked Allah, and retreated till
he reached the (first) row. Allah's Apostle went forward and led the
people in the prayer. When he completed the prayer he faced the people
and said, "O people! Why did you start clapping when something unusual
happened to you in the prayer? Clapping is only for women. So whoever
amongst you comes across something in the prayer should say,
'Subhan-Allah' for there is none who will not turn round on hearing him
saying Subhan-Allah. O Ab-u Bakr! What prevented you from leading the
people in the prayer when I beckoned you to do so?" Abu Bakr replied,
"How dare the son of Abu Quhafa lead the prayer in the presence of
Allah's Apostle ?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:327: Asma': I went to 'Aisha and she was standing praying and
the people, too, ...](bh2_329)
