[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_262.md) 
[Next](bh2_264.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:263

*Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :*

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to teach us the way of doing Istikhara
(Istikhara means to ask Allah to guide one to the right sort of action
concerning any job or a deed), in all matters as he taught us the Suras
of the Quran. He said, "If anyone of you thinks of doing any job he
should offer a two Rakat prayer other than the compulsory ones and say
(after the prayer): -- 'Allahumma inni astakhiruka bi'ilmika, Wa
astaqdiruka bi-qudratika, Wa as'alaka min fadlika al-'azlm Fa-innaka
taqdiru Wala aqdiru, Wa ta'lamu Wala a'lamu, Wa anta 'allamu l-ghuyub.
Allahumma, in kunta ta'lam anna hadha-l-amra Khairun li fi dini wa
ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or 'ajili amri wa'ajilihi) Faqdirhu wa
yas-sirhu li thumma barik li Fihi, Wa in kunta ta'lamu anna hadha-lamra
shar-run li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or fi'ajili amri wa
ajilihi) Fasrifhu anni was-rifni anhu. Waqdir li al-khaira haithu kana
Thumma ardini bihi.' (O Allah! I ask guidance from Your knowledge, And
Power from Your Might and I ask for Your great blessings. You are
capable and I am not. You know and I do not and You know the unseen. O
Allah! If You know that this job is good for my religion and my
subsistence and in my Hereafter--(or said: If it is better for my
present and later needs)--Then You ordain it for me and make it easy for
me to get, And then bless me in it, and if You know that this job is
harmful to me In my religion and subsistence and in the Hereafter--(or
said: If it is worse for my present and later needs)--Then keep it away
from me and let me be away from it. And ordain for me whatever is good
for me, And make me satisfied with it). The Prophet added that then the
person should name (mention) his need.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:264: Abu Qatada bin Rabi Al-Ansari; The Prophet said, If anyone
of you enters a Mosque, he should not sit...](bh2_264.md)
