[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_157.md) 
[Next](bh2_159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:159

*Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:*

A Jewess came to ask 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) about something.
She said to her, "May Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the
grave." So 'Aisha ' asked Allah's Apostle "Would the people be punished
in their graves?" Allah's Apostle after seeking refuge with Allah from
the punishment of the grave (and thus replied in the affirmative). Then
one day, Allah's Apostle rode to go to some place but the sun eclipsed.
He returned in the forenoon and passed through the rear of the dwellings
(of his wives) and stood for the (eclipse) prayer, and the people stood
behind him. He stood up for a long period and then performed a prolonged
bowing which was shorter than the first bowing. Then he raised his head
and prostrated. Then he stood up (for the second Raka) for a long while
but the standing was shorter than that of the first Raka. Then he
performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first one. Then
he raised his head and prostrated. Then he stood up for a long time but
shorter than the first. Then he performed a prolonged bowing but shorter
than the first. Then he raised his head and prostrated and finished the
prayer and (then delivered the sermon and) said as much as Allah wished.
And then he ordered the people to seek refuge with Allah from the
punishment of the grave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:160: 'Abdullah bin 'Amr When the sun eclipsed in the lifetime
of Allah's Apostle and an ...](bh2_159.md)
