[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_124) 
[Next](bh2_126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:126

*Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namir:*

I heard Anas bin Malik saying, "On a Friday a person entered the main
Mosque through the gate facing the pulpit while Allah's Apostle was
delivering the Khutba. The man stood in front of Allah's Apostle and
said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut
off; so please pray to Allah for rain.' " Anas added, "Allah's Apostle
(p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with rain!
O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain!' " Anas added,
"By Allah, we could not see any trace of cloud in the sky and there was
no building or a house between us and (the mountains of) Sila." Anas
added, "A heavy cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Sila'
Mountain). When it came in the middle of the sky, it spread and then
rained." Anas further said, "By Allah! We could not see the sun for a
week. Next Friday a person entered through the same gate and at that
time Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday's Khutba. The man stood
in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying
and the roads are cut off, please pray to Allah to with-hold rain.' "
Anas added, "Allah's Apostle I raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah!
Round about us and not on us. O Allah! On the plateaus, on the
mountains, on the hills, in the valleys and on the places where trees
grow.' So the rain stopped and we came out walking in the sun." Sharik
asked Anas whether it was the same person who had asked for the rain
(the last Friday). Anas replied that he did not know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:127: Sharik: Anas bin Malik said, A person entered the Mosque
on a Friday through ...](bh2_126)
