[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_141) 
[Next](bh2_143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:143

*Narrated Anas bin Malik:*

In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the people were afflicted
with a (famine) year. While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba
(sermon) on the pulpit on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the families (offspring)
are hungry: please pray to Allah to bless us with rain." Allah's Apostle
raised both his hands towards the sky and at that time there was not a
trace of cloud in they sky. Then the clouds started gathering like
mountains. Before he got down from the pulpit I saw rain-water trickling
down his beard. It rained that day, the next day, the third day, the
fourth day and till the next Friday, when the same Bedouin or some other
person stood up (during the Friday Khutba) and said, "O Allah's Apostle!
The houses have collapsed and the livestock are drowned. Please invoke
Allah for us." So Allah's Apostle raised both his hands and said, "O
Allah! Around us and not on us." Whichever side the Prophet directed his
hand, the clouds dispersed from there till a hole (in the clouds) was
formed over Medina. The valley of Qanat remained flowing (with water)
for one month and none, came from outside who didn't talk about the
abundant rain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:144: Anas: Whenever a strong wind blew, anxiety appeared on the
face of the ...](bh2_143)
