[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh2_494) 
[Next](bh2_496) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 2:494

*Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:*

While I was sitting with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) two person came to
him; one of them complained about his poverty and the other complained
about the prevalence of robberies. Allah's Apostle said, "As regards
stealing and robberies, there will shortly come a time when a caravan
will go to Mecca (from Medina) without any guard. And regarding poverty,
The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till one of you
wanders about with his object of charity and will not find anybody to
accept it And (no doubt) each one of you will stand in front of Allah
and there will be neither a curtain nor an interpreter between him and
Allah, and Allah will ask him, 'Did not I give you wealth?' He will
reply in the affirmative. Allah will further ask, 'Didn't send a
messenger to you?' And again that person will reply in the affirmative
Then he will look to his right and he will see nothing but Hell-fire,
and then he will look to his left and will see nothing but Hell-fire.
And so, any (each one) of you should save himself from the fire even by
giving half of a date-fruit (in charity). And if you do not find a hall
date-fruit, then (you can do it through saying) a good pleasant word (to
your brethren). (See Hadith No. 793 Vol. 4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2:495: Abu Musa: Thy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, A time will come
upon the people when a ...](bh2_496)
