[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mdut10)  [Next](mdut12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 9. SUN-MAN AND FROG-WOMAN.

Long ago Sun-Man lived, they say, in a sweat-house. From Honey-Lake
Valley, looking straight to the north, it was. He went stealing, stole
and carried off children. The Sun lived there, together with his sister.

Their house was covered all over with ice. And when he stole (children)
from all about, and brought them thither, no one could do anything to
him. They were unable to

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

crawl inside, could not crawl up to the smoke-hole, could do nothing to
him. So, when they could do nothing to him, he became more arrogant. And
the people from all countries were seeking to catch him and kill him,
but they couldn't kill him.

And he went to the north, going off again to steal. He kept going,
hunting as he went along. He searched the camps as he went. He saw a
house. Now, Frog-Woman lived there, having a large winter house. She was
weaving a basket, holding the grass in her mouth, and she was a woman
who never dropped the grass from her mouth.

And she staid there, weaving. The man arrived. She remained sitting on
one side of the house, staid there continually. Then, "How are you?" she
said, the woman said. "Pretty well always. I am going about, being tired
after having staid (long in one place)," said he. "I am travelling about
because I am lonesome." So he staid.

Meanwhile the woman's grandson, after having remained (within), went
outside the door to play. They could hear him playing. Then the man went
out, and, seizing the boy, stole and carried him off.

Meanwhile the woman wove without saying anything. And as she kept
weaving, she thought, "I wonder why that child does not make (any) noise
at play!" So she let go of what she was weaving, and crawled out.

Then she did not see the child. So she followed the man's tracks. And
they came to the place where the child had been playing, and (showed
how) the man had seized him and carried him off to keep. Then the woman
ran after (the thief). That woman was very strong, they say, and she ran
after him.

Meanwhile the man, having run a little ways, made a willow-valley,
created a beautiful valley of willows. Then,

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

having run on a little farther again, he made another; and after that he
made (another) pretty willow valley. Then, having done this, he ran
away. And meanwhile that woman who was running, and following behind,
ran as far. as the willow valley. She still held some grass in her
mouth. And, seeing the willow, she said, "Well, I never saw such a very
pretty one before." So, having stopped, she gathered some.

She went about breaking them off one after another for a time. Then she
thought of her child, and started to run on again. And when she had run
on for a little ways, she came again to a beautiful willow valley. And
she ran to it; and, having stopped, again she gathered some. She went
about breaking: them off one after another, and just then she
remembered. So she ran after Sun-Man (again).

She ran off, kept running, and, when she had almost caught up with him,
arrived (at his house) running. And he, by making the willow-patch,
brought it about that he should win over her while she was admiring it
and gathering it. He created the willow valleys; so, while she had
almost caught up with him, he beat her.

He (Sun-Man), having crawled up on his house, remained sitting on top by
the smoke-hole, having sent the child inside. Then the woman crawled up;
and when she had crawled up only a little ways, she slid down again.
Again she crawled up; and again crawling up, when she was pretty nearly
halfway up the side-slope of -the house, she slipped back to the bottom
again.

Then, having stood up, she said, "I do not know whether I shall be able
to crawl up to you." Then she crawled up, kept crawling up, kept
crawling up; and again, when she was pretty close to the smoke-hole, she
slipped up, and slid down little by little to the bottom.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Ham!" (equivalent to an oath) said she. "I will
crawl up there to you."

She got up, and stood, and, almost slipping all the time, slowly she
crawled up. Then she spoke. "Get out of the way!" she said. "Give me the
house! I am going in! Give me the house!" Meanwhile he did not answer.
"Do you hear?" she said. Don't be slow! Give me the house! I am going to
crawl in."

"I have come after my grandson. For what reason did you bring him
hither? Either I gave him to you, or you stole him from me," she said.
"Do you get out of the way!" she said. "I am going in. Get out of the
way! If you don't get out of the way, I will swallow you," she said. "Do
you hear? When I speak to you, get out of the way quickly. Go away! If
you don't do it, I'll swallow you," she said.

Then he answered, "If it is best to be swallowed, you will swallow me.
It is best so," he said. "Don't speak again!" she said. "Without
speaking again, without saying anything again, I am going to swallow
you," the woman said. Then he, said, "If you wish to swallow me, swallow
me!" Still he sat beside the smoke-hole, they say.

Then that old woman seized him in her mouth; and, having bitten him, she
swallowed him. And when she had swallowed him completely, having winked
her eyes repeatedly, she kept still. By and by she groaned. She kept on,
groaning, they say, (because) of swallowing this Sun-Man.

Meanwhile within her stomach he kept swelling, and kept swelling until
he swelled enough to protrude his head again from her mouth. Then she
groaned. Still he kept on growing until he killed that woman. Filling
her belly to bursting, and causing her to burst, he killed her.

Then he spoke. "An evil person, one who shall not

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

run after mortal men, a frog, one living in the rivers, that is what you
shall be. You shall not harm people in any way," he said. "She was the
one who, having a big mouth, had swallowed that man," he said.

But he himself, it is said, was to be continually swallowed by this old
woman. (?) "Once in a while the Sun, after being gradually shoved out of
sight, after he is all gone on one side (?), he keeps growing, until,
like one fully grown, he looks to himself the same," they say. "In the
olden time he was one who was swallowed continually," they say.

And he himself, after he had ceased from being killed, after he had
staid there for some time, spoke to that woman (his sister). <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) "You ought to travel at night," he said.
"You must be the night sun (moon)." Then she replied, "Very well."--"I
shall be the day sun," said he. And thereupon he set out. And so the
woman went at night.

Meanwhile some Star-Men were trying to catch that woman as she went
along. The woman saw them. And thereupon they stopped and stood still.
And they, it is said, those Star-Men, still are standing, together at
one place, where they stood, being ashamed of their running after the
woman.

That woman spoke to her brother. "You must go at night," she said.
"Those Star-Men were going to head me off, run after me; (but) I saw
them, and, being ashamed, they did not catch me. That kind of people
would trouble me a great deal."

Then the man said, "Yes. I will be the Night-Sun-Man. You must be the
Day-Sun-Woman," he said. "And there they used formerly, in olden times,
to say thus to mortal men: 'That is the one the Frog-Old-Woman
swallowed.' Thus mortal men shall see and talk of me,"

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

he said. "And they who ran after the woman, and were ashamed, mortal men
will see them still remaining where they stopped, and will talk of
them," he said. "They stopped (because) they were ashamed of having
followed the woman," he said. "And that, mortal men will say when
telling of the olden time," he said.

Then he went away. And going along, when it came night, then as the sun
set, they met face to face; and he said, "How are you?" And then the
woman answered, "Nothing is troubling me." Then he said, "All right! It
shall be so to the end." (?) It is finished, it is said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[181:1](mdut11.htm#fr_11) Not the frog-woman,
but his sister who lived with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Girls Who Married the Stars](mdut12)
