[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gsw11)  [Next](gsw13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Glory of the Shia World*, by P. M. Sykes and Khan Bahadur Ahmad din
Khan, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span id="img_11900"></span> ![FROM AN ENAMELLED BOX](img/11900.jpg)

### CHAPTER VIII

#### MY FIRST *MAMURIAT*

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>A <em>Mamur</em> should be wise,<br />
A ready talker, sharp witted,<br />
And of independent disposition.<br />
                                  FIRDAUSI.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">Towards</span> the end of the winter the
Vakil-ul-Mulk, who had been Governor-General for some years, was
summoned three or four times to the Telegraph Office, and there were
rumours in the bazaar that he was to be dismissed. However, one day
there came a private telegram from the Minister of the Interior, which
ran as follows: "*Alhamdulillah*, after much trouble and discussion,
your affair has been arranged. The Sovereign, may our souls be his
sacrifice, condescends, in consideration of your capacity and
efficiency, to order that you remain Governor-General of Kerman and
Baluchistan."

The Vakil-ul-Mulk, who was much pleased,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

at once gave the Telegraph Master, who brought the auspicious message in
person, five hundred *tomans*, and the following reply was despatched:
"The kindness of the Sovereign has exalted the head of this lowly one,
who ever prays that the shadow of His Majesty may eternally protect us.
Ten thousand *tomans*, although not a fit present for the royal
establishment, are offered by a bill on *Aga* Faraj Ullah."

Shortly after this it was decided to send a robe of honour of Kerman
shawl to those governors who, by their efficiency and capacity, had been
deemed fit to remain in office; for, praise be to Allah, the
Vakil-ul-Mulk was not like one of his predecessors, who used to take a
present from one man, appoint him to a governorship, and then almost
immediately accept a present from a second man, and send him after the
first with an order of dismissal.

About this former ruler there is a story which runs that he once
appointed a man to a governorship, and this individual, knowing what to
expect, bethought him of a plan by which he might be secured in his
post. So one day, when the Governor-General was sitting at the window of
the Hall of Audience, he saw such a one riding on a horse with his face
to its tail and holding a paper in his hand. On seeing this, His
Excellency remarked, "What animal is this?"

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

and immediately ordered the individual to be brought to his presence and
asked him what was the meaning of such behaviour. Such a one replied,
"May I be your Sacrifice! This slave was appointed Governor of Bam; but,
knowing that a second Governor would soon be appointed, he sat on his
horse looking back towards Kerman and holding the order of appointment
all ready for his successor!"

The Governor-General, upon hearing this, rolled over with
inextinguishable laughter; and, when he was able to speak, he shouted,
"Go, mount thy horse with thy head towards its head. I grant thee Bam
for five years."

To resume, I was appointed *Mamur* to bear the robe of honour to Hidayat
Khan, Governor of Jiruft. This official, who was thus honoured, had
recently represented to the Governor-General that, owing to the lack of
careful supervision, the Government land at Dosari had become worthless;
but that he, to render a service to the State, was prepared to pay one
thousand *tomans* for the property, although he knew that he would lose
heavily by it. The Vakil-ul-Mulk, therefore, instructed me to also
inquire into this question; and thus I felt that I was indeed a person
of consequence when I started on my journey, with a well-equipped
*abdari* on a stout pony, and three servants, one of whom, Rustam

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Beg, had served
the deceased *Mirza* Hasan Khan as steward for many years.

But perhaps, O my readers in London, there are no *abdaris* in your
country, and it is therefore necessary for me to explain their immense
utility. The *abdari* consists of a pair of large leather saddle bags,
faced with carpet, and in these are placed a samovar, a box of sundries,
a set of round copper dishes with lids, in which food is carried, a
tray, candlesticks, and many other things.

On the saddle bags the servant rides, sitting on a carpet or a Kerman
felt of fawn colour, which, when needed, is spread for the meals or
repose of the master. Behind is fastened a round leather case, in which
all light articles, such as the water pipe, plates, spoons, etc., are
carried. Add a charcoal brazier for lighting purposes, which swings on
one side, a set of spits, and an umbrella, and you will agree that
nothing more is needed than a mule laden with clothes and bedding for
even such luxurious travellers as we Iranis, from whom you can learn
something in the way of comfort.

Do not enter the tavern without the guide,  
Although you may be the Alexander of your time.

The first town we reached was Mahun, where I stopped for a day to see my
old friends, who all complimented me on my high position, and

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

begged me to help them in their various cases. From Mahun we rode over a
very lofty range, and spent the night close to its highest point in the
caravanserai just completed by the noble Vakil-ul-Mulk. The building was
of stone, and consisted of a splendid courtyard, round which were many
small chambers, and behind were stables for five hundred horses or
mules. In short, thanks to the generosity of the Vakil-ul-Mulk, we all
passed an agreeable night, whereas, otherwise, it would have been too
cold at this season of the year for sleep. Listen to what Omar Khayyam
writes:

Think, in this batter’d Caravanserai  
Whose Portals are alternate Night and Day,  
  How Sultan after Sultan with his Pomp  
Abode his destined Hour, and went his way.

We next halted at Rain, where a *mullah* insisted on entertaining me,
although Rustam Beg warned me that the *Aga* was very avaricious. Indeed
he spoke the truth, for, just as we were leaving on the following
morning, his head servant came to tell me very confidentially that his
master much admired my pistol.

I should have replied, "A gift"; but Rustam Beg interrupted me and said
that the pistol was only lent me for the journey, and that it would not
be right for me to part with it, even as a gift, to the *Aga*. He added
that he himself was

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

responsible for the return of the pistol to its owner. When the *Aga's*
servant understood that he had failed he was very angry, so Rustam Beg
said, "Bismillah! let us start quickly"; and when we had left the
village behind he exclaimed, "By Allah! true is the proverb, 'None hath
seen a snake's foot, an ant's eye, or a *mullah's* bread.' Praise be to
Allah that I did not allow him to flay you!"

From Rain we travelled down a wide valley to Sarvistan, which is noted
as being one of the windiest spots in Iran, the saying running as
follows:

They asked the Wind "Where is thy home?" It replied, "My poor home is in
Tahrud; but I occasionally visit Abarik and Sarvistan." <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)

Well do I recollect that it was necessary to order the luggage to be
piled against the door that night, and, although this precaution
prevented it flying open, it was impossible to sleep; and yet the
villagers did not consider this gale more than a light breeze! May Allah
take pity on them!

Separating us from Jiruft was the very high range of the Jabal Bariz,
well termed "the Cold Range," as, although it wanted but twenty days to
*No Ruz*, it was very difficult for our party to cross it owing to the
deep snow.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="img_12500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![IN THE JABAL
BARIZ&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Major J. W. Watson,
phot&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/12500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12500.jpg)  
IN THE JABAL BARIZ  
*Major J. W. Watson, phot*.  
</span>

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

We stopped for the night at Maskun; about a *farsakh* off is a famous
cave, said to contain gas which kills all living things. Allah knows if
this be true, but many witnesses agreed to its being so.

As a *mamur* from the Vakil-ul-Mulk, I was entertained by the head of
the Jabalbarizis. He was evidently of a very great age—more than one
hundred years, he said—and his face was like wax; but yet his eye
resembled that of a hawk, and, in spite of his poor clothes, he bore
himself like a king, and his long white beard was most majestic.

I asked him whether he had visited Kerman recently, as I found his
features familiar; but he said that it was more than twenty years since
he had left his district. That night, however, he narrated to me that he
was a lineal descendant of Sultan Sanjar, from whom he was the
thirty-fifth generation in descent; and suddenly I recollected that I
had recently been reading a history of that great Seljuk monarch, who,
once the Lord of half Asia, was defeated and taken prisoner by the vile
tribe of the Ghazz. I also remembered that, in the history, was a
portrait of the Sultan, and that that portrait resembled my host
closely. The ways of Allah are concealed; but surely there is no other
country in which its poor men can claim and prove that they are
descended from Sultans.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

The world is nothing,  
And the work of the world is nothing.

There was deep snow at Maskun; but yet, a few hours after leaving it, we
descended into the valley of Jiruft, where it was already late spring,
and it was delightful to see the green crops growing luxuriantly all
round the groves of date palms. There were also large numbers of lambs
and kids.

We were received by the confidential servant of the Governor, and
entertained at a village situated on the right bank of the Halil Rud,
the chief river of the Kerman province, which, from its violence, is
also known as the Div Rud or "Demon River."

Close by stretched the ruins of the "City of Dakianus," <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) covering many *farsakhs*. Now several
ruined cities are termed by this name after a Sovereign, to escape whose
persecutions seven Christian youths took refuge in a cave with a
faithful dog, and there slept for three hundred and nine years, as
recounted in the Koran. Two, *farsakhs* to the west is said to be the
cave in which they slept; but I knew that this event took place in Asia
Minor, and that this city was, in reality, the ruins of Komadin, which,
so I have read, was the storehouse of the valuables of China and Cathay,
and of Hindustan,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Abyssinia,
Zanzibar, and Egypt. By Allah, I felt sad when I thought of the fate of
Komadin, sacked by the accursed Ghazz, who tortured its wretched
inhabitants by pouring down their throats hot ashes known as "Ghazz
coffee." May the curse of Allah be upon them!

Three days later, escorted by his staff and attendants, Hidayat Khan
came out two, *farsakhs* from Dosari to a spot fixed by long custom for
these important ceremonies. There I invested him with the robe of honour
which had been, I assured him, worn by His Excellency the
Governor-General, and was therefore, in truth, *tanpush* or "worn on the
body," an especial honour. I also presented him with the order, by which
he was reappointed Governor of Jiruft for the following year. Hidayat
Khan was much pleased, and put on the robe of honour before the whole of
the assembled *Khans* and people. He also placed the order on his head
and eyes, and reverently kissed it before opening it.

To me he showed great kindness, not only on account of the deceased
*Mirza* Hasan Khan, but also perhaps because I was now *mustaufi* in his
place, and had charge of the revenue of the district. That night I was
presented with a beautiful horse of Nejd race; and it was explained to
me that an ordinary *mamur* would only have been given fifty *tomans*;
but that I

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

was to be considered an honoured friend and kinsman, as I was connected
with Hidayat *Khan* through my mother.

Rustam Beg told me, with reference to the gift, that, before the just
rule of the Vakil-ul-Mulk, a tyrant had been Governor-General of Kerman,
who heard that Hidayat Khan possessed a Nejd mare of pure race. He tried
to secure this by sending his Master of Horse to stay with the *Khan*,
with orders to obtain it as a gift; but this plan the latter rendered
worthless by giving him butter which had been poisoned with copper, from
which he nearly died. Indeed *mamur's* butter has become a proverb in
the province.

Knowing, however, that the matter would have a sequel, the *Khan* sent
off his family to Shiraz with the famous mare, and never slept in his
house at night. By Allah! he was astute, as, a month later, fifty sowars
suddenly surrounded his house at night, and, when they found neither the
mare nor its master, they tied up and flogged all the servants, sacked
the place, and then burned it. This Hidayat Khan saw from where he was
living in a nomad tent a *farsakh* off; and he rode away to Shiraz, and
thence went to Tehran, to prostrate himself at the foot of the Throne.
But the tyrant was too powerful, and so he lived at Tehran for some
years until that wicked Governor died, and he was free to return

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

to Jiruft. My old servant concluded by telling me that the horse
presented to me was of that same famous race.

The following morning I inspected the Government property, which, to
judge from the quantity of weeds, was not well cultivated; but yet it
appeared to be worth at least five thousand *tomans*; and I was informed
that, if properly managed, it would yield crops worth two thousand
*tomans* every year. For a day or two Rustam Beg was constantly visiting
the *Khan;* and, finally, after much hard bargaining, and a threat to
return to Kerman, it was arranged that I should receive two hundred
*tomans* for my trouble, and that eight hundred *tomans* should be
offered as a present to the Governor-General, if the Government agreed
to the sale of the land at the price suggested.

In the meanwhile the Khan had paid me three hundred *tomans* which were
due to the secretary of His Excellency for the cost of the robe of
honour, the pay of the tailor, and the customary gift for the keeper of
robes.

As it was very important to reach Kerman before the festival of *No
Ruz*, because to travel during that period, according to our ideas, is
inauspicious, I asked the *Khan* to allow me to leave and said good-bye
to him.

Two of my horses having died from eating

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

oleander, which is a terrible poison growing at the first stage, it was
decided to snake a double march, and so Dosari was left in the middle of
the night, and we rode through the pass with the oleander bushes without
stopping, and finally halted at the hamlet of Saghdar. At this stage
there was no snow left; but, on the contrary, even the camel thorn was
beginning to show great buds.

Close to the hamlet was a party of gipsies; and Rustam Beg warned every
one to be careful to see that they did not steal anything, when they
came round playing their instruments and offering their pipe-stems for
sale. These gipsies are the descendants of a band of twelve thousand
Indian musicians and jugglers who were brought from India by Bahram Gur
to amuse us Iranis; and, even to-day, they alone are the public
musicians in most parts of Persia, although I have heard that, in
Shiraz, Jews engage in this low profession. However, they are good
ironworkers, and also they are experts at bleeding. Now we Iranis know
that, unless we are cupped every spring and thereby purify our blood, we
shall not retain good health during the summer; and thus their services
are much in request for this purpose. In short, they are a vile race,
but yet useful to us.

When we had recrossed the Jabal Bariz, we

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span id="img_13300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![GIPSY MUSICIANS
&lt;i&gt;H. R. Sykes, phot&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/13300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13300.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

found that everywhere spring was coming; and we decided to march without
any halts so as to reach Kerman some days before *No Ruz*. At Sarvistan,
however, we met some men who had been robbed of everything except their
trousers by a party of twenty-five Afshar bandits; and so, that night,
it was decided to take an *Istakhara*, or beads, as to whether we should
march the following day or wait for further news.

Now every Mussulman carries a rosary with one hundred beads, the origin
of which is connected with the marriage of Her Highness the Princess
Fatima.

The Prophet, on Him be Peace! declared that he would only give her in
marriage to him on to whose house the planet Venus descended. That night
all the suitors to her hand were watching the heavens from the roofs of
their houses, when the planet moved from its place and descended to
above Medina. The white Fatima, too, was watching; and, on seeing this
marvel, she called out *Allah ho Akbar*, or "Allah is Great." When this
exclamation had been repeated thirty-four times the planet began to
circle round Medina, whereupon she exclaimed *Subhan Ullah*, or "Glory
be to Allah." This she had repeated thirty-three times when the planet
moved towards the house of Ali, and, finally, she broke into
*Alhamdulillah*, or "Thanks be to Allah,"

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

which she repeated thirty-three times, while the planet stopped over the
house of Ali, congratulated him on his good fortune, and re-ascended to
its place in the firmament.

These rosaries are consulted in case of danger, and indeed on every
occasion. So the opening chapter of the Koran was first solemnly
recited, after which I shut my eyes and, thinking intently about the
dangers of the road, I took an unknown number of beads in my hand; and
then counted them three at a time.

Every one was delighted when it was seen that there were ten beads, as
one over, termed *Subhan Ullah*, is deemed to be most auspicious; and we
immediately determined to proceed on the following day. Of course we
kept our pistols and rifles all ready, but the route was deserted,
although we saw where the Afshars had thrown away part of the loot which
was useless to them; and, that night, we all felt very happy that we had
been able to prove the truth of our proverb that "a road attacked by
thieves is safe," which means that, after attacking a caravan, the
robbers hasten away with their loot, knowing that they will be pursued.

In fact, that night a Captain with thirty sowars arrived, and, a week
after our return to Kerman, they brought in seven of the thieves, who
were publicly executed in the great square

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

of Kerman, after which the executioner was given a present by all the
shopkeepers, this being his perquisite.

During the last stage, the horses and mules understood that they were
approaching their home, and moved quite a, *farsakh* an hour; and, in
time, the walls of beloved Kerman appeared, and this my first *mamuriat*
was successfully accomplished. Not only was the private secretary
pleased with what I had brought him; but even His Excellency, after
listening to the details of what I had done, condescended to praise my
diligence and capacity, and remarked to the above official that such a
one was a good servant.

<span id="img_13700"></span> ![FROM AN OLD BRASS TRAY](img/13700.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[124:1](gsw12.htm#fr_46) These places are close
to one another.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[128:1](gsw12.htm#fr_47) Dakianus is the Roman
Emperor Decius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Persian New Year](gsw13)
