[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gsw15)  [Next](gsw17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Glory of the Shia World*, by P. M. Sykes and Khan Bahadur Ahmad din
Khan, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span id="img_19100"></span> ![FROM AN ENAMELLED BOX](img/19100.jpg.md)

### CHAPTER XII

#### ROBBED IN THE LUT

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>Therefore we delivered Lot and his family,<br />
Except his wife; she was one of those<br />
Who stayed behind: and we rained<br />
A shower of stones upon them . . . and<br />
We turned those cities upside down.<br />
                                    <em>The Koran</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> had reached Yezd on the sixth day of
the sacred month of Muharram; and this we had purposely intended, as,
being pilgrims, we were especially bound to take part in this sad
anniversary. In a previous chapter I referred very briefly to the
difference between us Shias and the Sunnis. I will now give further
details, as, indeed, I then promised.

We know that when, for the last time, Mohamed, on Him and on his family
be Peace! performed the pilgrimage, known as the Farewell Pilgrimage,
the angel Gabriel came to him at Mecca, with instructions from Allah,
the

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All-Wise, to
proclaim publicly that Ali should be his successor.

Upon the conclusion of the pilgrimage the Prophet, accompanied by Ali
and his other companions, started on his return journey, and, at a
village termed Khumm, close by which there was a pool of water, the
solemn investiture was held. A throne, constructed of camel saddles, was
erected, and Ali was set thereon by the Prophet, who then embraced the
"Lion of Allah" in such a close and long embrace that, by this act, his
virtues were transmitted to his illustrious son-in-law. Finally, the
Prophet formally constituted Ali as his successor and heir; and this
historical event is annually celebrated with much rejoicing under the
name of "the Festival of the Pool of Khumm," wherever Persians reside.

However, owing to the wickedness of mankind, Abu Bekr, Omar and Osman
were all elected Caliphs before Ali came to his right, and he only ruled
for a few short years, being foully murdered in the sixth year of his
Caliphate. After his death, his eldest son, Hasan the Pious, succeeded
him; but being wearied with the faithlessness of the Arabs, he
abdicated, and, like his descendant the *Imam* Riza, was poisoned.

Ten years later his brother Husein, who had been promised the succession
to the Caliphate

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

upon the death of Muavia, was invited by the fickle Kufans to trust
himself to their support to win the throne which was justly his, and,
accompanied by a small band of his faithful followers and his family, he
started off on this ill-omened journey.

Upon his approach the Kufans, the curse of Allah be on them! deserted
the cause of the *Imam*, who declined to retire but resolved to die
fighting to the bitter end, being fortified in this resolution by the
vision of a phantom horseman who said to him, "Men travel by night, and
by night their destinies travel towards them."

He encamped with his small party at a place called Kerbela, near the
bank of the Euphrates, and, to ensure a desperate defence, ordered the
tents to be fastened together, to prevent an attack from that quarter.

In the morning both sides prepared for battle, the forces of the enemy
being under Umar bin Saad, who was bribed to oppose the *Imam* by the
promise of the governorship of Rei. He himself wrote the following verse
on the subject:—

Shall I govern Rei, the object of my desire?  
Shall I be accursed for slaying Husein?  
The murder of Husein damns me to inevitable flames:  
Yet sweet is the Possession of Rei.

Umar's force numbered four thousand, whereas the band of the *Imam*
consisted of but

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

seventy-two devoted followers. However, before the battle commenced, Al
Hurr, an Arab chief, who commanded thirty horsemen, quitted the ranks of
the enemy and joined the sacred force with his son, brother and slave,
the other sowars declining to follow him. By Allah! we reverence his
memory even to-day and remember how he reproached the Arabs in these
words: "Alas for you! you invited him and he came, and you not only
deceived him, but are now come out to fight against him. Nay, you have
hindered him and his wives and his family from the waters of the
Euphrates, where Jews and Christians and Sabæans drink, and where pigs
and dogs disport themselves."

When the battle commenced two warriors stepped forth from the ranks of
the enemy, but they and many other champions were slain by the
indomitable heroes, until Umar withdrew his horsemen and sent five
hundred archers to the front, who rained in arrows. Even then the
warriors of the *Imam* were unconquered until, after the fight had raged
the whole day, and the entire party of the *Imam* had been slain, the
*Imam* himself, overpowered by countless wounds, fell in a last
desperate rush among the foemen. May the Peace of Allah be on him, and
His forgiveness be on the members of his band and on Al Hurr!

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span id="img_19500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![LEADERS OF THE
MUHARRAM PROCESSION](tn/19500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19500.jpg.md)  
LEADERS OF THE MUHARRAM PROCESSION  
</span>

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

The helpless women were stripped and insulted by their captors and also
by the pitiless rabble on the way to Damascus, where the accursed Yezid,
son of Muavia, endeavoured to aggravate their sorrows in such a fashion
that it can never be forgotten.

It is this awful tragedy that we Shias celebrate in the month of
Muharram, and on the tenth day, the anniversary of the murder of the
*Imam* Husein, the Prince of Martyrs, there are always processions to
remind us of the heart-rending calamity. In Yezd each of the seventeen
quarters prepares a procession, the cost of which is partly defrayed by
the legacies of pious men.

The procession I joined was headed by a band of men who, to honour the
*Imam* by self-inflicted pain, had hung horse-shoes, locks, and heavy
chains to their bare bodies, and who, by their example, encouraged even
little children to wound themselves in memory of the wounds of the
*Imam*.

Then came camels laden with tents, and innumerable mules, lent by their
pious owners, carrying baggage, followed by a hundred horses with shawls
draped on their necks and by two hundred led horses. Behind these there
were thirty-five camels, ridden by members of the *Imam's* family,
representations of the seventy-two

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

bodies of the martyrs, seventeen heads on lances and a band of Arab
horsemen. Two singers of war songs represented the two parties and
engaged in a heated dialogue, mingled with curses.

Then came *Hazrat* Abbas, the standard-bearer, accompanied by eighty
water-carriers. It was he who was slain when attempting to draw water
from the Euphrates.

Among the most conspicuous features was a wooden house draped in black
to represent the bridal chamber of Fatima, daughter of the *Imam*, who
was married to her cousin Kasim just before the fatal day. A hundred
dervishes with their axes, horns, and lion or leopard skins also formed
part of the procession.

The next scene was that of Yezid on his throne, surrounded by his Court,
while eighty men beat two stones together and recited mournful verses.
Nor must we forget the ambassador from Europe, who, seeing Yezid insult
the head of the dead *Imam*, fearlessly rebuked him before all his
courtiers. Finally, there was a model of the tomb of the *Imam*,
surrounded by brave officers and soldiers of the ever-victorious army of
Iran.

In the different parts of the procession groups of two hundred men beat
their breasts in rhythm, and as they advanced they recited:

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span id="img_19900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE MUHARRAM AT
YEZD&lt;br&gt; (Showing the bier of the &lt;i&gt;Imam&lt;/i&gt; in the
background)&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Mirza Daud,
phot&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/19900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19900.jpg.md)  
THE MUHARRAM AT YEZD  
(Showing the bier of the *Imam* in the background)  
*Mirza Daud, phot*.  
</span>

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

O our *Imam* Jafar! <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_55.md)  
Husein our Lord  
Has been murdered on the plain of Kerbela;  
Dust be on our heads.

And so the procession moved in stately order to the square of Mir
Chakmak, where there is an octagonal, tile-covered pillar, which is
peculiar to Yezd. There a halt was made, while an enormous structure,
representing the bier of the *Imam*, decorated with fine Kerman shawls
and innumerable flags, mirrors, swords, and daggers, was slowly carried
round the Square by five hundred men, who bore this heavy burden as a
sacred privilege. It is the pride of the inhabitants of the village of
Mohamedabad to render this unique service to the *Imam;* and nowhere
else in Persia is there such a huge bier. From the Square the procession
proceeded to the Palace, where the Governor loaded its organisers with
gifts and released two prisoners convicted of murder; and so back to its
quarter, after having shown to men, women, and children the poignant
tragedy of Kerbela, which will not be forgotten by us Iranis until the
Day of Judgment.

.        .        .        .        .        .

After taking part in the procession on the tenth of Moharram, we decided
to continue our

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

journey across the dreadful Lut to Tabas without undue delay. As I am
deeply versed in geography, and am not among those who believe that
"Atlantic" is the name of a city, perhaps the people of London would
like to hear from me about our famous desert, for, just as the gardens
of Iran surpass all others for beauty, so the Lut, well named after one
of our prophets, Lut or Lot, on Him be Peace! surpasses all other
deserts in the world for its extent and aridity.

Now the Lut stretches from near Tehran across the centre of Persia to
the frontiers of Baluchistan, a distance of two hundred *farsakhs*, and,
if travellers speak the truth, this desert really stretches almost to
India; but only in Iran is it called the Lut. From north to south its
extent is nowhere more than one hundred *farsakhs* wide, and, by the
road we were travelling, it scarcely exceeds fifty *farsakhs* in width.

This huge desert was once, according to our histories, a sea; but
nowadays there are great ranges without water and vast areas of moving
sand, which covers the road if there be a strong wind. Again, there are
huge salt swamps, more especially in the northern portion, and elsewhere
it is so stony that it is necessary to travel very slowly. Throughout
there is very little water, and generally it is salt. Indeed, there are
countless

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

steep passes over the ever-barring ranges of hills, fearful ascents and
descents, dangerous swamps, and the terror of the moving sands. The
climate is either extremely hot or bitterly cold. Indeed only a brave
and hardy race like we Iranis would dare to cross such an awesome place,
which is not only haunted by Ghouls and Afrits, but also by robbers with
savage faces and evil hearts.

There is no water, no habitation, and  
No summons to prayers of the Mussulman.

In all this huge waterless tract there is unlimited grazing for camels,
but little else. I have read that the camel-bird <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) in ancient days inhabited this desert, and
the Doctor *Sahib* told me that the English in Africa now make much
profit from selling its feathers. In the name of Allah, then, let them
come and show us Persians how to become rich from our boundless Lut!

We resumed our journey on a propitious day; but, just as I was mounting,
Ali Khan sneezed violently, and had not Mahmud Khan, who declined to pay
an extra day's hire for the mules, prevented us, we should not have
started that day. Allah knows how true is our proverb, "Greediness makes
a man blind."

About a *farsakh* from Yezd we dismounted

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

to smoke a water pipe, and, sitting on a ridge overlooking the city, we
swore with an oath that it was not fit for any one to live in but the
Yezdis. As Ali Khan truly remarked, the city was composed mainly of
wind-towers. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_57.md)

We rode slowly forward, and as we were descending a little valley, a
hare suddenly crossed our track to the left. Mahmud Khan turned white
like curds at this evil omen; but, angry at his behaviour in the
morning, I pointed out that what fate ordained would be; and that
avarice was composed of three letters, and that all three were
empty. <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_58.md)

In truth, I could not content myself with this proverb, but said to
them, "Have you not heard the story about the late Commander-in-Chief of
the Persian army at Tabriz?" This personage was so avaricious that he
used to allow the regiments on duty to return to their homes only if
their officers paid him large sums of money.

This was his constant habit, until he was very ill and the Angel of
Death was knocking at the gate, when he was told that General Najaf Ali
Khan had come to see him about dismissing the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Muzaffari
regiment; but that, as he was ill, he would not be allowed to trouble
him.

Unable to speak, the dying man gave a sign that the petitioner should be
admitted; and the General, after a few words, offered one thousand
*tomans*. The Commander-in-Chief was in the death agony; but, just
before the Angel of Death seized his soul, he shook two lean fingers at
the General, signifying thereby that he must pay two thousand *tomans*,
and, shaking his two fingers, he died. Truly Allah is great and his
paths are hidden!

To complete my ill-humour, when we halted to eat our breakfast my
servant Gholam Riza represented to me that my samovar had evidently been
stolen at Yezd, as he could not find it in the morning when packing up.
He added that this was fate. This answer made me so angry that I
exclaimed, "Thou half-boiled jackass, dost thou not know what our
Prophet, on him and on his family be Peace, replied to such a one as
thou?" He ordered: "Tie up the knee of thy camel, with thy trust in
Allah." Better advice than this has no man given.

The following day the head muleteer suggested to us to ride about a
*farsakh* to the left of the track, as we should see the famous City of
Lut. And indeed it was a wonderful spectacle, as, on each side of a wide
valley we saw the ruins of

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

great forts and of wonderful buildings, so enormous and so magnificent
that they must have been built by the Divs. Here then was the country
which Allah the Omnipotent destroyed, as it is written in the Koran, "We
turned those cities upside down." O my brethren, tremble and fear the
vengeance of Allah the Omnipotent! and forget not the awful punishment
that fell on those evil-doers.

That night at Kharana we overtook a caravan of pilgrims from Shiraz, who
had been delayed for a week by rumours that a band of robbers was
holding the road. However, the arrival of our party, sixty strong,
doubled our numbers; and it was decided to march together until Meshed
was reached.

In the caravan from Shiraz were two Khans with whom we made
acquaintance. But it must be stated clearly that, in the whole of
Persia, there are no people so immoderately proud of themselves as the
Shirazis. Indeed, before we had been together an hour, the son of Assad
Ullah Khan quoted from *Shaykh* Sadi:

Judge with thine eyes and set thy foot in the garden fair and free,*  
*And tread the jessamine under foot, and the flowers of the Judas
tree.*  
*O joyous and gay is the New Year's Day, and in Shiraz most of all,*  
*Even the stranger forgets his home and becomes its willing thrall.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fortunately, I was
as well acquainted with the great poet's works as the *Khan*, and I
stopped this boasting for a while by quoting:

My soul is weary of Shiraz, utterly sick and sad;  
If you seek for news of my doings, you will have to ask at Baghdad.

However, it was no use as, whatever we said, our companions could not
realise that it was their good fortune at having two such poets as
*Shaykh* Sadi and *Khoja* Hafiz born at Shiraz that had made their city
known, whereas actually its climate is damp and unwholesome compared
with Kerman, and in size there is no comparison. To say more would be
excessive.

The morning we left Kharana it was arranged that we *Khans* with our
armed servants should ride in front of the caravan in order to protect
it; and we warned all the pilgrims not to straggle. No one would,
however, pay attention to our warning, and the *Chaoush*, <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_59.md) who was reading suitable passages from the
Koran, to which every one replied by *Salawat* or "Blessings," said that
we should not be troubled, as His Highness the *Imam* Riza would protect
his servants.

We stopped for the heat of the day at Rizab, a dilapidated,
sinister-looking caravanserai. We knew that this was a dangerous place,
as we had

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

been informed that robbers from Fars had been heard of quite recently in
the vicinity; but, to our delight, we found the place empty, and,
feeling much relieved, we ate our breakfast with relish.

Mahmud Khan ordered two of his servants, as a precaution, to keep watch,
and we all

<span id="img_20800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE CARAVANSERAI
AT RIZAB &lt;i&gt;H. R. Sykes, phot&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/20800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20800.jpg.md)  
THE CARAVANSERAI AT RIZAB *H. R. Sykes, phot*.  
</span>

composed ourselves to sleep about noon. Just as we thought it was time
to arouse ourselves and finish the stage, a terrible uproar occurred,
and, before we had time even to seize our rifles, we were captured by
the Fars robbers.

Their leader, Gholam Ali, was a man of most ferocious aspect, and when
he recognised Assad Ullah Khan, he glared at him like a Div. Assad

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span id="img_20900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![GHOLAM ALI, CUT
HAND&lt;br&gt; (Only the thumb of the right hand is left)&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;W. Carter,. phot&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/20900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20900.jpg.md)  
GHOLAM ALI, “CUT HAND”  
(Only the thumb of the right hand is left)  
*W. Carter,. phot*.  
</span>

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ullah Khan was
frozen to the spot like a statue; and it was explained that he had some
years ago cut off the fingers of the right hand of Gholam Ali, who was
caught robbing a caravan near Dehbid, of which village Assad Ullah Khan
was at that time the Governor. The blackhearted

<span id="img_21100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A MESHED
BANKER&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;A. Wright, phot&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/21100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21100.jpg.md)  
A MESHED BANKER  
*A. Wright, phot*.  
</span>

ruffian, whose nickname was "Cut Hand," was so furious that his eyes
became red, and he swore that, in revenge: he would shoe Assad Ullah
Khan with horse-shoes; <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) and that he
would only grant him a respite until he had collected the booty.

Everything belonging to us was seized. Personally I had not brought much
money with

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

me, as I had a bill on a banker at Meshed, and had sent the horse
presented to me by the prince back to Kerman; but Mahmud Khan, who was
old fashioned and loved to keep his money under his quilt at night, had
seven hundred *tomans* with him, and in spite of his curses and
entreaties all of it was taken. As the verse runs:

You may shout or cry; but the thief will not return the robbed goods.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our carpets,
clothes, and rifles were seized; but the property of a *mullah*, who was
a *Sayyid*, was restored. In short, we were stripped of everything
except our underclothes, and those who resisted were badly beaten.

O readers of London and the New World, imagine our sad plight as we, who
in the morning had owned horses, mules, and camp equipment, crawled
miserably into Saghand with but a lame mule and a donkey which the
robbers did not require. Ali Khan alone, like the light youth he was,
kept repeating: "Respect is in Contentment; Disgrace is in Avarice,"
until we all begged him for Allah's sake to hold his peace.

Mahmud Khan was violently angry and behaved like a madman, at one time
cursing the robbers, and at another vowing that his two servants, who
had been ordered to keep watch, but who had slept, should eat a thousand
sticks.

Everything, fortunately, has an end; but,

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

upon our arrival at Saghand in a pitiful state of fatigue, judge of our
surprise when we saw Assad Ullah Khan seated outside the house of the
headman of the village smoking a water pipe. "O Allah, what do I behold?
Am I asleep or awake?" and a thousand other expressions rose to our
lips; but the Khan said, "Did you not know that the Shirazis are clever,
and I who am not less clever than the other Shirazis, told the servant
of Gholam Ali, who was guarding me, that I had two hundred *tomans* sewn
up in my quilt. He, like all ass, believing me went off to find the
money; and I quietly stole behind the caravanserai where Gholam Ali had
left his horses, mounted one of them and, riding down a water-course,
escaped. He completed his story by quoting: "If Allah wills, an enemy
becomes a source of good."

At Saghand we met *Haji* *Aga* Mohamed, a merchant of Kerman, and,
thanks to him, we were able to continue our journey without having to
beg for our bread. Indeed, like the masters of wisdom that we were, we
gradually ceased to eat grief, and Mahmud Khan finally forgave his
servants, who incessantly begged me with tears to intercede for them,
which I was bound to do. In short, I represented to Mahmud Khan that
"Allah takes the boat whither He will; let the boatman tear his clothes
in grief."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[201:1](gsw16.htm#fr_57.md) Jafar was the sixth
*Imam*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[203:1](gsw16.htm#fr_58.md) This is the Persian
term for the ostrich, which ranged the Lut many hundreds of years ago.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[204:1](gsw16.htm#fr_59.md) These wind-towers are
high chimneys, and convey a draught of air to subterraneous rooms which
are resorted to during the summer.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[204:2](gsw16.htm#fr_60.md) This refers to the
Persian word for avarice, which is spelt by three letters, none of which
are dotted.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[207:1](gsw16.htm#fr_61.md) The *Chaoush* is the
leader of the party. He generally carries a flag on a lance and protests
that he is the bravest of the brave.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[211:1](gsw16.htm#fr_62.md) This has frequently
been done, death generally resulting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Arrival at the Sacred Threshold](gsw17.md)
