<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pc03)  [Next](pc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3J0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Get PDF](pc.pdf)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Proofs of a Conspiracy*, by John Robison, \[1798\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### CHAP. I.

### Schisms in Free Masonry.

THERE IS undoubtedly a dignity in the art of building, or in
architecture, which no other art possesses, and this, whether we
consider it in its rudest state, occupied in raising a hut, or as
practised in a cultivated nation, in the erection of a magnificent and
ornamented temple. As the arts in general improve in any nation, this
must always maintain its pre-eminence; for it employs them all, and no
man can be eminent as an architect who does not possess a considerable
knowledge of almost every science and art already cultivated in his
nation. His great works are undertakings of the most serious concern,
connect him with the public, or with the rulers of the state, and attach
to him the practitioners of other arts, who are wholly occupied in
executing his orders: His works are the objects of public attention, and
are not the transient spectacles of the day, but hand down to posterity
his invention, his knowledge, and his taste. No wonder then that he
thinks highly of his profession, and that the public should acquiesce in
his pretensions, even when in some degree extravagant.

 

It is not at all surprising, therefore, that the incorporated architects
in all cultivated nations should arrogate to themselves a pre-eminence
over the similar associations of other tradesmen. We find traces of this
in the remotest antiquity. The Dionysiacs of Asia Minor were undoubtedly
an association of architects and engineers, who had the exclusive
privilege of building temples, stadia, and theatres, under the
mysterious tutelage of Bacchus, and distinguished from the uninitiated
or profane inhabitants by the science which they possessed, and by many
private signs and tokens, by which they recognized each other. This
association came into Ionia from Syria, into which country it had come
from Persia, along with that style of architecture that we call

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Grecian. We are
also certain that there was a similar trading association, during the
dark ages, in Christian Europe, which monopolized the building of great
churches and castles, working under the patronage and protection of the
Sovereigns and Princes of Europe, and possessing many privileges.
Circumstances, which it would be tedious to enumerate and discuss,
continued this association later in Britain than on the Continent.

 

But it is quite uncertain when and why persons who were not builders by
profession first sought admission into this Fraternity. The first
distinct and unequivocal instance that we have of this is the admission
of Mr. Ashmole, the famous antiquary, in 1648, into a Lodge at
Warrington, along with his father-in-law Colonel Mainwaring. It is not
improbable that the covert of secrecy in those assemblies had made them
courted by the Royalists, as occasions of meeting. Nay, the Ritual of
the Master's degree seems to have been formed, or perhaps twisted from
its original institution, so as to give an opportunity of founding the
political principles of the candidate, and of the whole Brethren
present. For it bears so easy an adaptation to the death of the King, to
the overturning of the venerable constitution of the English government
of three orders by a mean democracy, and its re-establishment by the
efforts of the loyalists, that this would start into every person's mind
during the ceremonial, and could hardly fail to show, by the
countenances and behaviour of the Brethren, how they were affected. I
recommend this hint to the consideration of the Brethren. I have met
with many particular facts, which convince me that this use had been
made of the meetings of Masons, and that at this time the Jesuits
interfered considerably, insinuating themselves into the Lodges, and
contributing to encrease that religious mysticism that is to be observed
in all the ceremonies of the order. This society is well known to have
put on every shape, and to have made use of every mean that could
promote the power and influence of the order. And we know that at this
time they were by no means without hopes of re-establishing the dominion
of the Church of Rome in England. Their services were not scrupled at by
the distressed Royalists, even such as were Protestants, while they were
highly prized by the Sovereign. We also know that Charles II. was made a
Mason, and

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

frequented the Lodges. It is not unlikely, that besides the amusement of
a vacant hour, which was always agreeable to him, he had pleasure in the
meeting with his loyal friends, and in the occupations of the Lodge,
which recalled to his mind their attachment and services. His brother
and successor James II, was of a more serious and manly cast of mind,
and had little pleasure in the frivolous ceremonies of Masonry. He did
not frequent the Lodges. But, by this time, they were the resort of many
persons who were not of the profession, or members of the trading
corporation. This circumstance, in all probability, produced the
denominations of FREE and ACCEPTED Masons. A person who has the
privilege of working at any incorporated trade, is said to be a
*freeman* of that trade. Others were *accepted* as Brethren, and
admitted to a kind of honorary freedom, as is the case in many other
trades and incorporations, without having (as far as we can learn for
certain) a legal title to earn a livelihood by the exercise of it.

 

The Lodges being in this manner frequented by persons of various
professions, and in various ranks of civil society, it cannot be
supposed that the employment in those meetings related entirely to the
ostensible profession of Masonry. We have no authentic information by
which the public can form any opinion about it. It was not till some
years after this period that the Lodges made open profession of the
cultivation of general benevolence, and that the grand aim of the
Fraternity was to enforce the exercise of all the social virtues. It is
not unlikely that this was an after thought. The political purposes of
the association being once obtained, the conversation and occupations of
the members must take some particular turn, in order to be generally
acceptable. The establishment of a fund for the relief of unfortunate
Brethren did not take place till the very end of last century; and we
may presume that it was brought about by the warm recommendations of
some benevolent members, who would naturally enforce it by addresses to
their assembled Brethren. This is the probable origin of those
philanthropic discourses which were delivered in the Lodges by one of
the Brethren as an official task. Brotherly love was the general topic,
and this, with great propriety, when we consider the object aimed at in
those addresses. Nor was this object altogether a novelty. For while the
manners of society were

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

yet but rude, Brother Masons, who were frequently led by their
employment far from home and from their friends, stood in need of such
helps, and might be greatly benefited by such an institution, which gave
them introduction and citizenship wherever they went, and a right to
share in the charitable contributions of Brethren who were strangers to
them. Other incorporated trades had similar provisions for their poor.
But their poor were townsmen and neighbours, well known to them. There
was more persuasion necessary in this Fraternity, where the objects of
our immediate beneficence were not of our acquaintance. But when the
Lodges consisted of many who were not Masons, and who had no particular
claim to good offices from a stranger, and their number might be great,
it is evident that stronger persuasions were now necessary, and that
every topic of philanthropy must now be employed. When the funds became
considerable, the effects naturally took the public eye, and recommended
the Society to notice and respect. And now the Brethren were induced to
dwell on the same topic, to join in the commendations bestowed on the
Society, and to say that universal beneficence was the great aim of the
Order. And this is all that could be said in public, without infringing
the obligation to secrecy. The inquisitive are always prying and
teazing, and this is the only point on which a Brother is at liberty to
speak. He will therefore do it with affectionate zeal, till perhaps he
has heated his own fancy a little, and overlooks the inconsistency of
this universal beneficence and philanthropy with the exclusive and
monopolizing spirit of an Association, which not only confines its
benevolence to its own Members (like any other charitable association)
but hoards up in its bosom inestimable secrets, whose natural tendency,
they say, is to form the heart to this generous and kind conduct, and
inspire us with love to all mankind. The profane world cannot see the
beneficence of concealing from public view a principle or a motive which
so powerfully induces a Mason to be good and kind. The Brother says that
publicity would rob it of its force, and we must take him at his word:
and our curiosity is so much the more excited to learn what are the
secrets which have so singular a quality.

 

Thus did the Fraternity conduct themselves, and thus

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

were they considered by the public, when it was carried over from
England to the continent; and here, it is to be particularly remarked,
that all our Brethren abroad profess to have received the Mystery of
Free Masonry from Britain. This is surely a puzzle in the history; and
we must leave it to others to reconcile this with the repeated
assertions in Anderson's book of Constitutions, "That the Fraternity
existed all over the world," and the numberless examples which he
adduces of its exertions in other countries; nay, with his repeated
assertions, "that it frequently was near perishing in Britain, and that
our Princes were obliged to send to France and other countries, for
leading men, to restore it to its former energy among us." We shall find
by and by that this is not a point of mere historical curiosity, but
that much hinges on it.

 

In the mean time, let us just remember, that the plain tale of Brotherly
love had been polished up to protestations of universal benevolence, and
had taken place of loyalty and attachment to the unfortunate Family of
Stuart, which was now totally forgotten in the English Lodges. The
Revolution had taken place, and King James, with many of his most
zealous adherents, had taken refuge in France.

 

But they took Free Masonry with them to the continent, where it was
immediately received by the French, and was cultivated with great zeal
in a manner suited to the taste and habits of that highly polished
people. The Lodges in France naturally became the rendezvous of the
adherents to their banished King, and the means of carrying on a
correspondence with their friends in England. At this time also the
Jesuits took a more active hand in Free Masonry than ever. They
insinuated themselves into the English Lodges, where they were caressed
by the Catholics, who panted after the re-establishment of their faith,
and tolerated by the Protestant royalists, who thought no concession too
great a compensation for their services. At this time changes were made
in some of the masonic symbols, particularly in the tracing of the
Lodge, which bear evident marks of Jesuitical interference.

 

It was in the Lodges held at St. Germain's that the degree of *Chevalier
Maçon Ecoffois* was added to the three SYMBOLICAL

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

degrees of English Masonry. The constitution, as imported, appeared too
coarse for the refined taste of our neighbours, and they must make
Masonry more like the occupation of a gentleman. Therefore, the English
degrees of Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master, were called
*symbolical*, and the whole Fraternity was considered either as typical
of something more elegant, or as a preparation for it. The degrees
afterwards superadded to this leave us in doubt which of these views the
French entertained of our Masonry. But at all events, this rank of
Scotch Knight was called the *first* degree of the *Maçon Parfait*.
There is a device belonging to this Lodge which deserves notice. A lion,
wounded by an arrow, and escaped from the stake to which he had been
bound, with the broken rope still about his neck, is represented lying
at the mouth of a cave, and occupied with mathematical instruments which
are lying near him. A broken crown lies at the foot of the stake. There
can be little doubt but that this emblem alludes to the dethronement,
the captivity, the escape, and the asylum of James II. and his hopes of
re-establishment by the help of the loyal Brethren. This emblem is worn
as the gorget of the Scotch Knight. It is not very certain, however when
this degree was added, whether immediately after King James's
Abdication, or about the time of the attempt to set his son on the
British Throne. But it is certain, that in 1716, this and still higher
degrees of Masonry were much in vogue in the Court of France. The
refining genius of the French, and their love of show, made the humble
denominations of the English Brethren disgusting; and their passion for
military rank, the only character that connected them with the Court of
an absolute monarch, made them adapt Free Masonry to the same scale of
public estimation, and invent ranks of *Maçons Chevaliers* ornamented
with titles, and ribbands, and stars. These were highly relished by that
vain people; and the price of reception, which was very high, became a
rich fund, that was generously applied to relieve the wants of the
banished British and Irish adherents of the unfortunate Family who had
taken refuge among them. Three new degrees of *Novice*, *Eleve*, and
*Chevalier*, were soon added, and the *Parfait Maçon* had now seven
receptions to go through, for each of which a handsome contribution was
made. Afterwards, when the first beneficent purpose of this contribution
ceased to exist,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the finery that now glittered in all the Lodges made a still more
craving demand for reception-money, and ingenuity was set to work to
invent new baits for the Parfait Maçon. More degrees of chivalry were
added, interspersed with degrees of *Philosophe*, *Pellerin*,
*Clairvoyant*, &c. &c. till some Parisian Lodges had forty-five ranks of
Masonry, having fifteen orders of chivalry. For a Knighthood, with a
Ribband and a Star, was a *bonne bouche*, given at every third step. For
a long while these degrees of chivalry proceeded on some faint analogies
with several orders of chivalry which had been erected in Europe. All of
these had some reference to some mystical doctrines of the Christian
Church, and were, in fact, contrivances of the Church of Rome for
securing and extending her influence on the laymen of rank and fortune,
whom she retained in her service by these play-things. The Knights
Templars of Jerusalem, and the Knights of the Desert, whose office it
was to protect pilgrims, and to defend the holy city, afforded very apt
models for Masonic mimicry, because the Temple of Solomon, and the Holy
Sepulchre, always shared the same fate. Many contended doctrines of the
theologians had also their Chevaliers to defend them.

 

In all this progressive mummery we see much of the hand of the Jesuits,
and it would seem that it was encouraged by the church. But a thing
happened which might easily have been foreseen. The Lodges had become
familiar with this kind of invention; the professed object of many
*real* Orders of Knighthood was often very whimsical, or very refined
and far-fetched, and it required all the finesse of the clergy to give
it some slight connection with religion or morality. The Masons,
protected by their secrecy, ventured to go farther. The declamations in
the Lodges by the Brother orator, must naturally resemble the
compositions of the ancient sophists, and consist of wire-drawn
dissertations on the social duties, where every thing is amplified and
strained to hyperbole, in their far-fetched and fanciful explanations of
the symbols of Masonry. Thus accustomed to allegory, to fiction, to
finesse, and to a sort of innocent hypocrisy, by which they cajoled
themselves into a notion that this child's-play had at bottom a serious
and important meaning, the zealous champions of Free Masonry found no
inclination to check this inventive spirit or circumscribe

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

its flights. Under the protection of Masonic secrecy, they planned
schemes of a different kind, and instead of more Orders of Chivalry
directed against the enemies of their faith, they formed associations in
opposition to the ridiculous and oppressive ceremonies and superstitions
of the church. There can be no doubt, that in those hidden assemblies, a
free communication of sentiment was highly relished and much indulged.
It was soon suspected that such use was made of the covert of a Mason
Lodge; and the church dreaded the consequences, and endeavored to
suppress the Lodges. But in vain. And when it was found, that even
auricular confession, and the spiritual threatenings of the church,
could not make the Brethren break their oath of secrecy; a full
confidence in their security made these free-thinking Brethren bring
forward, with all the eagerness of a missionary, such sentiments as they
were afraid to hazard in ordinary society. This was long suspected; but
the rigours of the church only served to knit the Brethren more firmly
together, and provoked them to a more eager exercise of their bold
criticisms. The Lodges became schools of scepticism and infidelity, and
the spirit of conversion or proselytism grew every day stronger.
Cardinal Dubois had before this time laboured with all his might to
corrupt the minds of the courtiers, by patronising, directly and
indirectly, all sceptics who were otherwise men of talents. He gave the
young courtiers to understand that if he should obtain the reins of
government, they should be entirely freed from the bigotry of Louis XIV,
and the oppression of the church, and should have the free indulgence of
their inclinations. His own plans were disappointed by his death; but
the Regent Orleans was equally indulgent, and in a few years there was
hardly a man in France who pretended to knowledge and reflection, who
did not laugh at all religion. Amidst the almost infinite number of
publications from the French presses, there is hardly a dozen to be
found whose author attempts to vindicate religion from the charges of
universal superstition and falsehood. And it must be acknowledged that
little else was to be seen in the established religion of the kingdom.
The people found nothing in Christianity but a never-ceasing round of
insignificant and troublesome ceremonies, which consumed their time, and
furnished a fund for supporting a set of lordly and oppressive
dignitaries, who declared in the plainest manner

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

their own disbelief of their religion, by their total disregard of
common decency, by their continual residence at court, and by absolute
neglect, and even the most haughty and oppressive treatment, of the only
part of their order that took any concern about the religious sentiments
of the nation, namely, the Curés or parish-priests. The monks appeared
only as lazy drones; but the parish-priests instructed the people,
visited the sick, reconciled the offender and the offended, and were the
great mediators between the landlords and their vassals, an office which
endeared them more to the people than all the other circumstances of
their profession. And it is remarkable, that in all the licentious
writings and bitter satyrical tales of the philosophic freethinkers,
such as Voltaire, who never fails to have a taunting hit at the clergy,
the Curé is generally an amiable personage, a charitable man, a friend
to the poor and unfortunate, a peace-maker, and a man of piety and
worth. Yet these men were kept in a state of the most slavish and cruel
subjection by the higher orders of the clergy, and all hopes of
advancement cut off. Rarely, hardly ever, does it happen, that a Curé
becomes a Bishop. The Abbés step into every line of preferment. When
such procedure is observed by a whole nation, what opinion can be formed
but that the whole is a vile cheat? This however was the case in France,
and therefore infidelity was almost universal. Nor was this overstrained
freedom or licentiousness confined to religious opinions. It was perhaps
more naturally directed to the restraints arising from civil
subordination. The familiar name of Brother could not but tickle the
fancy of those of inferior rank, when they found themselves set cheek by
jowl with persons whom they cannot approach out of doors but with
cautious respect; and while these men of rank have their pride lulled a
little, and perhaps their hearts a little softened by the slang and
sentimental declamation on the topic of Brotherly love and Utopian
felicity, the others begin to fancy the happy days arrived, and the
light of philanthropy beaming from the east and illuminating the Lodge.
The Garret Pamphleteer enjoys his fancied authority as Senior Warden,
and conducts with affectionate solemnity the young nobleman, who pants
for the honor of Mastership, and he praises the trusty Brother who has
guarded him in his perilous journies round the room. What topic of
declamation can be more agreeable than the equality of

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the worthy Brethren? and how naturally will the Brother Orator, in
support of this favorite topic, slide into all the common-place pictures
of human society, freed from all the anxieties attending civil
distinction, and passing their days in happy simplicity and equality.
From this state of the fancy, it is hardly a step to descant on the
propriety, the expediency, and at last, the justice of this arrangement
of civil society; and in doing this, one cannot avoid taking notice of
the great obstructions to human felicity which we see in every quarter,
proceeding from the abuses of those distinctions of rank and fortune
which have arisen in the world: and as the mischiefs and horrors of
superstition are topics of continual declamation to those who wish to
throw off the restraints of religion; so the oppression of the rulers of
this world, and the sufferings of talents and worth in inferior
stations, will be no less greedily listened to by all whose notions of
morality are not very pure, and who would be glad to have the enjoyments
of the wealthy without the trouble of labouring for them. Free Masonry
may be affirmed to have a natural tendency to foster such levelling
wishes; and we cannot doubt but that great liberties are taken with
those subjects in the Lodges, especially in countries where the
distinctions of rank and fortune are strongly expressed and noticed.

 

But it is not a matter of mere probability that the Mason Lodges were
the seminaries of these libertine instructions. We have distinct proof
of it, even in some of the French degrees. In the degree called the
*Chevalier de Soleil*, the whole instruction is aimed against the
established religion of the kingdom. The professed object is the
emancipation from error, and the discovery of truth. The inscription in
the east is *Sagesse*, that in the north is *Liberal*, that in the south
is *Fermeté*, and in the west it is *Caution;* terms which are very
significant. The *Tres Venerable* is Adam; the Senior Warden is Truth,
and all the Brethren are Children of Truth. The process of reception is
very well contrived: the whole ritual is decent and circumspect, and
nothing occurs which can alarm the most timid. Brother Truth is asked,
What is the hour? He informs Father Adam, that among men it is the hour
of darkness, but that it is mid-day in the Lodge. The candidate is
asked, Why he has knocked at the door, and what is become of the eight
companions (he is

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

one of the *Elûs*)? He says, that the world is in darkness, and his
companions and he have lost each other; that *Hesperus*, the star of
Europe, is obscured by clouds of incense, offered up by superstition to
despots, who have made themselves gods, and have retired into the inmost
recesses of their palaces, that they may not be recognised to be men,
while their priests are deceiving the people, and causing them to
worship these divinities. This and many similar sentiments are evident
allusions to the pernicious doctrine of the book called *Origine du
Despotisme Oriental*, where the religion of all countries is considered
as a mere engine of state; where it is declared that reason is the only
light which nature has given to man; and that our anxiety about futurity
has made us imagine endless torments in a future world; and that
princes, taking advantage of our weakness, have taken the management of
our hopes and fears, and directed them so as to suit their own purposes;
emancipation from the fear of death is declared the greatest of all
deliverances; questions are put to the candidate, tending to discover
whether and how far he may be trusted, and what sacrifices he is willing
to make in search after truth.

 

This shape given to the plastic mysteries of Masonry was much relished,
and in a very short time this new path was completely explored, and a
new series of degrees was added to the list, viz. the *Novice*, and the
*Elu de la Verité*, and the *Sublime Philosophe*. In the progress
through these degrees, the Brethren must forget that they have formerly
been *Chevaliers de l’Orient*, *Chevaliers de l’Aigle*, when the symbols
were all explained as typical of the life and immortality brought to
light by the gospel. Indeed they are taught to class this among the
other clouds which have been dispelled by the sun of reason. Even in the
*Chevalerie de l’Aigle* there is a two-fold explanation given of the
symbols, by which a lively imagination may conceive the whole history
and peculiar doctrines of the New Testament, as being typical of the
final triumph of reason and philosophy over error. And perhaps this
degree is the very first step in the plan of ILLUMINATION.

 

We are not to suppose that this was carried to extremity at once. But it
is certain, that before 1743 it had become universal, and that the
Lodges of Free Masons had become

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the places for making proselytes to every strange and obnoxious
doctrine. *Theurgy*, *Cosmogony*, *Cabala*, and many whimsical and
mythical doctrines which have been grafted on the distinguishing tenets
and the pure morality of the Jews and Christians, were subjects of
frequent discussion in the Lodges. The celebrated Chevalier Ramsay was a
zealous apostle in this mission. Affectionately attached to the family
of Stuart, and to his native country, he had co-operated heartily with
those who endeavoured to employ Masonry in the service of the Pretender,
and, availing himself of the pre-eminence given (at first perhaps as a
courtly compliment) to Scotch Masonry, he laboured to shew that it
existed, and indeed arose, during the Crusades, and that there really
was either an order of chivalry whose business it was to rebuild the
Christian churches destroyed by the Saracens; or that a fraternity of
Scotch Masons were thus employed in the east, under the protection of
the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem. He found some facts which were
thought sufficient grounds for such an opinion, such as the building of
the college of these Knights in London, called the Temple, which was
actually done by the public Fraternity of Masons who had been in the
holy wars. It is chiefly to him that we are indebted for that rage for
Masonic chivalry which distinguishes the French Free Masonry. Ramsay's
singular religious opinions are well known, and his no less singular
enthusiasm. His eminent learning, his elegant talents, his amiable
character, and particularly his estimation at court, gave great
influence to every thing he said on a subject which was merely a matter
of fashion and amusement. Whoever has attended much to human affairs,
knows the eagerness with which men propagate all singular opinions, and
the delight which attends their favorable reception. None are more
zealous than the apostles of infidelity and atheism. It is in human
nature to catch with greediness any opportunity of doing what lies under
general restraint. And if our apprehensions are not completely quieted,
in a case where our wishes lead us strongly to some favorite but
hazardous object, we are conscious of a kind of self-bullying. This
naturally gets into our discourse, and in our eagerness to get the
encouragement of joint adventurers, we enforce our tenets with an
energy, and even a violence, that is very inconsistent with the subject
in hand. If I am an Atheist, and my neighbour a

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Theist, there is
surely nothing that should make me violent in my endeavors to rid him of
his error. Yet how violent were the people of this party in France.

 

These facts and observations fully account for the zeal with which all
this patch-work addition to the simple Free Masonry of England was
prosecuted in France. It surprises us, Britons, who are accustomed to
consider the whole as a matter of amusement for young men, who are glad
of any pretext for indulging in conviviality. We generally consider a
man advanced in life with less respect, if he shows any serious
attachment to such things. But in France, the civil and religious
restraints on conversation made these secret assemblies very precious;
and they were much frequented by men of letters, who there found an
opportunity of expressing in safety their dissatisfaction with those
restraints, and with that inferiority of rank and condition to which
they were subjected, and which appeared to themselves so inadequate to
their own talents and merits. The *Avocats de Parlement*, the
unbeneficed Abbés, the young men of no fortune, and the *soi-disant*
philosophers, formed a numerous band, frequented the Lodges, and there
discussed every topic of religion and politics. Specimens of this
occupation appeared from time to time in Collections of Discourses
delivered by the *Frere Orateur*. I once had in my possession two
volumes of these discourses, which I now regret that I left in a Lodge
on the continent, when my relish for Free Masonry had forsaken me. One
of these is a discourse by Brother Robinet, delivered in the *Loge des
Chevaliers Bienfaisants de la Sainte Cité* at Lyons, at a visitation by
the Grand Master the *Duc de Chartres*, afterwards *Orleans* and
*Egalité*. In this discourse we have the germ and substance of his noted
work, the *Systeme de la Nature, ou l’Homme moral et physique*. In
another discourse, delivered by Brother Condorcet in the *Loge des
Philalethes* at Strasbourg, we have the outlines of his posthumous work,
*Le Progrès de l’Esprit humain;* and in another, delivered by Mirabeau
in the *Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants* at Paris, we have a great deal
of the levelling principles, and cosmopolitism, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) which he thundered from

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the tribunes of the National Assembly. But the most remarkable
performances of this kind are, the *Archives Mystico-Hermetiques*, and
the *Des Erreurs, et de la Verité*. The first is considered as an
account historical and dogmatical, of the procedure and system of the
*Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants* at Lyons. This was the most zealous
and systematical of all the cosmopolitical Lodges in France. It worked
long under the patronage of its Grand Master the *Duc de Chartres*,
afterwards *Orleans*, and at last *Ph. Egalité*. It sent out many
affiliated Lodges, which were erected in various parts of the French
dominions. The daughter Lodges at Paris, Strasbourg, Lille, Thoulouse,
took the additional title of *Philalethes*. There arose some schisms, as
may be expected, in an Association where every man is encouraged to
broach and to propagate any the most singular opinion. These schisms
were continued with some heat, but were in a great measure repaired in
Lodges which took the name of *Amis reunis de la Verité*. One of this
denomination at Paris became very eminent. The mother Lodge at Lyons
extended its correspondence into Germany, and other foreign countries,
and sent constitutions or systems, by which the Lodges conducted their
operations.

 

I have not been able to trace the steps by which this Lodge acquired
such an ascendency; but I see, that in 1769 and 1770, all the refined or
philosophical Lodges in Alsace and Lorraine united, and in a convention
at Lyons, formally put themselves under the patronage of this Lodge,
cultivated a continual correspondence, and considered themselves as
professing one Masonic Faith, sufficiently distinguishable from that of
other Lodges. What this was we do not very distinctly know. We can only
infer it from some historical circumstances. One of its favorite
daughters, the Lodge *Theodor von der guten Rath*, at Munich, became so
remarkable for discourses dangerous to church and state, that the
Elector of Bavaria, after repeated admonitions during a course of five
or six years, was obliged to suppress it in 1786. Another of its
suffragan Lodges at Regensburgh became exceedingly obnoxious to the
state, and occasioned several commotions and insurrections. Another, at
Paris, gradually refined into the Jacobin club--And in the year 1791,
the Lodges in Alsace and Lorraine, with

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

those of Spire and Worms, invited Custine into Germany, and delivered
Mentz into his hands.

 

When we reflect on these historical facts, we get some key to the better
understanding of the two performances which I mentioned as descriptive
of the opinions and occupations of this sect of Free Masons. The
*Archives Mystico-Hermetiques* exhibit a very strange mixture of
Mysticism, Theosophy, Cabalistic whim, real Science, Fanaticism, and
Freethinking, both in religion and politics. They must not be considered
as an account of any settled system, but rather as annals of the
proceedings of the Lodge, and abstracts of the strange doctrines which
made their successive appearance in the Lodge. But if an intelligent and
cautious reader examine them attentively, he will see, that the book is
the work of one hand, and that all the wonders and oddities are
caricatured, so as to engross the general attention, while they also are
twisted a little, so that in one way or another they accord with a
general spirit of licentiousness in morals, religion, and politics.
Although every thing is expressed decently, and with some caution and
moderation, atheism, materialism, and discontent with civil
subordination, pervade the whole. It is a work of great art. By keeping
the ridicule and the danger of superstition and ignorance continually in
view, the mind is captivated by the relief which free enquiry and
communication of sentiment seems to secure, and we are put off our guard
against the risk of delusion, to which we are exposed when our judgment
is warped by our passions.

 

The other book, "Des Erreurs et de la Verité," came from the same
school, and is a sort of holy scripture, or at least a Talmud among the
Free Masons of France. It is intended only for the initiated, and is
indeed a mystery to any other reader. But as it was intended for
spreading the favorite opinions of some enthusiastic Brethren, every
thing is said that does not directly betray the secrets of the Order. It
contains a system of Theosophy that has often appeared in the writings
of philosophers, both in ancient and modern times. "All the intelligence
and moral sentiment that appears in the universe, either directly, as in
the minds of men, or indirectly, as an inference from the marks of
design that we see around us, some of which show

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

us that men have acted, and many more that some other intelligence has
acted, are considered as parts or portions of a general mass of
intelligence which exists in the universe, in the same manner as matter
exists in it. This intelligence has an inscrutable connection with the
material part of the universe, perhaps resembling the connexion, equally
unsearchable, that subsists between the mind and body of man; and it may
be considered as the *Soul of the World*. It is this substance, the
natural object of wonder and respect, that men have called God, and have
made the object of religious worship. In doing so they have fallen into
gross mistakes, and have created for themselves numberless unfounded
hopes and fears, which have been the source of superstition and
fanaticism, the most destructive plagues that have ever afflicted the
human race. The Soul of Man is separated from the general mass of
intelligence by some of the operations of nature, which we shall never
understand, just as water is raised from the ground by evaporation, or
taken up by the root of a plant. And as the water, after an unsearchable
train of changes, in which it sometimes makes part of a flower,
sometimes part of an animal, &c. is at last reunited, in its original
form, to the great mass of waters, ready to run over the same circle
again; so the Soul of Man, after performing its office, and exhibiting
all that train of intellectual phenomena that we call human life, is at
last swallowed up in the great ocean of intelligence." The author then
breaks out

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,  
Atque metus omnes et inexorabile fatum  
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari."</span>

</div>

For he has now got to his asylum. This deity of his may be the object of
wonder, like every thing great and incomprehensible, but not of worship,
as the moral Governor of the universe. The hopes are at an end, which
rest on our notions of the immortality and individuality of the human
soul, and on the encouragement which religion holds forth to believe,
that improvement of the mind in the course of this life, by the exercise
of wisdom and of virtuous dispositions, is but the beginning of an
endless progress in all that can give delight to the rational and
well-disposed mind. No relation now subsists between man and Deity that
can warm the heart. But, as this is contrary to some natural

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

propensity in the human mind, which in all ages and nations has panted
after some connection with Deity, the author strives to avail himself of
some cold principles of symmetry in the works of nature, some
ill-supported notions of propriety, and other such considerations, to
make this *anima mundi* an object of love and respect. This is done in
greater detail in another work, *Tableau des rapports entre l’Homme,
Dieu, et l’Univers*, which is undoubtedly by the same hand. But the
intelligent reader will readily see, that such incongruous things cannot
be reconciled, and that we can expect nothing here but sophistry. The
author proceeds, in the next place, to consider man as related to man,
and to trace out the path to happiness in this life. Here we have the
same overstrained morality as in the other work, the same universal
benevolence, the same lamentations over the miserable state of mankind,
resulting from the oppression of the powerful, the great ones of the
earth, who have combined against the happiness of mankind, and have
succeeded, by debasing their minds, so that they have become willing
slaves. This could not have been brought about without the assistance of
superstition. But the princes of this world enlisted into their service
the priests, who exerted themselves in darkening the understandings of
men, and filled their minds with religious terrors. The altar became the
chief pillar of the throne, and men were held in complete subjection.
Nothing can recover them from this abject state but knowledge. While
this dispels their fears, it will also show them their rights, and the
way to attain them.

 

It deserves particularly to be remarked, that this system of opinions
(if such an inconsistent mass of assertions can be called a system)
bears a great resemblance to a performance of Toland's, published in
1720, called *Pantheisticon, seu Celebratio Sodalitii Socratici*. It is
an account of the principles of a Fraternity which he calls Socratica,
and the Brothers Pantheistæ. They are supposed to hold a Lodge, and the
author gives a ritual of the procedure in this Lodge; the ceremonies of
opening and shutting of the Lodge, the admission of Members into its
different degrees, &c. Reason is the Sun that illuminates the whole, and
Liberty and Equality are the objects of their occupations.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

We shall see afterwards that this book was fondly pushed into Germany,
translated, commented, and misrepresented, so as to take off the
attention from the real spirit of the book, which is intentionally
wrapped up in cabala and enigma. Mirabeau was at much pains to procure
it notice; and it must therefore be considered as a treasure of the
cosmo-political opinions of the Association of *Chevaliers
Bienfaisants*, *Philalethes*, and *Amis Reunis*, who were called the
improved Lodges, working under the D. de Chartres--of these there were
266 in 1784. This will be found a very important remark. Let it also be
recollected afterwards, that this Lodge of Lyons sent a deputy to a
grand Convention in Germany in 1772, viz. Mr. Willermooz, and that the
business was thought of such importance, that he remained there two
years.

 

The book *Des Erreurs et de la Verité*, must therefore be considered as
a classical book of these opinions. We know that it originated in the
*Loge des Chev. Bienfaisants* at Lyons. We know that this Lodge stood as
it were at the head of French Free Masonry, and that the fictitious
Order of Masonic Knights Templars was formed in this Lodge, and was
considered as the model of all the rest of this mimic chivalry. They
proceeded so far in this mummery, as even to have the clerical tonsure.
The Duke of Orleans, his son, the Elector of Bavaria, and some other
German Princes, did not scruple at this mummery in their own persons. In
all the Lodges of reception, the Brother Orator never failed to declaim
on the topics of superstition, blind to the exhibition he was then
making, or indifferent as to the vile hypocrisy of it. We have, in the
lists of Orators and Office-bearers, many names of persons, who have had
an opportunity at last of proclaiming their sentiments in public. The
Abbé Sieyes was of the Lodge of Philalethes at Paris, and also at Lyons.
Lequinio, author of the most profligate book that ever disgraced a
press, the *Prejuges vaincus par la Raison*, was warden in the Lodge
*Compacte Sociale*. Despremenil, Bailly, Fauchet, Maury, Mounier, were
of the same system, though in different Lodges. They were called
Martinists, from a St. Martin, who formed a schism in the system of the
*Chevaliers Bienfaisants*, of which we have not any very precise
account. Mercier, gives some account of it in his *Tableau de Paris*,
and in his *Année* 1888.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The breach alarmed
the Brethren, and occasioned great heats. But it was healed, and the
Fraternity took the name of *Misa du Renis*, which is an anagram of *des
Amis Reunis*. The Bishop of Autun, the man so bepraised as the
benevolent Citizen of the World, the friend of mankind and of good
order, was Senior Warden of another Lodge at Paris, established in 1786
(I think chiefly by Orleans and himself) which afterwards became the
Jacobin Club. In short, we may assert with confidence, that the Mason
Lodges in France were the hot-beds, where the seeds were soon, and
tenderly reared, of all the pernicious doctrines which soon after
choaked every moral or religious cultivation, and have made the Society
worse than a waste, have made it a noisome marsh of human corruption,
filled with every rank and poisonous weed.

 

These Lodges were frequented by persons of all ranks, and of every
profession. The idle and the frivolous found amusement, and glittering
things to tickle their satiated fancies. There they became the dupes of
the declamations of the crafty and licentious Abbés, and writers of
every denomination. Mutual encouragement in the indulgence of hazardous
thoughts and opinions which flatter our wishes or propensities is a lure
which few minds can resist. I believe that most men have felt this in
some period of their lives. I can find no other way of accounting for
the company that I have sometimes seen in a Mason Lodge. The Lodge *de
la Parfaite Intelligence* at Liege, contained, in December 1770, the
Prince Bishop, and the greatest part of his Chapter, and all the
Office-bearers were dignitaries of the church; yet a discourse given by
the Brother Orator was as poignant a satire on superstition and
credulity, as if it had been written by Voltaire. It was under the
auspices of this Lodge that this collection of discourses, which I
mentioned above, was published, and there is no fault found with Brother
Robinet; nor Brother Condorcet. Indeed the Trefonciers of Liege were
proverbial even in Brabant, for their Epicurism in the most extensive
sense of the word.

 

Thus was corruption spread over the kingdom under the mask of moral
instruction. For these discourses were full of the most refined and
strained morality, and florid paintings of Utopian felicity, in a state
where all are Brothers

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

and citizens of the world. But alas! these wire-drawn principles seem to
have had little influence on the hearts, even of those who could best
display their beauties. Read the tragedies of Voltaire, and some of his
grave performances in prose--What man is there who seems better to know
his Master's will? No man expresses with more propriety, with more
exactness, the feelings of a good mind. No man seems more sensible of
the immutable obligation of justice and of truth. Yet this man, in his
transactions with his book-sellers, with the very men to whom he was
immediately indebted for his affluence and his fame, was repeatedly,
nay, incessantly, guilty of the meanest, the vilest tricks. When he sold
a work for an enormous price to one bookseller (even to Cramer, whom he
really respected) he took care that a surreptitious edition should
appear in Holland, almost at the same moment. Proof-sheets have been
traced from Ferney to Amsterdam. When a friend of Cramer's expostulated
with Voltaire on the injustice of this conduct, he said, grinning, *Oh
le bon Cramer--eh bien--il n’a que d’etre du parti*--he may take a
share--he will not give me a livre the less for the first piece I offer
him. Where shall we see more tenderness, more honor, more love of every
thing that is good and fair, than in Diderot's *Pere de Famille*.--Yet
this man did not scruple to sell to the Empress of Russia an immense
library, which he did not possess, for an enormous price, having got her
promise that it should remain in his possession in Paris during his
life. When her ambassador wanted to see it, after a year or two's
payments, and the visitation could be no longer staved off, Diderot was
obliged to set off in a hurry, and run through all the book-sellers
shops in Germany, to help him to fill his empty shelves. He had the good
fortune to save appearances--but the trick took air, because he had been
niggardly in his attention to the ambassador's secretary. This, however,
did not hinder him from honoring his Imperial pupil with a visit. He
expected adoration, as the light of the world, and was indeed received
by the Russian courtiers with all the childish fondness that they feel
for every Parisian mode. But they did not understand him, and as he did
not like to lose money at play they did not long court his company. He
found his pupil too clearsighted. *Ces philosophes*, said she, *sont
beaux, vûs de loin; mais de plus prés, le diamant pardit crystal*. He
had contrived a poor

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

story, by which he hoped to get his daughter married in parade, and
portioned by her Majesty--but it was seen through, and he was
disappointed.

 

When we see the inefficacy of this refined humanity on these two
apostles of philosophical virtue, we see ground for doubting of the
propriety and expediency of trusting entirely to it for the peace and
happiness of a state, and we should be on our guard when we listen to
the florid speeches of the Brother Orator, and his congratulations on
the emancipation from superstition and oppression, which will in a short
time be effectuated by the *Chevaliers Bienfaisants*, the *Philalethes*,
or any other sect of cosmo-political Brethren.

 

I do not mean by all this to maintain, that the Mason Lodges were the
sole corrupters of the public mind in France.--No.--In all nations that
have made much progress in cultivation, there is a great tendency to
corruption, and it requires all the vigilance and exertions of
magistrates, and of moral instructors, to prevent the spreading of
licentious principles and maxims of conduct. They arise naturally of
themselves, as weeds in a rich soil; and, like weeds, they are
pernicious, only because they are, where they should not be, in a
cultivated field. Virtue is the cultivation of the human soul, and not
the mere possession of good dispositions; all men have these, and
occasionly exhibit them. But virtue supposes exertion; and, as the
husbandman must be incited to his laborious task by some cogent motive,
so must man be prompted to that exertion which is necessary on the part
of every individual for the very existence of a great society: For man
is indolent, and he is luxurious; he wishes for enjoyment, and this with
little trouble. The less fortunate envy the enjoyments of others, and
repine at their own inability to obtain the like. They see the idle in
affluence. Few, even of good men, have the candour, nay, I may call it
the wisdom, to think on the activity and the labour which had procured
these comforts to the rich, or to their ancestors; and to believe that
they are idle only because they are wealthy, but would be active if they
were needy. Such spontaneous reflections cannot be expected in persons
who are engaged in unceasing labour, to procure a very moderate share
(in their estimation at least)

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

of the comforts of life. Yet such reflections would, in the main, be
just, and surely they would greatly tend to quiet the minds of the
unsuccessful.

 

This excellent purpose may be greatly forwarded by a national
establishment for moral instruction and admonition; and if the public
instructors should add all the motives to virtuous moderation which are
suggested by the considerations of genuine religion, every advice would
have a tenfold influence. Religious and moral instructions are
therefore, in their own nature, unequivocal supports to that moderate
exertion of the authority arising from civil subordination, which the
most refined philanthropist or cosmopolite acknowledges to be necessary
for the very existence of a great and cultivated society. I have never
seen a scheme of Utopian happiness that did not contain some system of
education, and I cannot conceive any system of education of which moral
instruction is not a principal part. Such establishments are dictates of
nature, and obtrude themselves on the mind of every person who begins to
form plans of civil union. And in all existing societies they have
indeed been formed, and are considered as the greatest corrector and
soother of those discontents that are unavoidable in the minds of the
unsuccessful and the unfortunate. The magistrate, therefore, whose
professional habits lead him frequently to exert himself for the
maintenance of public peace, cannot but see the advantages of such
stated remembrancers of our duty. He will therefore support and cherish
this public establishment, which so evidently assists him in his
beneficent and important labours.

 

But all the evils of society do not spring from the discontents and the
vices of the poor. The rich come in for a large and a conspicuous share.
They frequently abuse their advantages. Pride and haughty behaviour on
their part rankle in the breasts, and affect the tempers of their
inferiors, already fretted by the hardships of their own condition. The
rich also are luxurious; and are often needy. Grasping at every mean of
gratification, they are inattentive to the rights of inferiors whom they
despise, and, despising, oppress. Perhaps their own superiority has been
acquired by injustice. Perhaps most sovereignties have been acquired by
oppression. Princes and Rulers are but men; as such, they abuse many of
their greatest blessings. Observing that

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

religious hopes make the good resigned under the hardships of the
present scene, and that its terrors frequently restrain the bad; they
avail themselves of these observations, and support religion as an
engine of state, and a mean of their own security. But they are not
contented with its real advantages; and they are much more afraid of the
resentment and the crimes of the offended profligate, than of the
murmurs of the suffering worthy. Therefore they encourage superstition,
and call to their aid the vices of the priesthood. The priests are men
of like passions as other men, and it is no ground of peculiar blame
that they also frequently yield to the temptations of their situation.
They are encouraged to the indulgence of the love of influence natural
to all men, and they heap terror upon terror, to subdue the minds of
men, and darken their understandings. Thus, the most honorable of all
employments, the moral instruction of the state, is degraded to a vile
trade, and is practised with all the deceit and rapacity of any other
trade; and religion, from being the honor and the safeguard of a nation,
becomes its greatest disgrace and curse.

 

When a nation has fallen into this lamentable state, it is extremely
difficult to reform. Although nothing would so immediately and so
completely remove all ground of complaint, as the re-establishing
private virtue, this is of all others the least likely to be adopted.,
The really worthy, who see the mischief where it really is, but who view
this life as the school of improvement, and know that man is to be made
perfect through suffering, are the last persons to complain. The
worthless are the most discontented, the most noisy in their complaints,
and the least scrupulous about the means of redress. Not to improve the
nation, but to advance themselves, they turn the attention to the abuses
of power and influence. And they begin their attack where they think the
place most defenceless, and where perhaps they expect assistance from a
discontented garrison. They attack superstition, and are not at all
solicitous that true religion shall not suffer along with it. It is not,
perhaps, with any direct intention to ruin the state, but merely to
obtain indulgence for themselves, and the cooperation of the wealthy.
They expect to be listened to by many who wish for the same indulgence;
and thus it is that religious

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

free-thinking is generally the first step of anarchy and revolution. For
in a corrupted state, persons of all ranks have the same licentious
wishes, and if superstitious, fear be really an ingredient of the human
mind, it requires some *struggle* to shake it off. Nothing is so
effectual as mutual encouragement, and therefore all join against
priestcraft; even the rulers forget their interest, which should lead
them to support it. In such a state, the pure morality of true religion
vanishes from the sight. There is commonly no remains of it in the
religion of the nation, and therefore all goes together.

 

Perhaps there never was a nation where all those cooperating causes had
acquired greater strength than in France. Oppressions of all kinds were
at a height. The luxuries of life were enjoyed exclusively by the upper
classes, and this in the highest degree of refinement; so that the
desires of the rest were whetted to the utmost. Religion appeared in its
worst form, and seemed calculated solely for procuring establishments
for the younger sons of the insolent and useless noblesse. The morals of
the higher orders of the clergy and of the laity were equally corrupted.
Thousands of literary men were excluded by their station from all hopes
of advancement to the more respectable offices in the church. These
vented their discontents as far as there was safety, and were encouraged
by many of the upper classes, who joined them in their satires on the
priesthood. The clergy opposed them, it is true, but feebly, because
they could not support their opposition by examples of their own
virtuous behaviour, but were always obliged to have recourse to the
power of the church, the very object of hatred and disgust. The whole
nation became infidel, and when in a few instances a worthy
[Curé](errata.htm#1) uttered the small still voice of true religion, it
was not heard amidst the general noise of satire and reproach. The
misconduct of administration, and the abuse of the public treasures,
were every day growing more impudent and glaring, and exposed the
government to continual criticism. But it was still too powerful to
suffer this to proceed to extremities; while therefore infidelity and
loose sentiments of morality passed unpunished, it was still very
hazardous to publish any thing against the state. It was in this respect
chiefly, that the Mason Lodges contributed to the dissemination of

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

dangerous opinions, and they were employed for this purpose all over the
kingdom. This is not an assertion hazarded merely on account of its
probability. Abundant proof will appear by and by, that the most
turbulent characters in the nation frequented the Lodges. We cannot
doubt, but that under this covert they indulged their factious
dispositions; nay, we shall find the greatest part of the Lodges of
France, converted, in the course of a very few weeks, into corresponding
political societies.

 

But it is now time to turn our eyes to the progress of Free Masonry in
Germany and the north of Europe; there it took a more serious turn. Free
Masonry was imported into Germany somewhat later than into France. The
first German Lodge that we have any account of, is that at Cologne,
erected in 1716, but very soon suppressed. Before the year 1725 there
were many, both in Protestant and Catholic Germany. Those of Wetzlar,
Frankfort on the Mayne, Brunswick, and Hamburg, are the oldest, and
their priority is doubtful. All of them received their institution from
England, and had patents from a mother Lodge in London. All seem to have
got the mystery through the same channel, the banished friends of the
Stuart family. Many of these were Catholics, and entered into the
service of Austria and the Catholic princes.

 

The true hospitality, that is no where more conspicuous than in the
character of the Germans, made this institution a most agreeable and
useful passport to these gentlemen; and as many of them were in military
stations, and in garrison, they found it a very easy matter to set up
Lodges in all parts of Germany. These afforded a very agreeable pastime
to the officers, who had little to occupy them, and were already
accustomed to a subordination which did not affect their vanity on
account of family distinctions. As the Ensign and the General were
equally gentlemen, the allegory or play of universal Brotherhood was
neither novel nor disgusting. Free Masonry was then of the simplest
form, consisting of the three degrees of Apprentice, Fellow-craft, and
Master. It is remarkable, that the Germans had been long accustomed to
the word, the sign, and the gripe of the Masons, and some other
handicraft trades. In many parts of Germany there was a distinction of
operative

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masons into
Wort-Maurers and Schrift-Maurers. The Wort-Maurers had no other proof to
give of their having been regularly brought up to the trade of builders,
but the word and signs; the Schrift-Maurers had written indentures to
shew. There are extant and in force, borough-laws, enjoining the Masters
of Masons to give employment to journeymen who had the proper words and
sign. In particular it appears, that some cities had more extensive
privileges in this respect than others. The word given at Wetzlar, the
feat of the great council of revision for the empire, entitled the
possessor to work over the whole empire. We may infer from the processes
and decisions in some of those municipal courts, that a master gave a
word and token for each year's progress of his apprentice. He gave the
word of the incorporated Imperial city or borough on which he depended,
and also a word peculiar to himself, by which all his own pupils could
recognise each other. This mode of recognisance was probably the only
document of education in old times, while writing was confined to a very
small part of the community. When we reflect on the nature of the German
empire, a confederation of small independent states, we see that this
profession cannot keep pace with the other mechanic arts, unless its
practitioners are invested with greater privileges than others. Their
great works exceed the strength of the immediate neighbourhood, and the
workmen must be brought together from a distance. Their association must
therefore be more cared for by the public.

When English Free Masonry was carried into Germany, it was hospitably
received. It required little effort to give it respectability, and to
make it the occupation of a gentleman, and its secrets and mysteries
were not such novelties as in France. It spread rapidly, and the simple
topic of Brotherly love was sufficient for recommending it to the honest
and hospitable Germans. But it soon took a very different turn. The
German character is the very opposite of frivolity. It tends to
seriousness, and requires serious occupation. The Germans are eminent
for their turn for investigation; and perhaps they indulge this to
excess. We call them plodding and dull, because we have little relish
for enquiry for its own sake. But this is surely the occupation of a
rational nature, and deserves any name but stupidity. At the same time
it must be acknowledged, that

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the spirit of enquiry requires regulation as much as any propensity of
the human mind. But it appears that the Germans are not nice in their
choice of their objects; it appears that singularity, and wonder, and
difficulty of research, are to them irresistible recommendations and
incitements. They have always exhibited a strong hankering after every
thing that is wonderful, or solemn, or terrible; and in spite of the
great progress which men have made in the course of these two last
centuries, in the knowledge of nature, a progress too in which we should
be very unjust if we did not acknowledge that the Germans have been
generally in the foremost ranks, the gross absurdities of magic,
exorcism, witchcraft, fortune-telling, transmutation of metals, and
universal medicine, have always had their zealous partizans, who have
listened with greedy ears to the nonsense and jargon of fanatics and
cheats; and though they every day saw examples of many who had been
ruined or rendered ridiculous by their credulity, every new pretender to
secrets found numbers ready to listen to him, and to run over the same
course.

 

Free Masonry, professing mysteries, instantly roused all these people,
and the Lodges appeared to the adventurers who wanted to profit by the
enthusiasm or the avarice of their dupes, the fittest places in the
world for the scene of their operations. The Rosycrucians were the first
who availed themselves of the opportunity. This was not the Society
which had appeared formerly under that name, and was now extinct; but a
set of Alchymists, pretenders to the transmutation of metals and the
universal medicine, who, the better to inveigle their votaries, had
mixed with their own tricks a good deal of the absurd superstitions of
that sect, in order to give a greater air of mystery to the whole, to
protract the time of instruction, and to afford more room for evasions,
by making so many difficult conditions necessary for perfecting the
grand work, that the unfortunate gull, who had thrown away his time and
his money, might believe that the failure was owing to his own
incapacity or unfitness for being the possessor of the grand secret.
These cheats found it convenient to make Masonry one of their
conditions, and by a small degree of art, persuaded their pupils that
they were the only true Masons. These Rosycrucian Lodges were soon
established,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and became numerous, because their mysteries were addressed, both to the
curiosity, the sensuality, and the avarice of men. They became a very
formidable band, adopting the constitution of the Jesuits, dividing the
Fraternity into circles, each under the management of its own superior,
known to the president, but unknown to the individuals of the Lodges.
These superiors were connected with each other in a way known only to
themselves, and the whole was under one General. At least this is the
account which they wish to be believed. If it be just, nothing but the
absurdity of the ostensible motives of their occupations could have
prevented this combination from carrying on schemes big with hazard to
the peace of the world. But the Rosycrucian Lodges have always been
considered by other Free Masons as bad Societies, and as gross
schismatics. This did not hinder, however, their alchemical and medical
secrets from being frequently introduced into the Lodges of simple Free
Masonry; and in like manner, exorcism, or ghost-raising, magic, and
other gross superstitions, were often held out in their meetings as
attainable mysteries, which would be immense acquisitions to the
Fraternity, without any necessity of admitting along with them the
religious deliriums of the Rosycrucians.

 

In 1743, a Baron Hunde, a gentleman of honorable character and
independent fortune, was in Paris, and got acquainted with the Earl of
Kilmarnock and some other gentlemen who were about the Pretender, and
learned from them that they had some wonderful secrets in their Lodges.
He was admitted, through the medium of that nobleman, and of a Lord
Clifford, and his Masonic patent was signed *George* (said to be the
signature of Kilmarnock). Hunde had attached himself to the fortunes of
the Pretender, in hopes (as he says himself) of rising in the world
under his protection. The mighty secret was this. "When the Order of
Knights Templars was abolished by Philip the Fair, and cruelly
persecuted, some worthy persons escaped, and took refuge in the
Highlands of Scotland, where they concealed themselves in caves. These
persons possessed the true secrets of Masonry, which had always been in
that Order, having been acquired by the Knights, during their services
in the east, from the pilgrims whom they occasionally protected or
delivered. The *Chevaliers de la Rose-Croix* continued

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

to have the same duties as formerly, though robbed of their emoluments.
In fine, every true Mason is a Knight Templar." It is very true that a
clever fancy can accommodate the ritual of reception of the *Chevalier
de l’Epée*, &c. to something like the institution of the Knights
Templars, and perhaps this explanation of young Zerobabel's pilgrimage,
and of the rebuilding of the Temple by Ezra, is the most significant
explanation that has been given of the meagre symbols of Free Masonry.

 

When Baron Hunde returned to Germany, he exhibited to some friends his
extensive powers for propagating this system of Masonry, and made a few
Knights. But he was not very active. Probably the failure of the
Pretender's attempt to recover the throne of his ancestors had put an
end to Hunde's hopes of making a figure. In the mean time Free Masonry
was cultivated with zeal in Germany, and many adventurers found their
advantage in supporting particular schisms.

 

But in 1756, or 1757, a complete revolution took place. The French
officers who were prisoners at large in Berlin, undertook, with the
assurance peculiar to their nation, to instruct the simple Germans in
every thing that embellishes society. They said, that the homespun Free
Masonry, which had been imported from England, was fit only for the
unpolished minds of the British; but that in France it had grown into an
elegant system, fit for the profession of Gentlemen. Nay, they said,
that the English were ignorant of true Masonry, and possessed nothing
but the introduction to it; and even this was not understood by them.
When the ribbands and stars, with which the French had ornamented the
Order, were shown to the Germans, they could not resist the enchantment.
A Mr. Rosa, a French commissary, brought from Paris a complete
waggonload of Masonic ornaments, which were all distributed before it
had reached Berlin, and he was obliged to order another, to furnish the
Lodges of that city. It became for a while a most profitable business to
many French officers and commissaries dispersed over Germany, having
nothing else to do. Every body gaped for instruction, and these kind
teachers were always ready to bestow it. In half a year Free Masonry
underwent a complete revolution all over Germany, and

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chevaliers
multiplied without number. The Rosaic system was a gospel to the Mason
and the poor British system was despised. But the new Lodges of Berlin,
as they had been the teachers of the whole empire, wanted also to be the
governors, and insisted on complete subjection from all the others. This
startled the Free Masons at a distance, and awakened them from their
golden dreams. Now began a struggle for dominion and for independency.
This made the old Lodges think a little about the whole affair. The
result of this was a counter revolution. Though no man could pretend
that he understood the true meaning of Free Masonry, its origin, its
history, or its real aim, all saw that the interpretations of their
hieroglyphics, and the rituals of the new degrees imported from France,
were quite gratuitous. It appeared, therefore, that the safest thing for
them was an appeal to the birth-place of Masonry. They sent to London
for instructions. There they learned, that nothing was acknowledged for
genuine unsophisticated Masonry but the three degrees; and that the
mother Lodge of London alone could, by her instructions, prevent the
most dangerous schisms and innovations. Many Lodges, therefore, applied
for patents and instructions. Patents were easily made out, and most
willingly sent to the zealous Brethren; and these were thankfully
received and paid for. But instruction was not so easy a matter. At that
time we had nothing but the book of constitutions, drawn up about 1720,
by Anderson and Desaguilliers, two persons of little education, and of
low manners, who had aimed at little more than making a pretext, not
altogether contemptible, for a convivial meeting. This, however, was
received with respect. We are apt to smile at grave men's being
satisfied with such coarse and scanty fare. But it was of use, merely
because it gave an ostensible reason for resisting the despotism of the
Lodges of Berlin. Several respectable Lodges, particularly that of
Frankfort on the Mayne, that of Brunswick, that of Wetzlar, and the
Royal York of Berlin, resolutely adhered to the English system, and
denied themselves all the enjoyment of the French degrees, rather than
acknowledge the supremacy of the Rosaic Lodges of Berlin.

 

About the year 1764 a new revolution took place. An adventurer, who
called himself Johnson, and passed himself for an Englishman, but who
was really a German or Bohemian

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

named Leucht, said that he was ambassador from the Chapter of Knights
Templars at Old Aberdeen in Scotland, sent to teach the Germans what was
true Masonry. He pretended to transmute metals, and some of the Brethren
declared that they had seen him do it repeatedly. This reached Baron
Hunde and brought back all his former enthusiasm. There is something
very dark in this part of the history; for in a little Johnson told his
partisans that the only point he had to inform them of was, that Baron
Hunde was the Grand Master of the 7th province of Masonry, which
included the whole of Germany, and the royal dominions of Prussia. He
showed them a map of the Masonic Empire arranged into provinces, each of
which had distinguishing emblems. These are all taken from an old
forgotten and insignificant book, *Typotii Symbola Divina et Humana*,
published in 1601. There is not the least trace in this book either of
Masonry or Templars, and the emblems are taken out without the smallest
ground of selection. Some inconsistency with the former magnificent
promises of Johnson startled them at first, but they acquiesced and
submitted to Baron Hunde as Grand Master of Germany. Soon after Johnson
turned out to be a cheat, escaped, was taken, and put in prison, where
he died. Yet this seems not to have ruined the credit of Baron Hunde. He
erected Lodges, gave a few simple instructions, all in the system of
English Masonry, and promised, that when they had approved themselves as
good Masons, he would then impart the mighty secret. After two or three
years of noviciate, a convention was held at Altenberg; and he told them
that his whole secret was, *that every true Mason was a Knight Templar*.
They were astonished, and disappointed; for they expected in general
that he would teach them the philosopher's stone, or ghost-raising, or
magic. After much discontent, falling out, and dispute, many Lodges
united in this system, made somewhat moderate and palatable, under the
name of the STRICT DISCIPLINARIANS, *Strickten Observanz*. It was
acceptable to many, because they insisted that they were really Knights,
properly consecrated, though without temporalities; and they seriously
set themselves about forming a fund which should secure the order in a
landed property and revenue, which would give them a respectable civil
existence. Hunde declared that his whole estate should devolve on the
Order. But the vexations which he afterwards

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

met with, and his falling in love with a lady who prevailed on him to
become Roman Catholic, made him alter this intention. The Order went on,
however, and acquired considerable credit by the serious regularity of
their proceedings; and, although in the mean time a new apostle of
Mysteries, a Dr. Zinzendorff, one of the *Strict Observanz*, introduced
a new system, which he said was from Sweden, distinguished by some of
the mystical doctrines of the Swedenborgh sect, and though this system
obtained the Royal patronage, and a National Lodge was established at
Berlin by patent, still the *Terpelorden*, or *Orden des Stricten
Observanz*, continued to be very respectable. The German gentry were
better pleased with a Grand Master of their own choosing, than with any
imposed on them by authority.

 

During this state of things, one Stark, a Protestant divine, well known
in Germany by his writings, made another trial of public faith. One
Gugomos (a private gentleman, but who would pass for son to a King of
Cyprus) and one Schropfer, keeper of a coffee-house at Nuremberg, drew
crowds of Free Masons around them, to learn ghost-raising, exorcism, and
alchymy. Numbers came from a great distance to Weisbad to see and learn
these mysteries, and Free Masonry was on the point of another
revolution. Dr. Stark was an adept in all these things, and contended
with Cagliostro in Courland for the palm of superiority. He saw that
this deception could not long stand its ground. He therefore came
forward, at a convention at Braunschweig in 1772, and said to the Strict
Disciplinarians or Templars, That he was of their Order, but of the
spiritual department, and was deputed by the Chapter of K--m--d--t in
Scotland, where he was Chancellor of the Congregation, and had the name
of Archidemides, *Eques ab Aquila fulva:* That this Chapter had the
superintendance of the Order: That they alone could consecrate the
Knights, or the unknown superiors; and that he was deputed to instruct
them in the real principles of the Order, and impart its inestimable
secrets, which could not be known to Baron Hunde, as he would readily
acknowledge when he should converse with him. Johnson, he said, had been
a cheat, and probably a murderer. He had got some knowledge from papers
which he must have stolen from a missionary, who had disappeared,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

and was probably killed. Gugomos and Schropfer must have had some
similar information; and Schropfer had even deceived him for a time. He
was ready to execute his commission, upon their coming under the
necessary obligations of secrecy and of submission. Hunde (whose name in
the Order was the *Eques ab Ense*) acquiesced at once, and proposed a
convention, with full powers to decide and accept. But a Schubart, a
gentleman of character, who was treasurer to the Templar Masons, and had
an employment which gave him considerable influence in the Order,
strongly dissuaded them from such a measure. The most unqualified
submission to unknown superiors, and to conditions equally unknown, was
required previous to the smallest communication, or any knowledge of the
powers which Archidemides had to treat with them. Many meetings were
held, and many attempts were made to learn something of this spiritual
court, and of what they might expect from them. Dr. Stark, Baron
Weggensak, Baron Von Raven, and some others of his coadjutors in the
Lodges at Koningsberg in Prussia, and at Wismar, were received into the
Order. But in vain--nothing was obtained from these ghostly Knights but
some insignificant ceremonials of receptions and consecrations. Of this
kind of novelties they were already heartily sick; and though they all
panted after the expected wonders, they were so much frightened by the
unconditional submission, that they could come to no agreement, and the
secrets of the Scotch Congregation of K--m--d--t still remain with Dr.
Stark. They did, however, a sensible thing; they sent a deputation to
Old Aberdeen, to enquire after the caves where their venerable mysteries
were known, and their treasures were hid. They had, as they thought,
merited some more confidence; for they had remitted annual contributions
to these unknown superiors, to the amount of some thousands of
rix-dollars. But alas, their ambassadors found the Free Masons of Old
Aberdeen ignorant of all this, and as eager to learn from the
ambassadors what was the true origin and meaning of Free Masonry, of
which they knew nothing but the simple tale of Old Hiram. This broke
Stark's credit; but he still insisted on the reality of his commission,
and said that the Brethren at Aberdeen were indeed ignorant, but that he
had never said otherwise; their expectations from that quarter had
rested on the scraps purloined by Johnson. He reminded

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

them of a thing well known to themselves; that one of them had been sent
for by a dying nobleman to receive papers on this subject, and that his
visit having been delayed a few hours by an unavoidable accident, he
found all burnt but a fragment of a capitulary and a thing in cypher,
part of which he (Dr. Stark) had explained to them. They had employed
another gentleman, a H. Wachter, to make similar enquiries in Italy,
where Schropfer and others (even Hunde) had told them great secrets were
to be obtained from the Pretender's secretary Approsi, and others.
Wachter told them, that all this was a fiction, but that he had seen at
Florence some Brethren from the Holy Land, who really possessed
wonderful secrets, which he was willing to impart, on proper conditions.
These, however, they could not accede to; but they were cruelly tortured
by seeing Wachter, who had left Germany in sober circumstances, now a
man of great wealth and expence. He would not acknowledge that he had
got the secret of gold-making from the Asiatic Brethren; but said that
no man had any right to ask him how he had come by his fortune. It was
enough that he behaved honorably, and owed no man any thing. He broke
off all connections with them, and left them in great distress about
their Order, and panting after his secrets. *Risum teneatis amici*.

 

Stark, in revenge for the opposition he had met with from Schubart, left
no stone unturned to hurt him with his Brethren, and succeeded, so that
he left them in disgust. Hunde died about this time. A book appeared,
called, *The Stumbling Block and Rock of Offence*, which betrayed (by
their own confession) the whole secrets of the Order of Templars, and
soon made an end of it, as far as it went beyond the simple English
Masonry.

 

Thus was the faith of Free Masons quite unhinged in Germany. But the
rage for mysteries and wonder was not in the least abated; and the
habits of these secret assemblies were becoming every day more craving.
Dissension and schism was multiplying in every quarter; and the
Institution, instead of being an incitement to mutual complaisance and
Brotherly love, had become a source of contention, and of bitter enmity.
Not satisfied with defending the propriety of its own Institutions, each
System of Free

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masonry was busy
in enticing away the partisans of other Systems, shut their Lodges
against each other, and proceeded even to vilify and persecute the
adherents of every System but their own.

 

These animosities arose chiefly from the quarrel about precedency, and
the arrogance (as it was thought) of the patent Lodge of Berlin, in
pretending to have any authority in the other parts of the Empire. But
these pretensions were not the result of mere vanity. The French
importers of the new degrees, always true to the glory of their nation,
hoped by this means to secure the dependence even of this frivolous
Society; perhaps they might foresee political uses and benefits which
might arise from it. One thing is worth notice: The French Lodges had
all emanated from the great Confederation under the Duke de Chartres,
and, even if we had no other proof, we might presume that they would
cultivate the same principles that characterised that Sect. But we are
certain that infidelity and laxity of moral principles were prevalent in
the Rosaic Lodges, and that the observation of this corruption had
offended many of the sober, oldfashioned Lodges, and was one great cause
of any check that was given to the brilliant Masonry of France. It is
the observation of this circumstance, in which they all resembled, and
which soon ceased to be a distinction, because it pervaded the other
Lodges, that induced me to expatiate more on this history of Free
Masonry in Germany, than may appear to my readers to be adequate to the
importance of Free Masonry in the general subject-matter of these pages.
But I hope that it will appear in the course of my narration that I have
not given it greater value than it deserves.

 

About this very time there was a great revolution of the public mind in
Germany, and scepticism, infidelity and irreligion, not only were
prevalent in the minds and manners of the wealthy and luxurious, and of
the profligate of lower ranks, but began to appear in the productions of
the press. Some circumstances, peculiar to Germany, occasioned these
declensions from the former acquiescence in the faith of their
forefathers to become more uniform and remarkable than they would
otherwise have been. The Confessions of Germany are the Roman Catholic,
the Lutheran

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (which they call
Protestant) and the Calvinist (which they call Reformed). These are
professed in many small contiguous principalities, and there is hardly
one of them in which all the three have not free exercise. The desire of
making proselytes is natural to all serious professors of a rational
faith, and was frequently exercised. The Roman Catholics are supposed by
us to be particularly zealous; and the Protestants (Lutherans and
Calvinists) were careful to oppose them by every kind of argument, among
which those of ridicule and reproach were not spared. The Catholics
accused them of infidelity respecting the fundamental doctrines of
Christianity which they professed to believe, and even with respect to
the doctrines of natural religion. This accusation was long very
slightly supported; but, of late, by better proofs. The spirit of free
inquiry was the great boast of the Protestants, and their only support
against the Catholics, securing them both in their religious and civil
rights. It was therefore supported by their governments. It is not to be
wondered at that it should be indulged to excess, or improperly, even by
serious men, liable to error, in their disputes with the Catholics. In
the progress of this contest, even their own Confession did not escape
criticism, and it was asserted that the Reformation which those
Confessions express was not complete. Further Reformations were
proposed. The Scriptures, the foundation of our faith, were examined by
clergymen of very different capacities, dispositions, and views, till by
explaining, correcting, allegorising, and otherwise twisting the Bible,
men's minds had hardly any thing left to rest on as a doctrine of
revealed religion. This encouraged others to go farther, and to say that
revelation was a solecism, as plainly appeared by the irreconcileable
differences among these Enlighteners (so they were called) of the
public, and that man had nothing to trust to but the dictates of natural
reason. Another set of writers, proceeding from this as a point already
settled, proscribed all religion whatever, and openly taught the
doctrines of materialism and atheism. Most of those innovations were the
work of Protestant divines, from the causes that I have mentioned.
Teller, Semler, Eberhardt, Leffing, Bahrdt, Riem, and Shultz, had the
chief hand in all these innovations. But no man contributed more than
Nicholai, an eminent and learned bookseller in Berlin. He has been for
many years the publisher

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of a periodical work, called the General German Library (*Algemein*
*deutsche Bibliothek*) consisting of original dissertations, and reviews
of the writings of others. The great merit of this work, on account of
many learned dissertations which appear in it, has procured it great
influence on that class of readers whose leisure or capacity did not
allow them a more profound kind of reading. This is the bulk of readers
in every country. Nicholai gives a decided preference to the writings of
the Enlighteners, and in his reviews treats them with particular notice,
makes the public fully acquainted with their works, and makes the most
favorable comments; whereas the performances of their opponents, or more
properly speaking, the defenders of the National Creeds, are neglected,
omitted, or barely mentioned, or they are criticised with every severity
of ridicule and reproach. He fell upon a very sure method of rendering
the orthodox writers disagreeable to the public, by representing them as
the abetters of superstition; and as secret Jesuits. He asserts, that
the abolition of the Order of *Loyola* is only apparent. The Brethren
still retain their connection, and most part of their property, under
the secret patronage of Catholic Princes. They are, therefore, in every
corner, in every habit and character, working with unwearied zeal for
the restoration of their empire. He raised a general alarm, and made a
journey through Germany, hunting for Jesuits, and for this purpose,
became Free Mason and Rosycrucian, being introduced by his friends
Gedicke and Biester, clergymen, publishers of the *Berlin Monatschrift*,
and most zealous promoters of the new doctrines. This favor he has
repaid at his return, by betraying the mysteries of the Lodges, and
numberless falsehoods. His journey was published in several volumes, and
is full of frightful Jesuitisms. This man, as I have said, found the
greatest success in his method of slandering the defenders of
Bible-Christianity, by representing them as concealed Jesuits. But, not
contented with open discussion, he long ago published a sort of romance,
called *Sebaldus Nothanker*, in which these divines are introduced under
feigned names, and made as ridiculous and detestable as possible. All
this was a good trading job, for sceptical and free-thinking writings
have every where a good market; and Nicholai was not only reviewer, but
publisher, having presses in different cities of the Empire. The immense
literary manufacture of Germany, far

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

exceeding that of any nation of Europe, is carried on in a very
particular way. The books go in sheets to the great fairs of Leipsic and
Frankfort, twice a year. The booksellers meet there, and see at one
glance the state of literature; and having speculated and made their
bargains, the books are instantly dispersed through every part of the
Empire, and appear at once in all quarters. Although every Principality
has an officer for licensing, it is impossible to prevent the currency
of a performance, although it may be prohibited; for it is to be had by
the carrier at three or four miles distance in another state. By this
mode of traffic, a plot may be formed, and actually has been formed, for
giving any particular turn to the literature of the country. There is an
excellent work printed at Bern by the author Heinzmann, a bookseller,
called, *Appeal to my Country, concerning a Combination of Writers, and
Booksellers, to rule the Literature of Germany, and form the public mind
into a contempt for the religion and civil establishments of the
Empire*. It contains a historical account of the publications in every
branch of literature for about thirty years. The author shows, in the
most convincing manner, that the prodigious change from the former
satisfaction of the Germans on those subjects to their present
discontent and attacks from every quarter, is neither a fair picture of
the prevailing sentiments, nor has been the simple operation of things,
but the result of a combination of trading Infidels.

 

I have here somewhat anticipated (for I hope to point out the sources of
this combination,) because it helps to explain or illustrate the
progress of infidelity and irreligion that I was speaking of. It was
much accelerated by another circumstance. One *Basedow*, a man of
talents and learning, set up, in the Principality of Anhalt-Dessau, a
PHILANTHROPINE, or academy of general education, on a plan extremely
different from those of the Universities and Academies. By this
appellation, the founder hoped to make parents expect that much
attention would be paid to the morals of the pupils; and indeed the
programs or advertisements by which Basedow announced his institution to
the public, described it as the professed seminary of practical Ethics.
Languages, sciences, and the ornamental exercises, were here considered
as mere accessories, and the great aim was to form the young mind to the
love of mankind and of

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

virtue, by a plan of moral education which was very specious and
unexceptionable. But there was a circumstance which greatly obstructed
the wide prospects of the founder. How were the religious opinions of
the youth to be cared for? Catholics, Lutherans, and Calvinists, were
almost equally numerous in the adjoining Principalities; and the
exclusion of any two of these communions would prodigiously limit the
proposed usefulness of the institution. Basedow was a man of talents, a
good scholar, and a persuasive writer. He framed a set of rules, by
which the education should be conducted, and which, he thought, should
make every parent easy; and the plan is very judicious and manly. But
none came but Lutherans. His zeal and interest in the thing made him
endeavour to interest others; and he found this no hard matter. The
people of condition, and all sensible men, saw that it would be a very
great advantage to the place, could they induce men to send their
children from all the neighbouring states. What we wish, we readily
believe to be the truth; and Basedow's plan and reasonings appeared
complete, and had the support of all classes of men. The moderate
Calvinists, after some time, were not averse from them, and the literary
manufacture of Germany was soon very busy in making pamphlets,
defending, improving, attacking and reprobating the plans. Innumerable
were the projects for moderating the differences between the three
Christian communions of Germany, and making it possible for the members
of them all, not only to live amicably among each other, and to worship
God in the same church, but even to communicate together. This attempt
naturally gave rise to much speculation and refinement; and the
proposals for amendment of the formulas and the instructions from the
pulpit were prosecuted with so much keenness, that the ground-work,
Christianity, was refined and refined, till it vanished altogether,
leaving Deism, or Natural, or, as it was called, Philosophical Religion,
in its place. I am not much mistaken as to historical fact, when I say,
that the astonishing change in religious doctrine which has taken place
in Protestant Germany within these last thirty years was chiefly
occasioned by this scheme of Basedow's. The pre-disposing causes
existed, indeed, and were general and powerful, and the disorder had
already broken out. But this specious and enticing object

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

first gave a title to Protestant clergymen to put to their hand without
risk of being censured.

 

Basedow corrected, and corrected again, but not one Catholic came to the
Philanthropine. He seems to have thought that the best plan would be, to
banish all positive religion whatever, and that he would then be sure of
Catholic scholars. Cardinal Dubois was so far right with respect to the
first Catholic pupil of the church. He had recommended a man of his own
stamp to Louis XIV. to fill some important office. The monarch was
astonished, and told the Cardinal, that "that would never do, for the
man was a Jansenist; *Eh! que non, Sire*," said the Cardinal, "*il n’est
qu’ Athée;*" all was safe, and the man got the priory. But though all
was in vain, Basedow's Philanthropine at Dessau got a high character. He
published many volumes on education that have much merit.

 

It were well had this been all. But most unfortunately, though most
naturally, writers of loose moral principles and of wicked hearts were
encouraged by the impunity which the sceptical writers experienced, and
ventured to publish things of the vilest tendency, inflaming the
passions and justifying licentious manners. These maxims are congenial
with irreligion and Atheism, and the books found a quick market. It was
chiefly in the Prussian States that this went on. The late King was, to
say the best of him, a naturalist, and, holding this life for his all,
gave full liberty to his subjects to write what they pleased, provided
they did not touch on state matters. He declared, however, to a minister
of his court, long before his death, that "he was extremely sorry that
his indifference had produced such effects; that he was sensible it had
greatly contributed to hurt the peace and mutual good treatment of his
subjects;" and he said, "that he would willingly give up the glory of
his best fought battle, to have the satisfaction of leaving his people
in the same state of peace and satisfaction with their religious
establishments, that he found them in at his accession to the throne."
His successor Frederick William found that things had gone much too far,
and determined to support the church establishment in the most
peremptory manner; but at the same time to allow perfect freedom of
thinking and conversing to the professors of every christian

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

faith, provided it was enjoyed without disturbing the general peace, or
any encroachment on the rights of those already supported by law. He
published an edict to this effect, which is really a model worthy of
imitation in every country. This was the epoch of a strange revolution.
It was attacked from all hands, and criticisms, satires, slanders,
threatenings, poured in from every quarter. The independency of the
neighbouring states, and the monarch's not being a great favorite among
several of his neighbours, permitted the publication of these pieces in
the adjoining principalities, and it was impossible to prevent their
circulation even in the Prussian States. His edict was called an
unjustifiable tyranny over the consciences of men; the dogmas supported
by it, were called absurd superstitions; the King's private character,
and his opinions in religious matters, were treated with little
reverence, nay, were ridiculed and scandalously abused. This field of
discussion being thus thrown open, the writers did not confine
themselves to religious matters. After flatly denying that the prince of
any country had the smallest right to prescribe, or even direct the
faith of his subjects, they extended their discussions to the rights of
princes in general; and now they fairly opened their trenches, and made
an attack in form on the constitutions of the German confederacy, and
after the usual approaches, they set up the standard of universal
citizenship on the very ridge of the glacis, and summoned the fort to
surrender. The most daring of these attacks was a collection of
anonymous letters on the constitution of the Prussian States. It was
printed (or said to be so) at Utrecht; but by comparing the faults of
some types with some books printed in Berlin, it was supposed by all to
be the production of one of Nicholai's presses. It was thought to be the
composition of Mirabeau. It is certain that he wrote a French
translation, with a preface and notes, more impudent than the work
itself. The monarch was declared to be a tyrant; the people are
addressed as a parcel of tame wretches crouching under oppression. The
people of Silesia are represented as still in a worse condition, and are
repeatedly called to rouse themselves, and to rise up and assert their
rights. The King is told, that there is a combination of philosophers
(*conjuration*) who are leagued together in defence of truth and reason,
and which no power can withstand; that they are to be found in every
country,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

and are connected by mutual and solemn engagement, and will put in
practice every mean of attack. Enlightening, instruction, was the
general cry among the writers. The triumph of reason over error, the
overthrow of superstition and slavish fear, freedom from religious and
political prejudices, and the establishment of liberty and equality, the
natural and unalienable rights of man, were the topics of general
declamation; and it was openly maintained, that secret societies, where
the communication of sentiment should be free from every restraint, was
the most effectual mean for instructing and enlightening the world.

 

And thus it appears, that Germany has experienced the same gradual
progress, from Religion to Atheism, from decency to dissoluteness, and
from loyalty to rebellion, which has had its course in France. And I
must now add, that this progress has been effected in the same manner,
and by the same means; and that one of the chief means of seduction has
been the Lodges of the Free Masons. The French, along with their
numerous chevaleries, and stars, and ribbands, had brought in the custom
of haranguing in the Lodges, and as human nature has a considerable
uniformity every where, the same topics became favorite subjects of
declamation that had tickled the ear in France; there were the same
corruptions of sentiments and manners among the luxurious or profligate,
and the same incitements to the utterance of these sentiments, wherever
it could be done with safety; and I may say, that the zealots in all
these tracts of free-thinking were more serious, more grave, and
fanatical. These are not assertions *apriori*. I can produce proofs.
There was a Baron Knigge residing at that time in the neighbourhood of
Frankfort, of whom I shall afterwards have occasion frequently to speak.
This man was an enthusiast in Masonry from his youth, and had run
through every possible degree of it. He was dissatisfied with them all,
and particularly with the frivolity of the French chivalry; but he still
believed that Masonry contained invaluable secrets. He imagined that he
saw a glimpse of them in the cosmo-political and sceptical discourses in
their Lodges; he sat down to meditate on these, and soon collected his
thoughts, and found that those French orators were right without
knocking it; and that Masonry was pure natural religion and universal
citizenship, and that this was

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

also true Christianity. In this faith he immediately began his career of
Brotherly love, and published three volumes of sermons; the first and
third published at Frankfort, and the second at Heidelberg, but without
his name. He published also a popular system of religion. In all these
publications, of which there are extracts in the *Religions
Begebenheiten*, Christianity is considered as a mere allegory, or a
Masonic type of natural religion; the moral duties are spun into the
common-place declamations of universal benevolence; and the attention is
continually directed to the absurdities and horrors of superstition, the
sufferings of the poor, the tyranny and oppression of the great, the
tricks of the priests, and the indolent simplicity and patience of the
laity and of the common people. The happiness of the patriarchal life,
and sweets of universal equality and freedom, are the burden of every
paragraph; and the general tenor of the whole is to make men
discontented with their condition of civil subordination, and the
restraints of revealed religion.

 

All the proceedings of Knigge in the Masonic schisms show that he was a
zealous apostle of cosmo-politism, and that he was continually dealing
with people in the Lodges who were associated with him in propagating
these notions among the Brethren; so that we are certain that such
conversations were common in the German Lodges.

 

When the reader considers all these circumstances, he will abate of that
surprise which naturally affects a Briton, when he reads accounts of
conventions for discussing and fixing the dogmatic tenets of Free
Masonry. The perfect freedom, civil and religious, which we enjoy in
this happy country, being familiar to every man, we indulge it with
calmness and moderation, and secret assemblies hardly differ from the
common meetings of friends and neighbours. We do not forget the
expediency of civil subordination, and of those distinctions which arise
from secure possession of our rights, and the gradual accumulation of
the comforts of life in the families of the sober and industrious. These
have, by prudence and a respectable œconomy, preserved the acquisitions
of their ancestors. Every man feels in his own breast the strong call of
nature to procure for himself and his children, by every honest and
commendable exertion, the means of public consideration and respect. No

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

man is so totally without spirit, as not to think the better of his
condition when he is come of creditable parents, and has creditable
connections; and without thinking that he is in any respect generous, he
presumes that others have the same sentiments, and therefore allows the
moderate expression of them, without thinking it insolence or
haughtiness. All these things are familiar, are not thought of, and we
enjoy them as we enjoy ordinary health, without perceiving it. But in
the same manner as a young man who has been long confined by sickness,
exults in returning health, and is apt to riot in the enjoyment of what
he so distinctly feels; so those who are under continual check in open
society, feel this emancipation in these hidden assemblies, and indulge
with eagerness in the expression of sentiments which in public they must
smother within their own breast. Such meetings, therefore, have a zest
that is very alluring, and they are frequented with avidity. There is no
country in Europe where this kind of enjoyment is so poignant as in
Germany. Very insignificant principalities have the same rank in the
General Federation with very extensive dominions. The internal
constitution of each petty state being modelled in nearly the same
manner, the official honors of their little courts become ludicrous and
even farcical. The Geheim Hofrath, the Hofmareschal, and all the
Kammerhers of a Prince, whose dominions do not equal the estates of many
English Squires, cause the whole to appear like the play of children,
and must give frequent occasion for discontent and ridicule, Mason
Lodges even keep this alive. The fraternal equality professed in them is
very flattering to those who have not succeeded in the scramble for
civil distinctions. Such persons become the most zealous Masons, and
generally obtain the active offices in the Lodges, and have an
opportunity of treating with authority persons whom in public society
they must look up to with some respect.

 

These considerations account, in some measure, for the importance which
Free Masonry has acquired in Germany. For a long while the hopes of
learning some wonderful secret made a German Baron think nothing of long
and expensive journies in quest of some new degree. Of late, the
cosmo-political doctrines encouraged and propagated in the Lodges, and
some hopes of producing a Revolution

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

in society, by which men of talents should obtain the management of
public affairs, seem to be the cause of all the zeal with which the
order is still cherished and promoted. In a periodical work, published
at Neuwied, called *Algemein* *Zeitung der Freymaurerey*, we have the
list of the Lodges in 1782, with the names of the Office-bearers.
Four-fifths of these are clergymen, professors, persons having offices
in the common-law courts, men of letters by trade, such as reviewers and
journalists, and other pamphleteers; a class of men, who generally think
that they have not attained that rank in society to which their talents
entitle them, and imagine that they could discharge the important
offices of the state with reputation to themselves and advantage to the
public.

 

The miserable uncertainty and instability of the Masonic faith, which I
described above, was not altogether the effect of mere chance, but had
been greatly accelerated by the machinations of Baron Knigge, and some
other Cosmo-political Brethren whom he had called to his assistance.
Knigge had now formed a scheme for uniting the whole Fraternity, for the
purpose of promoting his Utopian plan of universal benevolence in a
state of liberty and equality. He hoped to do this more readily by
completing their embarrassment, and shewing each system how imfirm its
foundation was, and how little chance it had of obtaining a general
adherence. The *Stricten Observanz* had now completely lost its credit,
by which it had hoped to get the better of all the rest. Knigge
therefore proposed a plan to the Lodges of Frankfort and Wetzlar, by
which all the systems might, in some measure, be united, or at least be
brought to a state of mutual forbearance and intercourse. He proposed
that the English system should be taken for the ground-work, and to
receive all and only those who had taken the three symbolical degrees,
as they were now generally called. After thus guarding this general
point of faith, he proposed to allow the validity of every degree or
rank which should be received in any Lodge, or be made the character of
any particular system. These Lodges, having secured the adherence of
several others, brought about a general convention at Willemsbad in
Hainault, where every different system should communicate its peculiar
tenets. It was then hoped, that after an examination of them

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

all, a constitution might be formed, which comprehended every thing that
was most worthy of selection, and therefore be far better than the
accommodating system already described. By this he hoped to get his
favorite scheme introduced into the whole Order, and Free Masons made
zealous Citizens of the World. I believe he was sincere in these
intentions, and had no intention to disturb the public peace. The
convention was accordingly held, and lasted a long while, the deputies
consulting about the frivolities of Masonry, with all the seriousness of
state-ambassadors. But there was a great shyness in their
communications; and Knigge was making but small progress in his plan,
when he met with another Mason, the Marquis of Constanza, who in an
instant converted him, and changed all his measures, by showing him that
he (Knigge) was only doing by halves what was already accomplished by
another Society, which had carried it to its full extent. They
immediately set about undoing what he had been occupied with, and
heightened as much as they could the dissentions, already sufficiently
great, and, in the mean time, got the Lodges of Frankfort and Wetzlar,
and several others, to unite, and pick out the best of the things they
had obtained by the communications from the other systems, and they
formed a plan of what they called, the *Eclectic* or *Syncritic Masonry
of the United Lodges of Germany*. They composed a constitution, ritual,
and catechism, which has merit, and is indeed the completest body of
Free Masonry that we have.

 

Such was the state of this celebrated and mysterious Fraternity in
Germany in 1776. The spirit of innovation had seized all the Brethren.
No man could give a tolerable account of the origin, history, or object
of the Order, and it appeared to all as a lost or forgotten mystery. The
symbols seemed to be equally susceptible of every interpretation, and
none of these seemed entitled to any decided preference.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[23:\*](pc04.htm#fr_0) Citizenship of the World,
from the Greek words *Cosmos*, world, and *Polis*, a city.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Illuminati](pc05)

</div>
