<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pc04)  [Next](pc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3J0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Get PDF](pc.pdf)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Proofs of a Conspiracy*, by John Robison, \[1798\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### CHAP. II.

### The Illuminati.

I AM now arrived at what I should call the great epoch of
Cosmo-politism, the scheme communicated to Baron Knigge by the *Marchese
di Constanza*. This obliges me to mention a remarkable Lodge of the
Eclectic Masonry, erected at Munich in Bavaria, in 1775, under the
worshipful Master, Professor Baader. It was called *The Lodge Theodore
of Good Counsel*. It had its constitutional patent from the Royal York
at Berlin, but had formed a particular system of its own, by
instructions from the *Loge des Chevaliers Bienfaisants* at Lyons, with
which it kept up a correspondence. This respect to the Lodge at Lyons
had arisen from the preponderance acquired in general by the French
party in the convention at Willemstad. The deputies of the Rosaic
Lodges, as well as the remains of the Templars, and *Stricten
Observanz*, all looking up to this as the mother Lodge of what they
called the *Grand Orient de la France*, consisting (in 1782) of 266
improved Lodges, united under the *D. de Chartres*. Accordingly the
Lodge at Lyons sent Mr. Willermooz as deputy to this convention at
Willemsbad. Refining gradually on the simple British Masonry, the Lodge
had formed a system of practical morality, which it asserted to be the
aim of genuine Masonry, saying, that a true Mason, and a man of upright
heart and active virtue, are synonymous characters, and that the great
aim of Free Masonry is to promote the happiness of mankind by every mean
in our power. In pursuance of these principles, the Lodge Theodore
professedly occupied itself with œconomical, statistical, and political
matters, and not only published from time to time discourses on such
subjects by the Brother Orator, but the Members considered themselves as
in duty bound to propagate and inculcate the same doctrines out of
doors.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Of the zealous members of the Lodge Theodore the most conspicuous was
Dr. Adam Weishaupt, Professor of Canon Law in the university of
Ingolstadt. This person had been educated among the Jesuits; but the
abolition of their order made him change his views, and from being their
pupil, he became their most bitter enemy. He had acquired a high
reputation in his profession, and was attended not only by those
intended for the practice in the law-courts, but also by the young
gentlemen at large, in their course of general education; and he brought
numbers from the neighbouring states to this university, and gave a ton
to the studies of the place. He embraced with great keenness this
opportunity of spreading the favorite doctrines of the Lodge, and his
auditory became the seminary of Cosmopolitism. The engaging pictures of
the possible felicity of a society where every office is held by a man
of talents and virtue, and where every talent is set in a place fitted
for its exertion, forcibly catches the generous and unsuspecting minds
of youth, and in a Roman Catholic state, far advanced in the habits of
gross superstition (a character given to Bavaria by its neighbours) and
abounding in monks and idle dignitaries, the opportunities must be
frequent for observing the inconsiderate dominion of the clergy, and the
abject and indolent submission of the laity. Accordingly Professor
Weishaupt says, in his Apology for Illuminatism, that Deism, Infidelity,
and Atheism are more prevalent in Bavaria than in any country he was
acquainted with. Discourses, therefore, in which the absurdity and
horrors of superstition and spiritual tyranny were strongly painted,
could not fail of making a deep impression. And during this state of the
minds of the auditory the transition to general infidelity and
irreligion is so easy, and so inviting to sanguine youth, prompted
perhaps by a latent wish that the restraints which religion imposes on
the expectants of a future state might be found, on enquiry, to be
nothing but groundless terrors; that I imagine it requires the most
anxious care of the public teacher to keep the minds of his audience
impressed with the reality and importance of the great truths of
religion, while he frees them from the shackles of blind and absurd
superstition. I fear that this celebrated instructor had none of this
anxiety, but was satisfied with his great success in the last part of
this task, the emancipation of his young hearers from the terrors of

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

superstition. I suppose also that this was the more agreeable to him, as
it procured him the triumph over the Jesuits, with whom he had long
struggled for the direction of the university.

 

This was in 1777. Weishaupt had long been scheming the establishment of
an Association or Order, which, in time, should govern the world. In his
first fervour and high expectations, he hinted to several Ex-Jesuits the
probability of their recovering, under a new name, the influence which
they formerly possessed, and of being again of great service to society,
by directing the education of youth of distinction, now emancipated from
all civil and religious prejudices. He prevailed on some to join him,
but they all retracted but two. After this disappointment Weishaupt
became the implacable enemy of the Jesuits; and his sanguine temper made
him frequently lay himself open to their piercing eye, and drew on him
their keenest resentment, and at last made him the victim of their
enmity.

 

The Lodge Theodore was the place where the above-mentioned doctrines
were most zealously propagated. But Weishaupt's emissaries had already
procured the adherence of many other Lodges; and the Eclectic Masonry
had been brought into vogue chiefly by their exertions at the Willemsbad
convention. The Lodge Theodore was perhaps less guarded in its
proceedings, for it became remarkable for the very bold sentiments in
politics and religion which were frequently uttered in their harangues;
and its members were noted for their zeal in making proselytes. Many
bitter pasquinades, satires, and other offensive pamphlets were in
secret circulation, and even larger works of very dangerous tendency,
and several of them were traced to that Lodge. The Elector often
expressed his disapprobation of such proceedings, and sent them kind
messages, desiring them to be careful not to disturb the peace of the
country, and particularly to recollect the solemn declaration made to
every entrant into the Fraternity of Free Masons, "That no subject of
religion or politics shall ever be touched on in the Lodge;" a
declaration which alone could have procured his permission of any secret
assembly whatever, and on the sincerity and honor of which he had
reckoned when he gave his sanction to their establishment. But repeated
accounts

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the same kind increased the alarm, and the Elector ordered a judicial
enquiry into the proceedings of the Lodge Theodore.

 

It was then discovered that this and several associated Lodges were the
nursery or preparation-school for another Order of Masons, who called
themselves the ILLUMINATED, and that the express aim of this Order was
to abolish Christianity, and overturn all civil government. But the
result of the enquiry was very imperfect and unsatisfactory. No
Illuminati were to be found. They were unknown in the Lodge. Some of the
members occasionally heard of certain candidates for illumination called
MINERVALS, who were sometimes seen among them. But whether these had
been admitted, or who received them, was known only to themselves. Some
of these were examined in private by the Elector himself. They said that
they were bound by honor to secrecy: But they assured the Elector, on
their honor, that the aim of the Order was in the highest degree
praiseworthy, and useful both to church and state: But this could not
allay the anxiety of the profane public; and it was repeatedly stated to
the Elector, that members of the Lodge Theodore had unguardedly spoken
of this Order as one that in time must rule the world. He therefore
issued an order forbidding, during his pleasure, all secret assemblies,
and shutting up the Mason Lodges. It was not meant to be rigorously
enforced, but was intended as a trial of the deference of these
Associations for civil authority. The Lodge Theodore distinguished
itself by pointed opposition, continuing its meetings; and the members,
out of doors, openly reprobated the prohibition as an absurd and
unjustifiable tyranny.

 

In the beginning of 1783, four professors of the Marianen Academy,
founded by the widow of the late Elector, viz. Utschneider, Cossandey,
Renner, and Grunberger, with two others, were summoned before the Court
of Enquiry, and questioned, on their allegiance, respecting the Order of
the Illuminati. They acknowledged that they belonged to it, and when
more closely examined, they related several circumstances of its
constitution and principles. Their declarations were immediately
published, and were very unfavorable. The Order was said to abjure
Christianity, and

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

to refuse admission into the higher degrees to all who adhered to any of
the three confessions. Sensual pleasures were restored to the rank they
held in the Epicurean philosophy. Self-murder was justified on Stoical
principles. In the Lodges death was declared an eternal sleep;
patriotism and loyalty were called narrow-minded prejudices, and
incompatible with universal benevolence; continual declamations were
made on liberty and equality as the unalienable rights of man. The
baneful influence of accumulated property was declared an insurmountable
obstacle to the happiness of any nation whose chief laws were framed for
its protection and increase. Nothing was so frequently discoursed of as
the propriety of employing, for a good purpose, the means which the
wicked employed for evil purposes; and it was taught, that the
preponderancy of good in the ultimate result consecrated every mean
employed; and that wisdom and virtue consisted in properly determining
this balance. This appeared big with danger; because it appeared that
nothing would be scrupled at, if we could make it appear that the Order
could derive advantage from it, because the great object of the Order
was held as superior to every consideration. They concluded by saying
that the method of education made them all spies on each other and on
all around them. But all this was denied by the Illuminati. Some of them
were said to be absolutely false; and the rest were said to be mistakes.
The apostate professors had acknowledged their ignorance of many things.
Two of them were only Minervals, another was an Illuminatus of the
lowest class, and the fourth was but one step farther advanced.
Pamphlets appeared on both sides, with very little effect. The Elector
called before him one of the superiors, a young nobleman, who denied
these injurious charges, and said that they were ready to lay before his
Highness their whole archives and all constitutional papers.

Notwithstanding all this, the government had received such an impression
of the dangerous tendency of the Order, that the Elector issued another
edict, forbidding all hidden assemblies; and a third, expressly
abolishing the Order of Illuminati. It was followed by a search after
their papers. The Lodge Theodore was immediately searched, but none

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

were to be found. They said now that they had burnt them all, as of no
use, since that Order was at an end.

 

It was now discovered, that Weishaupt was the head and founder of the
Order. He was deprived of his Professor's chair, and banished from the
Bavarian States; but with a pension of 800 florins, which he refused. He
went to Regensburg, on the confines of Switzerland. Two Italians, the
Marquis Constanza and Marquis Savioli, were also banished, with equal
pensions (about L. 40) which they accepted. One Zwack, a counsellor,
holding some law-office, was also banished. Others were imprisoned for
some time. Weishaupt went afterwards into the service of the D. of Saxe
Gotha, a person of a romantic turn of mind, and whom we shall again meet
with. Zwack went into the service of the Pr. de Salms, who soon after
had so great a hand in the disturbances in Holland.

 

By destroying the papers, all opportunity was lost for authenticating
the innocence and usefulness of the Order. After much altercation and
paper war, Weishaupt, now safe in Regensburg, published an account of
the Order, namely, the account which was given to every *Novice* in a
discourse read at his reception. To this were added, the statutes and
the rules proceeding, as far as the degree of *Illuminatus Minor*,
inclusive. This account he affirmed to be conform to the real practice
of the Order. But this publication did by no means satisfy the public
mind. It differed exceedingly from the accounts given by the four
professors. It made no mention of the higher degrees, which had been
most blamed by them. Besides, it was alleged, that it was all a fiction,
written in order to lull the suspicions which had been raised (and this
was found to be the case, except in respect of the very lowest degree.)
The real constitution was brought to light by degrees, and shall be laid
before the reader, in the order in which it was gradually discovered,
that we may the better judge of things not fully known by the conduct of
the leaders during the detection. The first account given by Weishaupt
is correct, as far as I shall make use of it, and shows clearly the
methods that were taken to recommend the Order to strangers.

 

The Order of ILLUMINATI appears as an accessory to

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Free Masonry. It
is in the Lodges of Free Masons that the Minervals are found, and there
they are prepared for Illumination. They must have previously obtained
the three English degrees. The founder says more. He says that his
doctrines are the only true Free Masonry. He was the chief promoter of
the *Eclectic System*. This he urged as the best method for getting
information of all the explanations which have been given of the Masonic
Mysteries. He was also a *Strict Observanz*, and an adept Rosycrucian.
The result of all his knowledge is worthy of particular remark, and
shall therefore be given at large.

 

"I declare," says he, "and I challenge all mankind to contradict my
declaration, that no man can give any account of the Order of Free
Masonry, of its origin, of its history, of its object, nor any
explanation of its mysteries and symbols, which does not leave the mind
in total uncertainty on all these points. Every man is entitled,
therefore, to give any explanation of the symbols, and any system of the
doctrines, that he can render palatable. Hence have sprung up that
variety of systems which for twenty years have divided the Order. The
simple tale of the English, and the fifty degrees of the French, and the
Knights of Baron Hunde, are equally authentic, and have equally had the
support of intelligent and zealous Brethren. These systems are in fact
but one. They have all sprung from the Blue Lodge of Three degrees; take
these for their standard, and found on these all the improvements by
which each system is afterwards suited to the particular object which it
keeps in view. There is no man, nor system, in the world, which can show
by undoubted succession that it should stand at the head of the Order.
Our ignorance in this particular frets me. Do but consider our short
history of 120 years.--Who will show me the Mother Lodge? Those of
London we have discovered to be self-erected in 1716. Ask for their
archives. They tell you they were burnt. They have nothing but the
wretched sophistications of the Englishman Anderson, and the Frenchman
Desaguilliers. Where is the Lodge of York, which pretends to the
priority, with their King Bouden, and the archives that he brought from
the East? These too are all burnt. What is the Chapter of Old Aberdeen,
and its Holy Clericate? Did we not find it unknown, and the Mason Lodges
there the most ignorant of all the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

ignorant, gaping for instruction from our deputies? Did we not find the
same thing at London? And have not their missionaries been among us,
prying into our mysteries, and eager to learn from us what is true Free
Masonry? It is in vain, therefore, to appeal to judges; they are no
where to be found; all claim for themselves the sceptre of the Order;
all indeed are on an equal footing. They obtained followers, not from
their authenticity, but from their conduciveness to the end which they
proposed, and from the importance of that end. It is by this scale that
we must measure the mad and wicked explanations of the Rosycrucians, the
Exorcists, and Cabalists. These are rejected by all good Masons, because
incompatible with social happiness. Only such systems as promote this
are retained. But alas, they are all sadly deficient, because they leave
us under the dominion of political and religious prejudice; and they are
as inefficient as the sleepy dose of an ordinary sermon.

 

"But I have contrived an explanation which has every advantage; is
inviting to Christians of every communion; gradually frees them from all
religious prejudices; cultivates the social virtues; and animates them
by a great, a feasible, and *speedy* prospect of universal happiness, in
a state of liberty and moral equality, freed from the obstacles which
subordination, rank, and riches, continually throw in our way. My
explanation is accurate, and complete, my means are effectual, and
irresistible. Our secret Association works in a way that nothing can
withstand, *and man shall soon be free and happy*.

 

"This is the great object held out by this Association: and the means of
attaining it is Illumination, enlightening the understanding by the sun
of reason, which will dispel the clouds of superstition and of
prejudice. The proficients in this Order are therefore justly named the
Illuminated. And of all Illumination which human reason can give, none
is comparable to the discovery of what we are, our nature, our
obligations, what happiness we are capable of, and what are the means of
attaining it. In comparison with this, the most brilliant sciences are
but amusements for the idle and luxurious. To fit man by Illumination
for active virtue, to engage him to it by the strongest motives, to
render the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

attainment of it easy and certain, by finding employment for every
talent, and by placing every talent in its proper sphere of action, so
that all, without feeling any extraordinary effort, and in conjunction
with and completion of ordinary business, shall urge forward, with
united powers, the general task. This indeed will be an employment
suited to noble natures, grand in its views, and delightful in its
exercise.

 

"And what is this general object? THE HAPPINESS OF THE HUMAN RACE. Is it
not distressing to a generous mind, after contemplating what human
nature is capable of, to see how little we enjoy? When we look at this
goodly world, and see that every man *may* be happy, but that the
happiness of one depends on the conduct of another; when we see the
wicked so powerful, and the good so weak; and that it is in vain to
strive, singly and alone, against the general current of vice and
oppression; the wish naturally arises in the mind, that it were possible
to form a durable combination of the most worthy persons, who should
work together in removing the obstacles to human happiness, become
terrible to the wicked, and give their aid to all the good without
distinction, and should by the most powerful means, first fetter, and by
fettering, lessen vice; means which at the same time should promote
virtue, by rendering the inclination to rectitude, hitherto too feeble,
more powerful and engaging. Would not such an association be a blessing
to the world?

 

"But where are the proper persons, the good, the generous, and the
accomplished, to be found? and how, and by what strong motives, are they
to be induced to engage in a task so vast, so incessant, so difficult,
and so laborious? This Association must be gradual. There are some such
persons to be found in every society. Such noble minds will be engaged
by the heart-warming object. The first task of the Association must
therefore be to form the young members. As these multiply and advance,
they become the apostles of beneficence, and the work is now on foot,
and advances with a speed encreasing every day. The slightest
observation shows that nothing will so much contribute to increase the
zeal of the members as secret union. We see with what keenness and zeal
the frivolous business of Free

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masonry is
conducted, by persons knit together by the secrecy of their union. It is
needless to enquire into the causes of this zeal which secrecy produces.
It is an universal fact, confirmed by the history of every age. Let this
circumstance of our constitution therefore be directed to this noble
purpose, and then all the objections urged against it by jealous tyranny
and affrighted superstition will vanish. The Order will thus work
silently, and securely; and though the generous benefactors of the human
race are thus deprived of the applause of the world, they have the noble
pleasure of seeing their work prosper in their hands."

 

Such is the aim, and such are the hopes of the Order of the Illuminated.
Let us now see how these were to be accomplished. We cannot judge
precisely of this, because the account given of the constitution of the
Order by its founder includes only the lowest degree, and even this is
suspected to be fictitious. The accounts given by the four Professors,
even of this part of the Order, make a very different impression on the
mind, although they differ only in a few particulars.

 

The only ostensible members of the Order were the Minervals. They were
to be found only in the Lodges of Free Masons. A candidate for admission
must make his wish known to some Minerval; he reports it to a Superior,
who, by a channel to be explained presently, intimates it to the
Council. No notice is farther taken of it for some time. The candidate
is carefully observed in silence, and if thought unfit for the Order, no
notice is taken of his solicitation. But if otherwise, the candidate
receives privately an invitation to a conference. Here he meets with a
person unknown to him, and, previous to all further conference, he is
required to peruse and to sign the following oath.

 

"I N. N. hereby bind myself, by mine honor and good name, forswearing
all mental reservation, never to reveal, by hint, word, writing, or in
any manner whatever, even to my most trusted friend, any thing that
shall now be said or done to me respecting my wished-for-reception, and
this whether my reception shall follow or not; I being previously
assured that it shall contain nothing contrary to religion, the state,
nor good manners. I promise, that I shall make

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

no intelligible extract from any papers which shall be shewn me now or
during my noviciate. All this I swear, as I am, and as I hope to
continue, a Man of Honor."

 

The urbanity of this protestation must agreeably impress the mind of a
person who recollects the dreadful imprecations which he made at his
reception into the different ranks of Free Masonry. The candidate is
then introduced to an *Illuminates Dirigens*, whom perhaps he knows, and
is told that this person is to be his future instructor. There is now
presented to the candidate, what they call a table, in which he writes
his name, place of birth, . age, rank, place of residence, profession,
and favorite studies. He is then made to read several articles of this
table. It contains, 1st. a very concise account of the Order, its
connection with Free Masonry, and its great object, the promoting the
happiness of mankind by means of instruction and confirmation in
virtuous principles. 2d. Several questions relative to the Order. Among
these are, "What advantages he hopes to derive from being a member? What
he most particularly wishes to learn? What delicate questions relative
to the life, the prospects, the duties of man, as an individual, and as
a citizen, he wishes to have particularly discussed to him? In what
respects he thinks he can be of use to the Order? Who are his ancestors,
relations, friends, correspondents, or enemies? Whom he thinks proper
persons to be received into the Order, or whom he thinks unfit for it,
and the reasons for both opinions. To each of these questions he must
give some answer in writing.

 

The Novice and his Mentor are known only to each other; perhaps nothing
more follows upon this; if otherwise, the Mentor appoints another
conference, and begins his instructions, by giving him in detail certain
portions of the constitution, and of the fundamental rules of the Order.
Of these the Novice must give a weekly account in writing. He must also
read, in the Mentor's house, a book containing more of the instructions
of the Order; but he must make no extracts. Yet from this reading he
must derive all his knowledge; and he must give an account in writing of
his progress. All writings received from his Superiors must be returned
with a stated punctuality. These writings consist chiefly of important
and delicate questions,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

suited, either to the particular inclination, or to the peculiar taste
which the candidate had discovered in his subscriptions of the articles
of the table, and in his former rescripts, or to the direction which the
Mentor wishes to give to his thoughts.

 

Enlightening the understanding, and the rooting out of prejudices, are
pointed out to him as the principal tasks of his noviciate. The
knowledge of himself is considered as preparatory to all other
knowledge. To disclose to him, by means of the calm and unbiassed
observation of his instructor, what is his own character, his most
vulnerable side, either in respect of temper, passions, or
prepossessions, is therefore the most essential service that can be done
him. For this purpose there is required of him some account of his own
conduct on occasions where he doubted of its propriety; some account of
his friendships, of his differences of opinion, and of his conduct on
such occasions. From such relations the Superior learns his manner of
thinking and judging, and those propensities which require his chief
attention.

 

Having made the candidate acquainted with himself, he is apprised that
the Order is not a speculative, but an active association, engaged in
doing good to others. The knowledge of human character is therefore of
all others the most important. This is acquired only by observation,
assisted by the instructions of his teacher. Characters in history are
proposed to him for observation, and his opinion is required. After this
he is directed to look around him, and to notice the conduct of other
men; and part of his weekly rescripts must consist of accounts of all
interesting occurrences in his [neighbourhood](errata.htm#2), whether of
a public or private nature. Cossandey, one of the four Professors, gives
a particular account of the instructions relating to this kind of
science. "The Novice must be attentive to trifles: For, in frivolous
occurrences a man is indolent, and makes no effort to act a part, so
that his real character is then acting alone. Nothing will have such
influence with the Superiors in promoting the advancement of a candidate
as very copious narrations of this kind, because the candidate, if
promoted, is to be employed in an active station, and it is from this
kind of information only that the Superiors can judge of

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

his fitness. These characteristic anecdotes are not for the instruction
of the Superiors, who are men of long experience, and familiar with such
occupation. But they inform the Order concerning the talents and
proficiency of the young member. Scientific instruction, being connected
by system, is soon communicated, and may in general be very completely
obtained from the books which are recommended to the Novice, and
acquired in the public seminaries of instruction. But knowledge of
character is more multifarious and more delicate. For this there is no
college, and it must therefore require longer time for its attainment.
Besides, this assiduous and long continued study of men, enables the
possessor of such knowledge to act with men, and by his knowledge of
their character, to influence their conduct. For such reasons this study
is continued, and these rescripts are required, during the whole
progress through the Order, and attention to them is recommended as the
only mean of advancement. Remarks on Physiognomy in these narrations are
accounted of considerable value." So far Mr. Cossandey.

 

During all this trial, which may last one, two, or three years, the
Novice knows no person of the Order but his own instructor, with whom he
has frequent meetings, along with other Minervals. In these
conversations he learns the importance of the Order, and the
opportunities he will afterwards have of acquiring much hidden science.
The employment of his unknown Superiors naturally causes him to
entertain very high notions of their abilities and worth. He is
counselled to aim at a resemblance to them by getting rid by degrees of
all those prejudices or prepossessions which checked his own former
progress; and he is assisted in this endeavour by an invitation to a
correspondence with them. He may address his Provincial Superior, by
directing his letter *Soli*, or the General by *Primo*, or the Superiors
in general by *Quibus licet*. In these letters he may mention whatever
he thinks conducive to the advancement of the Order; he may inform the
Superiors how his instructor behaves to him; if assiduous or remiss,
indulgent or severe. The Superiors are enjoined by the strongest motives
to convey these letters wherever addressed. None but the General and
Council know the result of all this; and all

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

are enjoined to keep themselves and their proceedings unknown to all the
world.

 

If three years of this Noviciate have elapsed without further notice,
the Minerval must look for no further advancement; he is found unfit,
and remains a Free Mason of the highest class. This is called a *Sta
bene*.

 

But should his Superiors judge more favorably of him, he is drawn out of
the general mass of Free Masons, and becomes *Illuminatus Minor*. When
called to a conference for this purpose, he is told in the most serious
manner, that "it is vain for him to hope to acquire wisdom by mere
systematic instruction; for such instruction the Superiors have no
leisure. Their duty is not to form speculators, but active men, whom
they must *immediately* employ in the service of the Order. He must
therefore grow wise and able entirely by the unfolding and exertion of
his own talents. His Superiors have already discovered what these are,
and know what service he may be capable of rendering the Order, provided
he now heartily acquiesces in being thus honorably employed. They will
assist him in bringing his talents into action, and will place him in
the situations most favorable for their exertion, so that he may be
assured of success. Hitherto he has been a mere scholar, but his first a
step farther carries him into action; he must therefore now consider
himself as an instrument in the hands of his Superiors, to be used for
the noblest purposes." The aim of the Order is now more fully told him.
It is, in one sentence, "to make of the human race, without any
distinction of nation, condition, or profession, one good and happy
family." To this aim, demonstrably attainable, every smaller
consideration must give way. This may sometimes require sacrifices which
no man standing alone has fortitude to make; but which become light, and
a source of the purest enjoyment, when supported and encouraged by the
countenance and co-operation of the united wise and good, such as are
the Superiors of the Order. If the candidate, warmed by the alluring
picture of the possible happiness of a virtuous Society, says that he is
sensible of the propriety of this procedure, and still wishes to be of
the Order, he is required to sign the following obligation.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

"I, N. N. protest before you, the worthy Plenipotentiary of the
venerable Order into which I wish to be admitted, that I acknowledge my
natural weakness and inability, and that I, with all my possessions,
rank, honors, and titles which I hold in political society, am, at
bottom, only a man; I can enjoy these things only through my fellow-men,
and through them also I may lose them. The approbation and consideration
of my fellow-men are indispensibly necessary, and I must try to maintain
them by all my talents. These I will never use to the prejudice of
universal good, but will oppose, with all my might, the enemies of the
human race, and of political society. I will embrace every opportunity
of saving mankind, by improving my understanding and my affections, and
by imparting all important knowledge, as the good and statutes of this
Order require of me. I bind myself to perpetual silence and unshaken
loyalty and submission to the Order, in the persons of my Superiors;
here making a faithful and complete surrender of my private judgment, my
own will, and every narrow-minded employment of my power and influence.
I pledge myself to account the go d of the Order as my own, and am ready
to serve it with my fortune, my honor, and my blood. Should I, through
omission, neglect, passion, or wickedness, behave contrary to this good
of the Order, I subject myself to what reproof or punishment my
Superiors shall enjoin. The friends and enemies of the Order shall be my
friends and enemies; and with respect to both I will conduct myself as
directed by the Order, and am ready, in every lawful way, to devote
myself to its increase and promotion, and therein to employ all my
ability. All this I promise, and protest, without secret reservation,
according to the intention of the Society which require from me this
engagement. This I do as I am, and as I hope to continue, a Man of
Honor."

 

A drawn sword is then pointed at his breast, and he is asked, Will you
be obedient to the commands of your Superiors? He is threatened with
unavoidable vengeance, from which no potentate can defend him, if he
should ever betray the Order. He is then asked, 1. What aim does he wish
the Order to have? 2. What means he would choose to advance this aim? 3.
Whom he wishes to keep out of the Order? 4. What subjects he wishes not
to be discussed in it?

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

Our candidate is now ILLUMINATUS MINOR. It is needless to narrate the
mummery of reception, and it is enough to say, that it nearly resembles
that of the *Masonic Chevalier du Soleil*, known to every one much
conversant in Masonry. Weishaupt's preparatory discourse of reception is
a piece of good composition, whether considered as argumentative (from
topics, indeed, that are very gratuitous and fanciful) or as a specimen
of that declamation which was so much practised by Libanius and the
other Sophists, and it gives a distinct and captivating account of the
professed aim of the Order.

The *Illuminatus Minor* learns a good deal more of the Order, but by
very sparing morsels, under the same instructor. The task has now become
more delicate and difficult. The chief part of it is the rooting out of
prejudices in politics and religion; and Weishaupt has shown much
address in the method which he has employed. Not the most hurtful, but
the most easily refuted, were the first subjects of discussion, so that
the pupil gets into the habits of victory; and his reverence for the
systems of either kind is diminished when they are found to have
harboured such untenable opinions. The proceedings in the Eclectic
Lodges of Masonry, and the harangues of the Brother Orators, teemed with
the boldest sentiments both in politics and religion. Enlightening, and
the triumph of reason, had been the *ton* of the country for some time
past, and every institution, civil and religious, had been the subject
of the most free criticism. Above all, the Cosmo-politism, which had
been imported from France, where it had been the favorite topic of the
enthusiastical œconomists, was now become a general theme of discussion
in all societies of cultivated men. It was a subject of easy and
agreeable declamation; and the Literati found in it a subject admirably
fitted for showing their talents, and ingratiating themselves with the
young men of fortune, whose minds, unsuspicious as yet and generous,
were fired with the fair prospects set before them of universal and
attainable happiness. And the pupils of the Illuminati were still more
warmed by the thought that they were to be the happy instruments of
accomplishing all this. And though the doctrines of universal liberty
and equality, as imprescriptible rights of man, might sometimes startle
those who possessed the advantage of fortune, there were

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

thousands of younger sons, and of men of talents without fortune, to
whom these were agreeable sounds. And we must particularly observe, that
those who were now the pupils were a set of picked subjects, whose
characters and peculiar biases were well known by their conduct during
their noviciate as Minervals. They were therefore such as, in all
probability, would not boggle at very free sentiments. We might rather
expect a partiality to doctrines which removed some restraints which
formerly checked them in the indulgence of youthful passions. Their
instructors, who have thus relieved their minds from several anxious
thoughts, must appear men of superior minds. This was a notion most
carefully inculcated; and they could see nothing to contradict it: for
except their own Mentor, they knew none; they heard of Superiors of
different ranks, but never saw them; and the same mode of instruction
that was practised during their noviciate was still retained. More
particulars of the Order were slowly unfolded to them, and they were
taught that their Superiors were men of distinguished talents, and were
Superiors for this reason alone. They were taught, that the great
opportunities which the Superiors had for observation, and their habits
of continually occupying their thoughts with the great objects of this
Order, had enlarged their views, even far beyond the narrow limits of
nations and kingdoms, which they hoped would one day coalesce into one
great Society, where consideration would attach to talents and worth
alone, and that pre-eminence in these would be invariably attended with
all the enjoyments of influence and power. And they were told that they
would gradually become acquainted with these great and venerable
Characters, as they advanced in the Order. In earnest of this, they were
made acquainted with one or two Superiors, and with several Illuminati
of their own rank. Also, to whet their zeal, they are now made
instructors of one or two Minervals, and report their progress to their
Superiors. They are given to understand that nothing can so much
recommend them as the success with which they perform this task. It is
declared to be the best evidence of their usefulness in the great
designs of the Order.

 

The baleful effects of general superstition, and even of any peculiar
religious prepossession, are now strongly inculcated,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

and the discernment of the pupils in these matters is learned by
questions which are given them from time to time to discuss. These are
managed with delicacy and circumspection, that the timid may not be
alarmed. In like manner, the political doctrines of the Order are
inculcated with the utmost caution. After the mind of the pupil has been
warmed by the pictures of universal happiness, and convinced that it is
a possible thing to unite all the inhabitants of the earth in one great
society, and after it has been made out, in some measure to the
satisfaction of the pupil, that a great addition of happiness is gained
by the abolition of national distinctions and animosities, it may
frequently be no hard task to make him think that patriotism is a
narrow-minded monopolising sentiment, and even incompatible with the
more enlarged views of the Order, namely, the uniting the whole human
race into one great and happy society. Princes are a chief feature of
national distinction. Princes, therefore, may now be safely represented
as unnecessary. If so, loyalty to Princes loses much of its sacred
character; and the so frequent enforcing of it in our common political
discussions may now be easily made to appear a selfish maxim of rulers,
by which they may more easily enslave the people; and thus, it may at
last appear, that religion, the love of our particular country, and
loyalty to our Prince, should be resisted, if, by these partial or
narrow views, we prevent the accomplishment of that Cosmo-political
happiness which is continually held forth as the great object of the
Order. It is in this point of view that the terms of devotion to the
Order which are inserted in the oath of admission are now explained. The
authority of the ruling powers is therefore represented as of inferior
moral weight to that of the Order. "These powers are despots, when they
do not conduct themselves by its principles; and it is therefore our
duty to surround them with its members, so that the profane may have no
access to them. Thus we are able most powerfully to promote its
interests. If any person is more disposed to listen to Princes than to
the Order, he is not fit for it, and must rise no higher. We must do our
utmost to procure the advancement of Illuminati into all important civil
offices."

 

Accordingly the Order laboured in this with great zeal and success. A
correspondence was discovered, in which

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

it is plain, that by their influence, one of the greatest ecclesiastical
dignities was filled up in opposition to the right and authority of the
Archbishop of Spire, who is there represented as a tyrannical and
bigotted priest. They contrived to place their Members as tutors to the
youth of distinction. One of them, Baron Leuchtsenring, took the charge
of a young prince without any salary. They insinuated themselves into
all public offices, and particularly into courts of justice. In like
manner, the chairs in the University of Ingolstadt were (with only two
exceptions) occupied by Illuminati. "Rulers who are members must be
promoted through the ranks of the Order only in proportion as they
acknowledge the goodness of its great object, and manner of procedure.
Its object may be said to be the checking the tyranny of princes,
nobles, and priests, and establishing an universal equality of condition
and of religion." The pupil is now informed "that such a religion is
contained in the Order, is the perfection of Christianity, and will be
imparted to him in due time."

 

These and other principles and maxims of the Order are partly
communicated by the verbal instruction of the Mentor, partly by
writings, which must be punctually returned, and partly read by the
pupil at the Mentor's house (but without taking extracts) in such
portions as he shall direct. The rescripts by the pupil must contain
discussions on these subjects, and of anecdotes and descriptions of
living characters; and these must be zealously continued, as the chief
mean of advancement. All this while the pupil knows only his Mentor, the
Minervals, and a few others of his own rank. All mention of degrees, or
other business of the Order, must be carefully avoided, even in the
meetings with other Members: "For the Order wishes to be secret, and to
work in silence; for thus it is better secured from the oppression of
the ruling powers, and because this secrecy gives a greater zest to the
whole."

 

This short account of the *Noviciate*, and of the lowest class of
Illuminati, is all we can get from the authority of Mr. Weishaupt. The
higher degrees were not published by him. Many circumstances appear
suspicious, and are certainly susceptible of different turns, and may
easily be

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

pushed to very dangerous extremes. The accounts given by the four
professors confirm these suspicions. They declare upon oath, that they
make all these accusations in consequence of what they heard in the
Meetings, and of what they knew of the Higher Orders.

 

But since the time of the suppression by the Elector, discoveries have
been made which throw great light on the subject. A collection of
original papers and correspondence was found by searching the house of
one Zwack (a Member) in 1786. The following year a much larger
collection was found at the house of Baron Bassus; and since that time
Baron Knigge, the most active Member next to Weishaupt, published an
account of some of the higher degrees, which had been formed by himself.
A long while after this were published, *Neueste Arbeitung des Spartacus
and Philo in der Illuminaten Orden*, and *Hohere Granden des Ilium.
Ordens*. These two works give an account of the whole secret
constitution of the Order, its various degrees, the manner of conferring
them, the instructions to the intrants, and an explanation of the
connection of the Order with Free Masonry, and a critical history. We
shall give some extracts from such of these as have been published.

 

Weishaupt was the founder in 1776. In 1778 the number of Members was
considerably increased, and the Order was fully established. The Members
took antique names. Thus Weishaupt took the name of Spartacus, the man
who headed the insurrection of slaves, which in Pompey's time kept Rome
in terror and uproar for three years. Zwack was called Cato. Knigge was
Philo. Bassus was Hannibal. Hertel was Marius. Marquis Constanza was
Diomedes. Nicholai, an eminent and learned bookseller in Berlin, and
author of several works of reputation, took the name of Lucian, the
great scoffer at all religion. Another was Mahomet, &c. It is
remarkable, that except Cato and Socrates, we have not a name of any
ancient who was eminent as a teacher and practiser of virtue. On the
contrary, they seem to have affected the characters of the free-thinkers
and turbulent spirits of antiquity. In the same manner they gave ancient
names to the cities and countries of Europe. Munich was Athens, Vienna
was Rome, &c.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

#### Spartacus to Cato, Feb. 6, 1778.

"*Mon but est de faire valoir la raison*. As a subordinate object I
shall endeavour to gain security to ourselves, a backing in case of
misfortunes, and assistance from without. I shall therefore press the
cultivation of science, especially such sciences as may have an
influence on our reception in the world, and may serve to remove
obstacles out of the way. We have to struggle with pedantry, with
intolerance, with divines and statesmen, and above all, princes and
priests are in our way. Men are unfit as they are, and must be formed;
each class must be the school of trial for the next. This will be
tedious, because it is hazardous. In the last classes I propose
academies under the direction of the Order. This will secure us the
adherence of the Literati. Science shall here be the lure. Only those
who are assuredly proper subjects shall be picked out from among the
inferior classes for the higher mysteries, which contain the first
principles and means of promoting a happy life. No religionist must, on
any account, be admitted into these: For here we work at the discovery
and extirpation of superstition and prejudices. The instructions shall
be so conducted that each shall disclose what he thinks he conceals
within his own breast, what are his ruling propensities and passions,
and how far he has advanced in the command of himself. This will answer
all the purposes of auricular confession. And in particular, every
person shall be made a spy on another and on all around him. Nothing can
escape our sight; by these means we shall readily discover who are
contented, and receive with relish the peculiar state-doctrines and
religious opinions that are laid before them; and, at last, the
trust-worthy alone will be admitted to a participation of the whole
maxims and political constitution of the Order. In a council composed of
such members we shall labour at the contrivance of means to drive by
degrees the enemies of reason and of humanity out of the world, and to
establish a peculiar morality and religion fitted for the great Society
of mankind.

 

"But this is a ticklish project, and requires the utmost circumspection.
The squeamish will start at the sight of religious or political
novelties; and they must be prepared

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

for them. We must be particularly careful about the books which we
recommend; I shall confine them at first to moralists and reasoning
historians. This will prepare for a patient reception, in the higher
classes, of works of a bolder flight, such as Robinet's *Systeme de la
Nature*--*Politique Naturelle*--*Philosophie de la Nature*--*Systeme
Social*--The writings of Mirabaud, &c. Helvetius is fit only for the
strongest stomachs. If any one has a copy already, neither praise nor
find fault with him. Say nothing on such subjects to intrants, for we
don't know how they will be received--folks are not yet prepared.
Marius, an excellent man, must be dealt with. His stomach, which cannot
yet digest such strong food, must acquire a better tone. The allegory on
which I am to found the mysteries of the Higher Orders is *the
fire-worship of the Magi*. We must have some worship, and none is so
apposite. LET THERE BE LIGHT, AND THERE SHALL BE LIGHT. This is my
motto, and is my fundamental principle. The degrees will be *Feurer
Orden, Parsen Orden;* <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1) all very
practicable. In the course through these there will be no STA BENE (this
is the answer given to one who solicits preferment, and is refused.) For
I engage that none shall enter this class who has not laid aside his
prejudices. No man is fit for our Order who is not a Brutus or a
Catiline, and is not ready to go every length.--Tell me how you like
this?"

#### Spartacus to Cato, March 1778.

"To collect unpublished works, and information from the archives of
States, will be a most useful service. We shall be able to show in a
very ridiculous light the claims of our despots. Marius (keeper of the
archives of the Electorate) has ferreted out a noble document, which we
have got. He makes it, forsooth, a case of conscience--how silly
that--since only that is sin, which is *ultimately* productive of
mischief. In this case, where the advantage far exceeds the hurt, it is
meritorious virtue. It will do more good in our hands than by remaining
for 1000 years on the dusty shelf."

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

There was found in the hand-writing of Zwack a project for a Sisterhood,
in subserviency to the designs of the Illuminati. In it are the
following passages:

 

"It will be of great service, and procure us both much information *and
money*, and will suit charmingly the taste of many of our truest
members, who are lovers of the sex. It should consist of two classes,
the virtuous, and the freer hearted (*i.e.* those who fly out of the
common tract of prudish manners); they must not know of each other, and
must be under the direction of men, but without knowing it. Proper books
must be put into their hands, and such (but secretly) as are flattering
to their passions."

 

There are, in the same hand-writing, Description of a strong box, which,
if forced open, shall blow up and destroy its contents--Several receipts
for procuring abortion--A composition which blinds or kills when spurted
in the face--A sheet, containing a receipt for sympathetic ink--Tea for
procuring abortion--*Herbæ quæ habent qualitatem deleteriam*--A method
for filling a bed-chamber with pestilential vapours--How to take off
impressions of seals, so as to use them afterwards as seals--A
collection of some hundreds of such impressions, with a list of their
owners, princes, nobles, clergymen, merchants, &c.--A receipt *ad
excitandum furorem uterinum*--A manuscript entitled, "Better than
Horus." It was afterwards printed and distributed at Leipzig fair, and
is an attack and bitter satire on all religion. This is in the
hand-writing of Ajax. As also a dissertation on suicide. N. B. His
sister-in-law threw herself from the top of a tower. There was also a
set of portraits, or characters of eighty-five ladies in Munich; with
recommendations of some of them for members of a Lodge of Sister
Illuminatæ; also injunctions to all the Superiors to learn to write with
both hands; and that they should use more than one cypher.

 

Immediately after the publication of these writings, many defences
appeared. It was said that the dreadful medical apparatus were with
propriety in the hands of Counsellor Zwack, who was a judge of a
criminal court, and whose duty it was therefore to know such things. The
same excuse was offered for the collection of seals; but how came these

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

things to be put up with papers of the Illuminati, and to be in the hand
writing of one of that Order? Weishaupt says, "These things were not
carried into effect--only spoken of, and are justifiable when taken in
proper connection." This however he has not pointed out; but he appeals
to the account of the Order, which he had published at Regensburg, and
in which neither these things are to be found, nor any possibility of a
connection by which they may be justified. "All men, says he, are
subject to errors, and the best man is he who best conceals them. I have
never been guilty of any such vices or follies: for proof, I appeal to
the whole tenor of my life, which my reputation, and my struggles with
hostile cabals, had brought completely into public view long before the
institution of this Order, without abating any thing of that flattering
regard which was paid to me by the first persons of my country and its
neighbourhood; a regard well evinced by their confidence in me as the
best instructor of their children." In some of his private letters, we
learn the means which he employed to acquire this influence among the
youth, and they are such as could not fail. But we must not anticipate.
"It is well known that I have made the chair which I occupied in the
university of Ingolstadt, the resort of the first class of the German
youth; whereas formerly it had only brought round it the low-born
practitioners in the courts of law. I have gone through the whole circle
of human enquiry. I have exorcised spirits--raised ghosts--discovered
treasures--interrogated the Cabala--*hatte Loto gespielt*--I have never
transmuted metals."--(A very pretty and respectable circle indeed, and
what vulgar spirits would scarcely have included within the pale of
their curiosity.) "The tenor of my life has been the opposite of every
thing that is vile; and no man can lay any such thing to my charge. I
have reason to rejoice that these writings have appeared; they are a
vindication of the Order and of my conduct. I can, and must declare to
God, and I do it now in the most solemn manner, that in my whole life I
never saw or heard of the so much condemned secret writings; and in
particular, respecting these abominable means; such as poisoning,
abortion, &c. was it ever known to me in any case, that any of my
friends or acquaintances ever even thought of them, advised them, or
made any use of them. I was indeed always a schemer and projector, but
never could engage much in detail. My general

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

plan is good, though in the detail there may be faults. I had myself to
form. In another situation, and in an active station in life, I should
have been keenly occupied, and the founding an Order would never have
come into my head. But I would have executed much greater things, had
not government always opposed my exertions, and placed others in the
situations which suited my talents. It was the full conviction of this,
and of what could be done, if every man were placed in the office for
which he was fitted by nature and a proper education, which first
suggested to me the plan of illumination." Surely Mr. Weishaupt had a
very serious charge, the education of youth; and his encouragement in
that charge was the most flattering that an Illuminatus could wish for,
because he had brought round him the youth whose influence in society
was the greatest and who would most of all contribute to the diffusing
good principles, and exciting to good conduct through the whole state.
"I did not," says he, "bring deism into Bavaria more than into Rome. I
found it here, in great vigour, more abounding than in any of the
neighbouring Protestant states. I am proud to be known to the world as
the founder of the Order of Illuminati; and I repeat my wish to have for
my epitaph,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*Hic situs est Phaethon, currûs auriga paterni*,  
"*Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis*."

</div>

The second discovery of secret correspondence at Sandersdorff, the feat
of Baron Batz (Hannibal) contains still more interesting facts.

#### Spartacus to Cato.

"What shall I do? I am deprived of all help. Socrates, who would insist
on being a man of consequence among us, and is really a man of talents,
and of a *right way of thinking*, is eternally besotted. Augustus is in
the worst estimation imaginable. Alcibiades sits the day long with the
vintner's pretty wife, and there he sighs and pines. A few days ago, at
Corinth, Tiberius attempted to ravish the wife of Democides, and her
husband came in upon them. Good heavens! what *Areopagitæ* I have got.
When the worthy man Marcus Aurelius comes to Athens (Munich) what

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

will he think? What a meeting with dissolute immoral wretches,
whore-masters, liars, bankrupts, braggarts, and vain fools! When he sees
all this, what will he think? He will be ashamed to enter into an
Association," (observe, Reader, that Spartacus writes this in August
1783, in the very time that he was trying to murder Cato's sister)
"where the chiefs raise the highest expectations, and exhibit such a
wretched example; and all this from self-will, from sensuality. Am I not
in the right--that this man--that any such worthy man--whose name alone
would give us the selection of all Germany--will declare that the whole
province of Grecia (Bavaria) innocent and guilty, must be excluded. I
tell you, we may study; and write, and toil till death. We may sacrifice
to the Order, our health, our fortune, and our reputation (alas the
loss!) and these Lords, following their own pleasures, will whore,
cheat, steal, and drive on like shameless rascals; and yet must be
Areopagitæ, and interfere in every thing. Indeed, my dearest friend, we
have only enslaved ourselves."

 

In another part of this fine correspondence, Diomedes has had the good
fortune to intercept a Q. L. (*Quibus licet*) in which it is said, and
supported by proofs, that Cato had received 250 florins as a bribe for
his sentence in his capacity as a judge in a criminal court; (the end
had surely sanctified the means.) In another, a Minerval complains of
his Mentor for having by lies occasioned the dismission of a physician
from a family, by which he obtained the custom of the house and free
access, which favor he repaid by debauching the wife; and he prays to be
informed whether he may not get another Mentor, saying, that although
that man had always given him the most excellent instructions, and he
doubted not would continue them, yet he felt a disgust at the hypocrisy,
which would certainly diminish the impression of the most salutary
truths. (Is it not distressing to think, that this promising youth will
by and by laugh at his former simplicity, and follow the steps and not
the instructions of his physician.) In another place, Spartacus writes
to Marius (in confidence) that another worthy Brother, an *Areopagitæ*,
had stolen a gold and a silver watch, and a ring, from Brutus
(*Savioli*) and begs Marius, in another letter, to try, while it was yet
possible, to get the things restored, because the culprit was a most
*excellent* 

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

*man* (*Vortrefflich*) and of vast use to the Order, having the
direction of an eminent seminary of young gentlemen; and because Savioli
was much in good company, and did not much care for the Order, except in
so far as it gave him an opportunity of knowing and leading some of
them, and of steering his way at court.

 

I cannot help inserting here, though not the most proper place, a part
of a provincial report from Knigge, the man of the whole *Areopagitæ*
who shows any thing like urbanity or gentleness of mind.

 

"Of my whole colony (Westphalia) the most brilliant is Claudiopolis
(Neuwied.) There they work, and direct, and do wonders."

 

If there ever was a spot upon earth where men may be happy in a state of
cultivated society, it was the little principality of Neuwied. I saw it
in 1770. The town was neat, and the palace handsome and in good taste;
all was clean. But the country was beyond conception delightful; not a
cottage that was out of repair, not a hedge out of order; it had been
the hobby (pardon the word) of the Prince, who made it his *daily*
employment to go through his principality regularly, and assist every
householder, of whatever condition, with his advice, and with his purse;
and, when a freeholder could not of himself put things into a thriving
condition, the Prince sent his workmen and did it for him. He endowed
schools for the common people, and two academies for the gentry and the
people of business. He gave little portions to the daughters, and prizes
to the well-behaving sons of the labouring people. His own household was
a pattern of elegance and economy; his sons were sent to Paris to learn
elegance, and to England to learn science and agriculture. In short, the
whole was like a romance (and was indeed romantic.) I heard it spoken of
with a smile at the table of the Bishop of Treves, at Ehrenbretstein,
and was induced to see it next day as a curiosity: And yet even here,
the fanaticism of Knigge would distribute his poison, and tell the
blinded people, that they were in a state of sin and misery, that their
Prince was a despot, and that they would never be happy till he was made
to fly, and till they were all made equal.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

They got their wish; the swarm of French locusts sat down on Neuwied's
beautiful fields in 1793, and entrenched themselves; and in three
months, Prince and farmers houses, and cottages, and schools, and
academies--all vanished; and all the subjects were made equal, and free
(as they were expressly told by the French General) to weep.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Discite justitiam moniti, et non temnere divos!*

</div>

To proceed:

#### Spartacus to Cato.

"By this plan we shall direct all mankind. In this manner, and by the
simplest means, we shall set all in motion and in flames. The
occupations must be so allotted and contrived, that we may, in secret,
influence all political transactions." N. B. This alludes to a part that
is withheld from the public, because it contained the allotment of the
most rebellious and profligate occupations to several persons whose
common names could not be traced. "I have considered," says Spartacus,
"every thing, and so prepared it, that if the Order should this day go
to ruin, I shall in a year re-establish it more brilliant than ever."
Accordingly it got up again in about this space of time, under the name
of the GERMAN UNION, appearing in the form of READING SOCIETIES. One of
these was set up in Zwack's house; and this raising a suspicion, a
visitation was made at Landshut, and the first set of the private papers
were found. The scheme was, however, zealously prosecuted in other parts
of Germany, as we shall see by and by. "Nor," continues Spartacus, "will
it signify though all should be betrayed and printed. I am so certain of
success, in spite of all obstacles (for the springs are in every heart)
that I am indifferent, though it should involve my life and my liberty.
What! Have thousands thrown away their lives about *homoios* and
*homoiousios*, and shall not this cause warm even the heart of a coward?
But I have the art to draw advantage even from misfortune; and when you
would think me sunk to the bottom, I shall rise with new vigour. Who
would have thought, that a professor at Ingolstadt was to become the
teacher of the professors of Gottingen, and of the greatest men in
Germany?"

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

#### Spartacus to Cato.

"Send me back my degree of *Illuminatus Minor;* it is the wonder of all
men here (I may perhaps find time to give a translation of the discourse
of reception, which contains all that can be said of this Association to
the public;) as also the two last sheets of my degree, which is in the
keeping of Marius, and Celsus, under 100 locks which contains my history
of the lives of the Patriarchs." N. B. Nothing very particular has been
discovered of these lives of the Patriarchs. He says, that there were
above sixty sheets of it. To judge by the care taken of it, it must be a
favorite work, very hazardous, and very catching.

 

In another letter to Cato, we have some hints of the higher degrees, and
concerning a peculiar morality, and a popular religion, which the Order
was one day to give the world. He says, "There must (*a la Jésuite*) not
a single purpose ever come in sight that is ambiguous, and that may
betray our aims against religion and the state. One must speak sometimes
one way and sometimes another, but so as never to contradict ourselves,
and so that, with respect to our true way of thinking, we may be
impenetrable. When our strongest things chance to give offence, they
must be explained as attempts to draw answers which discover to us the
sentiments of the person we converse with." N. B. This did not always
succeed with him.

 

Spartacus says, speaking of the priests degree, "One would almost
imagine, that this degree, as I have managed it, is genuine
Christianity, and that its end was to free the Jews from slavery. I say,
that Free Masonry is concealed Christianity. My explanation of the
hieroglyphics, at least, proceeds on this supposition; and as I explain
things, no man need be ashamed of being a Christian. Indeed I afterwards
throw away this name, and substitute *Reason*. But I assure you this is
no small affair; a new religion, and a new state-government, which so
happily explain one and all of these symbols, and combines them in one
degree, You may think that this is my chief work; but I have three other
degrees, all different, for my class of higher mysteries, in comparison
with which this is but

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

child's play; but these I keep for myself as General, to be bestowed by
me only on the *Benemeritissimi*," (surely such as Cato, his dearest
friend, and the possessor of such pretty secrets, as abortives, poisons,
pestilential vapours, &c.) "The promoted may be Areopagites or not. Were
you here I should give you this degree without hesitation. But it is too
important to be intrusted to paper, or to be bestowed otherwise than
from my own hand. It is the key to history, to religion, and to every
state-government in the world." <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2)

 

Spartacus proceeds, "There shall be but three copies for all Germany.
You can't imagine what respect and curiosity my priest-degree has
raised; and, which is wonderful, a famous Protestant divine, who is now
of the Order, is persuaded that the religion contained in it is the true
sense of Christianity. O MAN, MAN! TO WHAT MAY'ST THOU NOT BE PERSUADED.
Who would imagine that I was to be the founder of a new religion."

 

In this scheme of Masonic Christianity, Spartacus and Philo laboured
seriously together. Spartacus sent him the materials, and Philo worked
them up. It will therefore illustrate this capital point of the
constitution of the Order, if we take Philo's account of it.

#### Philo to Cato.

"We must consider the ruling propensities of every age of the world. At
present the cheats and tricks of the priests have roused all men against
them, and against Christianity. But, at the same time superstition and
fanaticism rule with unlimited dominion, and the understanding of man
really seems to be going backwards. Our task, therefore, is doubled. We
must give such an account of things, that fanatics shall not be alarmed,
and that shall, notwithstanding, excite a spirit of free enquiry. We
must not throw away the good with the bad, the child with the dirty
water; but we must

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

make the secret doctrines of Christianity be received as the secrets of
genuine Free Masonry. But farther, we have to deal with the despotism of
Princes. This increases every day. But then, the spirit of freedom
breathes and sighs in every corner; and, by the assistance of hidden
schools of wisdom, Liberty and Equality, the natural and imprescriptible
rights of man, warm and glow in every breast. We must therefore unite
these extremes. We proceed in this manner.

 

"Jesus Christ established no new Religion; he would only set Religion
and Reason in their ancient rights. For this purpose he would unite men
in a common bond. He would fit them for this by spreading a just
morality, by enlightening the understanding, and by assisting the mind
to shake off all prejudices. He would teach all men, in the first place,
to govern themselves. Rulers would then be needless, and equality and
liberty would take place without any revolution, by the natural and
gentle operation of reason and expediency. This great Teacher allows
himself to explain every part of the Bible in conformity to these
purposes; and he forbids all wrangling among his scholars, because every
man may there find a reasonable application to his peculiar doctrines.
Let this be true or false, it does not signify. This was a simple
Religion, and it was so far inspired; but the minds of his hearers were
not fitted for receiving these doctrines. I told you, says he, but you
could not bear it. Many therefore were called, but few were chosen. To
these elect were entrusted the most important secrets; and even among
them there were degrees of information. There was a seventy, and a
twelve. All this was in the natural order of things, and according to
the habits of the Jews, and indeed of all antiquity. The Jewish
Theosophy was a mystery; like the Eleusinian, or the Pythagorean, unfit
for the vulgar, And thus the doctrines of Christianity were committed to
the *Adepti*, in a *Disciplina Arcani*. By these they were maintained,
like the Vestal Fire. They were kept up, only in hidden societies, who
handed them down to posterity; and they are now possessed by the genuine
Free Masons."

 

N. B. This explains the origin of many anonymous pamphlets which
appeared about this time in Germany, showing that Free Masonry was
Christianity. They have doubtless

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

been the works of Spartacus and his partizans among the Eclectic Masons.
Nicholai, the great apostle of infidelity, had given very favorable
reviews of these performances, and having always shown himself an
advocate of such writers as depreciated Christianity, it was natural for
him to take this opportunity of bringing it still lower in the opinion
of the people. Spartacus therefore conceived a high opinion of the
importance of gaining Nicholai to the Order. He had before this gained
Leuchtsenring, a hot-headed fanatic, who had spied Jesuits in every
corner, and set Nicholai on his journey through Germany, to hunt them
out. This man finding them equally hated by the Illuminati, was easily
gained, and was most zealous in their cause. He engaged Nicholai, and
Spartacus exults exceedingly in the acquisition, saying, "that he was an
unwearied champion, *et quidem contentissimus*." Of this man Philo says,
"that he had spread this Christianity into every corner of Germany. I
have put meaning," says Philo, "to all these dark symbols, and have
prepared both degrees, introducing beautiful ceremonies, which I have
selected from among those of the ancient communions, combined with those
of the Rosaic Masonry; and now," says he, "it will appear that we are
the only true Christians. We shall now be in a condition to say a few
words to Priests and Princes. I have so contrived things, that I would
admit even Popes and Kings, after the trials which I have prefixed; and
they would be glad to be of the Order."

 

But how is all this to be reconciled with the plan of Illumination,
which is to banish Christianity altogether. Philo himself in many places
says, "that it is only a cloak, to prevent squeamish people from
starting back." This is done pretty much in the same way that was
practised in the French Masonry. In one of their degrees, the Master's
degree is made typical of the death of Jesus Christ, the preacher of
Brotherly love. But in the next step, the *Chevalier du Soleil*, it is
Reason that has been destroyed and entombed, and the Master in this
degree, the *Sublime Philosophe*, occasions the discovery of the place
where the body is hid. Reason tries again, and superstition and tyranny
disappear, and all becomes clear; man becomes free and happy.

Let us hear Spartacus again.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

#### Spartacus, in another place.

"We must, 1st. gradually explain away all our preparatory pious frauds.
And when persons of discernment find fault, we must desire them to
consider the end of all our labour. This sanctifies our means, which at
any rate are harmless, and have been useful, even in this case, because
they procured us a patient hearing, when otherwise men would have turned
away from us like petted children. This will convince them of our
sentiments in all the intervening points; and our ambiguous expressions
will then be interpreted into an endeavour to draw answers of any kind,
which may show us the minds of our pupils. 2d. We must unfold, from
history and other writings, the origin and fabrication of all religious
lies whatever; and then, 3d. We give a critical history of the Order.
But I cannot but laugh, when I think of the ready reception which all
this has met with from the grave and learned divines of Germany and of
England; and I wonder how their William failed when he attempted to
establish a Deistical Worship in London (what can this mean? <span
id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3)) for, I am certain, that it must have been
most acceptable to that learned and free people. But they had not the
enlightening of our days." I may here remark, that Weishaupt is
presuming too much on the ignorance of his friend, for there was a great
deal of this enlightening in England at the time he speaks of, and if I
am not mistaken, even this celebrated Professor of Irreligion has
borrowed most of his scheme from this kingdom. This to be sure is
nothing in our praise. But the PANTHEISTICON of Toland resembles
Weishaupt's Illumination in every thing but its rebellion and its
villany. Toland's Socratic Lodge is an elegant pattern for Weishaupt,
and his Triumph of Reason, his Philosophic Happiness, his God, or *Anima
Mundi*, are all so like the harsh system of Spartacus, that I am
convinced that he has copied them, stamping them with the roughness of
his own character. But to go on; Spartacus says of the English: "Their
poet Pope made his Essay on Man a system of pure naturalism, without
knowing it, as Brother Chrysippus did with my Priest's Degree, and was
equally astonished when this was

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

pointed out to him. Chrysippus is religious, but not superstitious.
Brother Lucian (Nicholai, of whom I have already said so much) says,
that the grave Zolikofer now allows that it would be a very proper thing
to establish a Deistical Worship at Berlin. I am not afraid but things
will go on very well. But Philo, who was entrusted with framing the
Priest's Degree, has destroyed it without any necessity; it would,
forsooth, startle those who have a hankering for Religion. But I always
told you that Philo is fanatical and prudish. I gave him fine materials,
and he has stuffed it full of ceremonies and child's play, and as Minos
says, *c’est jouer la religion*. But all this may be corrected in the
revision by the *Areopagitæ*."

 

N. B. I have already mentioned Baron Knigge's conversion to Illuminatism
by the M. de Constanza, whose name in the Order was Diomedes. Knigge
(henceforth Philo) was, next to Spartacus, the most serviceable man in
the Order, and procured the greatest number of members. It was chiefly
by his exertions among the Masons in the Protestant countries, that the
*Eclectic System* was introduced, and afterwards brought under the
direction of the Illuminati. This conquest was owing entirely to his
very extensive connections among the Masons. He travelled like a
philosopher from city to city, from Lodge to Lodge, and even from house
to house, before his Illumination, trying to unite the Masons, and he
now went over the same ground to extend the *Eclectic System*, and to
get the Lodges put under the direction of the Illuminati, by their
choice of the Master and Wardens. By this the Order had an opportunity
of noticing the conduct of individuals; and when they had found out
their manner of thinking, and that they were fit for their purpose, they
never quitted them till they had gained them over to their party. We
have seen, that he was by no means void of religious impressions, and we
often find him offended with the atheism of Spartacus. Knigge was at the
same time a man of the world, and had kept good company. Weishaupt had
passed his life in the habits of a college. Therefore he knew Knigge's
value, and communicated to him all his projects, to be dressed up by him
for the taste of society. Philo was of a much more affectionate
disposition, with something of a devotional

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

turn, and was shocked at the hard indifference of Spartacus. After
labouring four years with great zeal, he was provoked with the
disingenuous tricks of Spartacus, and he broke off all connection with
the Society in 1784, and some time after published a declaration of all
that he had done in it. This is a most excellent account of the plan and
principles of the Order (at least as he conceived it, for Spartacus had
much deeper views) and shows that the aim of it was to abolish
Christianity, and all the state-governments in Europe, and to establish
a great republic. But it is full of romantic notions and enthusiastic
declamation, on the hackneyed topics of universal citizenship, and
liberty and equality. Spartacus gave him line, and allowed him to work
on, knowing that he could discard him when he chose. I shall after this
give some extracts from Philo's letters, from which the reader will see
the vile behaviour of Spartacus, and the nature of his ultimate views.
In the mean time we may proceed with the account of the principles of
the system.

#### Spartacus to Cato.

"Nothing would be more profitable to us than a right history of mankind.
Despotism has robbed them of their liberty. How can the weak obtain
protection? Only by union; but this is rare. Nothing can bring this
about but hidden societies. Hidden schools of wisdom are the means which
will one day free men from their bonds. These have in all ages been the
archives of nature, and of the rights of men; and by them shall human
nature be raised from her fallen state. Princes and nations shall vanish
from the earth. The human race will then become one family, and the
world will be the dwelling of rational men.

 

"Morality alone can do this. The head of every family will be what
Abraham was, the patriarch, the priest, and the unlettered lord of his
family, and Reason will be the code of laws to all mankind. THIS," says
Spartacus, "is our GREAT SECRET. True, there may be some disturbance;
but by and by the unequal will become equal; and after the storm all
will be calm. Can the unhappy consequences remain when the grounds of
dissension are removed? Rouse yourselves therefore, O men! assert your
rights; and then

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

will Reason rule with unperceived sway; and ALL SHALL BE HAPPY. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4)

 

"Morality will perform all this; and morality is the fruit of
Illumination; duties and rights are reciprocal. Where Octavius has no
right, Cato owes him no duty. Illumination shews us our rights, and
Morality follows; that Morality which teaches us to be *of age*, to be
*out of wardenship*, to be full grown, and to *walk without the
leading-strings of priests and princes*.

 

"Jesus of Nazareth, the Grand Master of our Order, appeared at a time
when the world was in the utmost disorder, and among a people who for
ages had groaned under the yoke of bondage. He taught them the lessons
of reason. To be more effective, he took in the aid of Religion--of
opinions which were current--and, in *a very clever manner*, he combined
his secret doctrines with the popular religion, and with the customs
which lay to his hand. In these he wrapped up his lessons--he taught by
parables. Never did any prophet lead men so easily and so securely along
the road of liberty. He concealed the precious meaning and consequences
of his doctrines; but fully disclosed them to a chosen few. He speaks of
a kingdom of the upright and faithful; his Father's kingdom, whose
children we also are. Let us only take Liberty and Equality as the great
aim of his doctrines, and Morality as the way to attain it, and every
thing in the New Testament will be comprehensible; and Jesus will appear
as the Redeemer of slaves. Man is fallen from the condition of Liberty
and Equality, the STATE OF PURE NATURE. He is under subordination and
civil bondage, arising from the vices of man. This is the FALL, and
ORIGINAL SIN. The KINGDOM OF GRACE is that restoration which may be
brought about by Illumination and a just Morality. This is the NEW
BIRTH. When man lives under government, he is fallen, his worth is gone,
and his nature tarnished. By subduing our passions, or limiting their
cravings, we may recover a great deal of our original worth, and live in
a state of grace. This is the redemption of men

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --this is
accomplished by Morality; and when this is spread over the world, we
have THE KINGDOM OF THE JUST.

 

"But alas! the task of self-formation was too hard for the subjects of
the Roman empire, corrupted by every species of profligacy. A chosen few
received the doctrines in secret, and they have been handed down to us
(but frequently almost buried under rubbish of man's invention) by the
Free Masons. These three conditions of human society are expressed by
the rough, the split and the polished stone. The rough stone, and the
one that is split, express our condition under civil government; rough
by every fretting inequality of condition; and split, since we are no
longer one family; and are farther divided by differences of government,
rank, property, and religion; but when reunited in one family, we are
represented by the polished stone. G. is Grace; the Flaming Star is the
Torch of Reason. Those who possess this knowledge are indeed ILLUMINATI.
Hiram is our fictitious Grand Master, slain for the REDEMPTION OF
SLAVES; the Nine Masters are the Founders of the Order. Free Masonry is
a Royal Art, inasmuch as it teaches us to walk without trammels, and to
govern ourselves."

 

Reader, are you not curious to learn something of this all-powerful
morality, so operative on the heart of the truly illuminated--of this
*disciplina arcani*, entrusted only to the chosen few, and handed down
to Professor Weishaupt, to Spartacus, and his associates, who have
cleared it of the rubbish heaped on it by the dim-sighted Masons, and
now beaming in its native lustre on the minds of the *Areopagitæ?* The
teachers of ordinary Christianity have been labouring for almost 2000
years, with the New Testament in their hands; many of them with great
address, and many, I believe, with honest zeal. But alas! they cannot
produce such wonderful and certain effects (for observe, that Weishaupt
repeatedly assures us that his means are certain) probably for want of
this *disciplina arcani*, of whose efficacy so much is said. Most
fortunately, Spartacus has given us a brilliant specimen of the ethics
which illuminated himself on a trying occasion, where an ordinary
Christian would have been much perplexed, or would have taken a road
widely different from that of this illustrious apostle of light. And
seeing

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

that several of the Areopagitæ co-operated in the transaction, and that
it was carefully concealed from the profane and dim-sighted world, we
can have no doubt but that it was conducted according to the *disciplina
arcani* of Illumination. I shall give it in his own words.

#### Spartacus to Marius, September 1783.

"I am now in the most embarrassing situation; it robs me of all rest,
and makes me unfit for every thing. I am in danger of losing at once my
honor and my reputation, by which I have long had such influence. What
think you--my sister-in-law is with child. I have sent her to
[Euriphon](errata.htm#3), and am endeavouring to procure a
marriage-licence from Rome. How much depends on this uncertainty--and
there is not a moment to lose. Should I fail, what is to be done? What a
return do I make by this to a person to whom I am so much obliged! (we
shall see the probable meaning of this exclamation by and by.) We have
tried every method in our power to destroy the child; and I hope she is
determined on every thing--even d------. (Can this mean death?) But
alas! Euriphon is, I fear, too timid (alas! poor woman, thou art now
under the *disciplina arcani*) and I see no other expedient. Could I be
but assured of the silence of Celsus (a physician at Ingoldstadt) he
*can* relieve me, and he *promised me as much* three years ago. Do speak
to him, if you think he will be staunch. I would not let Cato (his
dearest friend, and his chief or only confidant in the scheme of
Illumination) know it yet, because the affair in other respects requires
his whole friendship. (Cato had all the pretty receipts.) Could you but
help me out of this distress, you would give me life, honor, and peace,
*and strength to work again in the great cause*. If you cannot, be
assured I will venture on the most desperate stroke (poor sister!) for
it is fixed.--I will not lose my honor. I cannot conceive what devil has
made me to go astray--*me who have always been so careful on such
occasions*. As yet all is quiet, and none know of it but you and
Euriphon. Were it but time to undertake any thing--but alas! it is the
fourth month. These damned priests too--for the action is so criminally
accounted by them, and scandalises the blood. This makes the utmost
efforts and the most desperate measures absolutely necessary."

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

It will throw some light on this transaction if we read a letter from
Spartacus to Cato about this time.

 

"One thing more, my dearest friend--Would it be agreeable to you to have
me for a brother-in-law. If this should be agreeable, and if it can be
brought about without prejudice to my honor, as I hope it may, I am not
without hopes that the connection may take place. But in the mean time
keep it a secret, and only give me permission to enter into
correspondence on the subject with the good lady, to whom I beg you will
offer my respectful compliments, and I will explain myself more fully to
you by word of mouth, and tell you my whole situation. But I repeat
it--the thing must be gone about with address and caution. I would not
for all the world deceive a person who certainly has not deserved so of
me."

 

What interpretation can be put on this? Cato seems to be brother to the
poor woman--he was unwittingly to furnish the drugs, and he was to be
dealt with about consenting to a marriage, which could not be altogether
agreeable to him, since it required a dispensation, she being already
the sister-in-law of Weishaupt, either the sister of his former wife, or
the widow of a deceased brother. Or perhaps Spartacus really wishes to
marry Cato's sister, a different person from the poor woman in the
straw; and he conceals this adventure from his trusty friend Cato, till
he sees what becomes of it. The child may perhaps be got rid of, and
then Spartacus is a free man. There is a letter to Cato, thanking him
for his friendship in the affair of the child--but it gives no light. I
meet with another account, that the sister of Zwack threw herself from
the top of a tower, and beat out her brains. But it is not said that it
was an only sister; if it was, the probability is, that Spartacus had
paid his addresses to her, and succeeded, and that the subsequent affair
of his marriage with his sister-in-law or something worse, broke her
heart. This seems the best account of the matter. For Hertel (Marius)
writes to Zwack in November 1782: "Spartacus is this day gone home, but
has left his sister-in-law pregnant behind (this is from Bassus Hoss.)
About the new year he hopes to be made merry by a------; who will be
before all kings and princes--a young Spartacus.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Pope also will
respect him, and legitimate him before the time."

 

Now, vulgar Christian, compare this with the former declaration of
Weishaupt, in page 80, where he appeals to the tenor of his former life,
which had been so severely scrutinised, without diminishing his high
reputation and great influence, and his ignorance and abhorrence of all
those things found in Cato's repositories. You see this was a
surprise--he had formerly proceeded cautiously.--"He is the best man,"
says Spartacus, "who best conceals his faults."--He was disappointed by
Celsus, *who had promised him his assistance on such occasions* three
years ago, during which time he had been busy in "forming himself." How
far he has advanced, the reader may judge.

 

One is curious to know what became of the poor woman: she was afterwards
taken to the house of Baron Bassus; but here the foolish woman, for want
of that courage which Illumination, and the bright prospect of eternal
sleep should have produced, took fright at the *disciplina arcani*, left
the house, and in the hidden society of a midwife and nurse brought
forth a young Spartacus, who now lives to thank his father for his
endeavours to murder him. A "*damned priest*," the good Bishop of
Freysingen, knowing the cogent reasons, procured the dispensation, and
Spartacus was obliged, like another dim-sighted mortal, to marry her.
The scandal was hushed, and would not have been discovered had it not
been for these private writings.

 

But Spartacus says (page 84) "that when you think him sunk to the
bottom, he will spring up with double vigour." In a subsequent work
called *Short Amendment of my Plan*, he says, "If men were not
habituated to wicked manners, his letters would be their own
justification." He does not say that he is without fault; "but they are
faults of the understanding--not of the heart. He had, first of all, to
form himself; and this is a work of time." In the affair of his
sister-in-law he admits the facts, and the attempts to destroy the
child; "but this is far from proving any depravity of heart. In his
condition, his honor at stake, what else was left him to do? His
greatest enemies, the Jesuits, have taught that in such a case it is
lawful to make away with

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the child," and he quotes authorities from their books. "In the
introductory fault he has the example of the best of men. The second was
its natural consequence, it was altogether involuntary, and, in the eye
of a philosophical judge (I presume of the Gallic School) who does not
square himself by the harsh letters of a *blood-thirsty lawgiver*, he
has but a very trifling account to settle. He had become a public
teacher, and was greatly followed; this example *might have ruined many
young men*. The eyes of the Order also were fixed on him. The edifice
rested on his credit; had he fallen, *he could no longer have been in a
condition to treat the matters of virtue so as to make a lasting
impression*. It was chiefly his anxiety to support the credit of the
Order which determined him to take this step. It makes *for* him, but by
no means *against* him; and the persons who are most in fault are the
slavish inquisitors, who have published the transaction, in order to
make his character more remarkable, and to hurt the Order through his
person; and they have not scrupled, for this hellish purpose, to stir up
a child against its father ! ! !"

 

I make no reflections on this very remarkable, and highly useful story,
but content myself with saying, that this justification by Weishaupt
(which I have been careful to give in his own words) is the greatest
instance of effrontery and insult on the sentiments of mankind that I
have ever met with. We are all supposed as completely corrupted as if we
had lived under the full blaze of Illumination.

 

In other places of this curious correspondence we learn that Minos, and
others of the *Areopagitæ*, wanted to introduce Atheism at once, and not
go hedging in the manner they did; affirming it was easier to show at
once that Atheism was friendly to society, than to explain all their
Masonic Christianity, which they were afterwards to show to be a bundle
of lies. Indeed this purpose, of not only abolishing Christianity, but
all positive religion whatever, was Weishaupt's favorite scheme from the
beginning. Before he canvassed for his Order, in 1774, he published a
fictitious antique, which he called *Sidonii Apollinaris Fragmenta*, to
prepare (as he expressly says in another place) [men's](errata.htm#4)
minds for the doctrines of Reason, which contains all the detestable
doctrines of Robinet's *Systeme de la Nature*. The

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

publication of the second part was stopped. Weishaupt says, in his
APOLOGY FOR THE ILLUMINATI, that before 1780 he had retracted his
opinions about Materialism, and about the inexpediency of Princes. But
this is false: Philo says expressly, that every thing remained on its
original footing in the whole practice and dogmas of the Order when he
quitted it in July 1784. All this was concealed, and a even the
abominable Masonry, in the account of the Order which Weishaupt
published at Regensburg; and it required the constant efforts of Philo
to prevent bare or flat Atheism from being uniformly taught in their
degrees. He had told the council that Zeno would not be under a roof
with a man who denied the immortality of the soul. He complains of
Minos's cramming irreligion down their throats in every meeting, and
says, that he frightened many from entering the Order. "Truth," says
Philo, "is a clever, but a modest girl, who must be led by the hand like
a gentlewoman, but not kicked about like a whore." Spartacus complains
much of the squeamishness of Philo; yet Philo is not a great deal behind
him in irreligion. When describing to Cato the Christianity of the
Priest-degree, as he had manufactured it, he says, "It is all one
whether it be true or false, we must have it, that we may tickle those
who have a hankering for religion." All the odds seems to be, that he
was of a gentler disposition, and had more deference even for the absurd
prejudices of others. In one of his angry letters to Cato he says; "The
vanity and self conceit of Spartacus would have got the better of all
prudence, had I not checked him, and prevailed on the *Areopagitæ* but
to defer the developement of the bold principles till we had firmly
secured the man. I even wished to entice the candidate the more by
giving him back all his former bonds of secrecy, and leaving him at
liberty to walk out without fear; and I am certain that they were, by
this time, so engaged that we should not have lost one man. But
Spartacus had composed an exhibition of his last principles, for a
discourse of reception, in which he painted his three favorite
mysterious degrees, which were to be conferred by him alone, in colours
which had fascinated his own fancy. But they were the colours of hell,
and would have scared the most intrepid; and because I represented the
danger of this, and by force obtained the omission of this picture, he
became my implacable enemy. I

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

abhor treachery and profligacy, and leave him to blow himself and his
Order in the air."

 

Accordingly this happened. It was this which terrified one of the four
professors, and made him impart his doubts to the rest. Yet Spartacus
seems to have profited by the apprehensions of Philo; for in the last
reception, he, for the first time, exacts a bond from the intrant,
engaging himself for ever to the Order, and swearing that he will never
draw back. Thus admitted, he becomes a sure card. The course of his life
is in the hands of the Order, and his thoughts on a thousand dangerous
points; his reports concerning his neighbours and friends; in short, his
honor and his neck. The Deist, thus led on, has not far to go before he
becomes a Naturalist or Atheist; and then the eternal sleep of death
crowns all his humble hopes.

 

Before giving an account of the higher degrees, I shall just extract
from one letter more on a singular subject.

#### Minos to Sebastian, 1782.

"The proposal of Hercules to establish a Minerval school for girls is
excellent, but requires much circumspection. Philo and I have long
conversed on this subject. We cannot improve the world without improving
women, who have such a mighty influence on the men. But how shall we get
hold of them? How will their relations, particularly their mothers,
immersed in prejudices, consent that others shall influence their
education? We must begin with grown girls. Hercules proposes the wife of
Ptolemy Magus. I have no objection; and I have four step-daughters, fine
girls. The oldest in particular is excellent. She is twenty-four, has
read much, is above all prejudices, and in religion she thinks as I do.
They have much acquaintance among the young ladies their relations (N.
B. we don't know the rank of Minos, but as he does not use the word
*Damen*, but *Frauenzimmer*, it is probable that it is not high.) It may
immediately be a very pretty Society, under the management of Ptolemy's
wife, but really under *his* management. You must contrive pretty
degrees, and dresses, and ornaments, and elegant and decent rituals. No
man must be admitted. This will make them become more keen, and they
will go much farther than

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

if we were present, or than if they thought that we knew of their
proceedings. Leave them to the scope of their own fancies, and they will
soon invent mysteries which will put us to the blush, and create an
enthusiasm which we can never equal. They will be our great apostles.
Reflect on the respect, nay the awe and terror inspired by the female
mystics of antiquity. (Think of the Danaids--think of the Theban
*Bacchantes*.) Ptolemy's wife must direct them, and she will be
instructed by Ptolemy, and my step-daughters will consult with me. We
must always be at hand to prevent the introduction of any improper
question. We must prepare themes for their discussion--thus we shall
confess them, and inspire them with our sentiments. No man however must
come near them. This will fire their roving fancies, and we may expect
rare mysteries. But I am doubtful whether this Association will be
durable. Women are fickle and impatient. Nothing will please them but
hurrying from degree to degree, through a heap of insignificant
ceremonies, which will soon lose their novelty and influence. To rest
seriously in one rank, and to be still and silent when they have found
out that the whole is a cheat (hear the words of an experienced Mason)
is a task of which they are incapable. They have not our motives to
persevere for years, allowing themselves to be led about, and even then
to hold their tongues when they find that they have been deceived. Nay
there is a risk that they may take it into their heads to give things an
opposite turn, and then, by voluptuous allurements, heightened by
affected modesty and decency, which give them an irresistible empire
over the best men, they may turn our Order upside down, and in their
turn will lead the new one."

 

Such is the information which may be got from the private
correspondence. It is needless to make more extracts of every kind of
vice and trick. I have taken such as show a little of the plan of the
Order, as far as the degree of *Illuminatus Minor*, and the vile
purposes which are concealed under all their specious declamation. A
very minute account is given of the plan, the ritual, ceremonies, &c.
and even the instructions and discourses, in a book called the *Achte
Illuminat*, published at *Edessa* (Frankfurt) in 1787. Philo says, "that
this is quite accurate, but that he does not know the author." I proceed
to give an account

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

of their higher degrees, as they are to be seen in the book called
*Neueste Arbeitung des Spartacus and Philo*. And the authenticity of the
accounts is attested by Grollman, a private gentleman of independent
fortune, who read them, signed and sealed by Spartacus and the
Areopagitæ.

The series of ranks and progress of the pupil were arranged as follows:

<span id="img_10100"></span> ![](img/10100.jpg)

The Reader must be almost sick of so much villany, and would be
disgusted with the minute detail, in which the cant of the Order is
ringing continually in his ears. I shall therefore only give such a
short extract as may fix our notions of the object of the Order, and the
morality of the means employed for attaining it. We need not go back to
the lower degrees, and shall begin with the *ILLUMINATUS DIRIGENS*, or
SCOTCH KNIGHT.

 

After a short introduction, teaching us how the holy secret Chapter of
Scotch Knights is assembled, we have, I. Fuller accounts and
instructions relating to the whole. II. Instructions for the lower
classes of Masonry. III. Instructions relating to Mason Lodges in
general. IV. Account of a reception into this degree, with the bond
which each subscribes before he can be admitted. V. Concerning the
solemn Chapter for reception. VI. Opening of the Chapter. VII. Ritual of
Reception, and the Oath. VIII. Shutting of

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the Chapter. IX. *Agapé*, or Love Feast. X. Ceremonies of the
consecration of the Chapter. Appendix A, Explanation of the Symbols of
Free Masonry. B, Catechism for the Scotch Knight. C, Secret Cypher.

 

In No. I. it is said that the "chief study of the Scotch Knight is to
work on all men in such a way as is most insinuating. II. He must
endeavour to acquire the possession of considerable property. III. In
all Mason Lodges we must try secretly to get the upper hand. The Masons
do not know what Free Masonry is, their high objects, nor their highest
Superiors, and should be directed by those who will lead them along the
right road. In preparing a candidate for the degree of Scotch
Knighthood, we must bring him into dilemmas by catching questions.--We
must endeavour to get the disposal of the money of the Lodges of the
Free Masons, or at least take care that it be applied to purposes
favorable to our Order--but this must be done in a way that shall not be
remarked. Above all, we must push forward with all our skill, the plan
of Eclectic Masonry, and for this purpose follow up the circular letter
already sent to all the Lodges with every thing that can increase their
present embarrassment." In the bond of No. IV. the candidate binds
himself to "consider and treat the Illuminati as the Superiors of Free
Masonry, and endeavour in all the Mason Lodges which he frequents, to
have the Masonry of the Illuminated, and particularly the Scotch
Noviciate, introduced into the Lodge." (This is not very different from
the Masonry of the *Chevalier de l’Aigle* of the Rosaic Masonry, making
the Master's degree a sort of commemoration of the passion, but without
giving that character to Christianity which is peculiar to
Illuminatism.) Jesus Christ is represented as the enemy of superstitious
observances, and the assertor of the Empire of Reason and of Brotherly
love, and his death and memory as dear to mankind. This evidently paves
the way for Weishaupt's Christianity. The Scotch Knight also engages "to
consider the Superiors of the Order as the unknown Superiors of Free
Masonry, and to contribute all he can to their gradual union." In the
Oath, No. VII. the candidate says, "I will never more be a flatterer of
the great, I will never be a lowly servant of princes; but I will strive
with spirit, and with address, for virtue, wisdom, and liberty. I will
powerfully oppose superstition,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

slander, and despotism; so, that like a true son of the Order, I may
serve the world. I will never sacrifice the general good, and the
happiness of the world, to my private interest. I will boldly defend my
Brother against slander, will follow out the traces of the pure and true
Religion pointed out to me in my instructions, and in the doctrines of
Masonry; and will faithfully report to my Superiors the progress I make
therein."

 

When he gets the stroke which dubs him a Knight, the Preses says to him,
"Now prove thyself, by thy ability, equal to Kings, and never from this
time forward bow thy knee to one who is, like thyself, but a man."

 

No. IX is an account of the Love-Feast.

 

1*st*, There is a Table Lodge, opened as usual, but in virtue of the
ancient Master-word. Then it is said, "Let moderation, fortitude,
morality, and genuine love of the Brethren, with the overflowing of
innocent and careless mirth reign here." (This is almost verbatim from
Toland.)

2*d*, In the middle of a bye-table is a chalice, a pot of wine, an empty
plate, and a plate of unleavened bread--All is covered with a green
cloth.

 

3*d*, When the Table Lodge is ended, and the Prefect sees no obstacle,
he strikes on this bye-table the stroke of Scotch Master, and his signal
is repeated by the Senior Warden. All are still and silent. The Prefect
lifts off the cloth.

 

4*th*, The Prefect asks, whether the Knights are in the disposition to
partake of the Love-Feast in earnest, peace, and contentment. If none
hesitates, or offers to retire, he takes the plate with the bread and
says,

 

"J. of N. our Grand-Master, in the night in which he was betrayed by his
friends, persecuted for his love for truth, imprisoned, and condemned to
die, assembled his trusty Brethren, to celebrate his last
Love-Feast--which is signified to us in many ways. He took bread (taking
it) and broke it (breaking it) and blessed it, and gave it to his
disciples, &c.--This shall be the mark of our Holy Union, &c. Let each
of you examine his heart, whether

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

love reigns in it, and whether he, in full imitation of our
Grand-Master, is ready to lay down his life for his Brethren.

 

"Thanks be to our Grand-Master, who has appointed this feast as a
memorial of his kindness, for the uniting of the hearts of those who
love him.--Go in peace, and blessed be this new Association which we
have formed.--Blessed be ye who remain loyal and strive for the good
cause."

 

5*th*, The Prefect immediately closes the Chapter with the usual
ceremonies of the *Loge de Table*.

 

6*t*h, It is to be observed, that no priest of the Order must be present
at this Love-Feast, and that even the Brother Servitor quits the Lodge.

 

I must observe here, that Philo, the manufacturer of this ritual, has
done it very injudiciously; it has no resemblance whatever to the
Love-Feast of the primitive Christians, and is merely a copy of a
similar thing in one of the steps of French Masonry. Philo's reading in
church-history was probably very scanty, or he trusted that the
candidates would not be very nice in their examination of it, and he
imagined that it would do well enough, and "tickle such as had a
religious hankering." Spartacus disliked it exceedingly--it did not
accord with his serious conceptions, and he justly calls it *Jouer la
Religion*.

 

The discourse of reception is to be found also in the secret
correspondence (*Nachtrag* II. *Abtheilung*, p. 44). But it is needless
to insert it here. I have given the substance of this and of all the
Cosmo-political declamations already in the panegyric introduction to
the account of the process of education. And in Spartacus's letter, and
in Philo's I have given an abstract of the introduction to the
explanation given in this degree of the symbols of Free Masonry. With
respect to the explanation itself, it is as slovenly and wretched as can
be imagined, and shows that Spartacus trusted to much more operative
principles in the human heart for the reception of his nonsense than the
dictates of unbiased reason. None but promising subjects were admitted
thus far--such as would not boggle; and

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

their principles were already sufficiently apparent to assure him that
they would be contented with any thing that made game of religion, and
would be diverted by the seriousness which a chance devotee might
exhibit during these silly caricatures of Christianity and Free Masonry.
But there is considerable address in the way that Spartacus prepares his
pupils for having all this mummery shown in its true colours, and
overturned.

 

"Examine, read, think on these symbols. There are many things which one
cannot find out without a guide nor even learn without instructions.
They require study and zeal. Should you in any future period think that
you have conceived a clearer notion of them, that you have found a paved
road, declare your discoveries to your Superiors; it is thus that you
improve your mind; they expect this of you; they know the true path--but
will not point it out--enough if they assist you in every approach to
it, and warn you when you recede from it. They have even put things in
your way to try your powers of leading yourself through the difficult
track of discovery. In this process the weak head finds only child's
play--the initiated finds objects of thought which language cannot
express, and the thinking mind finds food for his faculties." By such
forewarnings as these Weishaupt leaves room for any deviation, for any
sentiment or opinion of the individual that he may afterwards choose to
encourage, and "to whisper in their ear (as he expresses it) many things
which he did not find it prudent to insert in a printed compend."

 

But all the principles and aim of Spartacus and of his Order are most
distinctly seen in the third or Mystery Class. I proceed therefore to
give some account of it. By the Table it appears to have two degrees,
the Lesser and the Greater Mysteries, each of which have two
departments, one relating chiefly to Religion and the other to Politics.

 

The Priest's degree contains, 1. An Introduction. 2. Further Accounts of
the Reception into this degree. 3. What is called Instruction in the
Third Chamber, which the candidate must read over. 4. The Ritual of
Reception. 5. Instruction for the First Degree of the Priest's Class,
called

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Instructio in
Scientificis*. 6. Account of the Consecration of a Dean, the Superior of
this Lower Order of Priests.

 

The Regent degree contains, 1. Directions to the Provincial concerning
the dispensation of this degree. 2. Ritual of Reception. 3. System of
Direction for the whole Order. 4. Instruction for the whole Regent
degree. 5. Instruction for the Prefects or Local Superiors. 6.
Instruction for the Provincials.

 

The most remarkable thing in the Priest's degree is the Instruction in
the Third Chamber. It is to be found in the private correspondence.
(*Nachtrage Original Schriften* 1787, 2nd *Abtheilung*, page 44.) There
it has the title *Discourse to the Illuminati Dirigentes*, or Scotch
Knights. In the critical history, which is annexed to the *Neueste
Arbeitung*, there is an account given of the reason for this
denomination; and notice is taken of some differences between the
instructions here contained and that discourse.

 

This instruction begins with sore complaints of the low condition of the
human race; and the causes are deduced from religion and
state-government. "Men originally led a patriarchal life, in which every
father of a family was the sole lord of his house and his property,
while he himself possessed general freedom and [equality](errata.htm#5).
But they suffered themselves to be oppressed--gave themselves up to
civil societies, and formed states. Even by this they fell; and this is
the fall of man, by which they were thrust into unspeakable misery. To
get out of this state, to be freed and born again, there is no other
mean than the use of pure Reason, by which a general morality may be
established, which will put man in a condition to govern himself, regain
his original worth, and dispense with all political supports, and
particularly with rulers. This can be done in no other way but by secret
associations, which will by degrees, and in silence, possess themselves
of the government of the States, and make use of those means for this
purpose which the wicked use for attaining their base ends. Princes and
Priests are in particular, and *kat’ exochen*, the wicked, whose hands
must tie up by means of these associations, if we cannot root them out
altogether.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

"Kings are parents. The paternal power ceases with the incapacity of the
child; and the father injures his child, if he pretends to retain his
right beyond this period. When a nation comes of age, their state of
wardship is at an end."

 

Here follows a long declamation against patriotism, as a narrow-minded
principle when compared with true Cosmo-politism. Nobles are represented
as "a race of men that serve not the nation but the Prince, whom a hint
from the Sovereign stirs up against the nation, who are retained
servants and ministers of despotism, and the mean for oppressing
national liberty. Kings are accused of a tacit convention, under the
flattering appellation of the balance of power, to keep nations in
subjection.

 

"The mean to regain Reason her rights--to raise liberty from its
ashes--to restore to man his original rights--to produce the previous
revolution in the mind of man--to obtain an eternal victory over
oppressors--and to work the redemption of mankind, is secret schools of
wisdom. When the worthy have strengthened their association by numbers,
they are secure, and then they begin to become powerful, and terrible to
the wicked, of whom many will, for safety, amend themselves--many will
come over to our party, and we shall bind the hands of the rest, and
finally conquer them. Whoever spreads general illumination augments
mutual security; illumination and security make princes
[unnecessary](errata.htm#6); illumination performs this by creating an
effective Morality, and Morality makes a nation of full age fit to
govern itself; and since it is not impossible to produce a just
Morality, it is possible to regain freedom for the world."

 

"We must therefore strengthen our band, and establish a legion, which
shall restore the rights of man, original liberty and independence.

 

"Jesus Christ"--but I am sick of all this. The following questions are
put to the candidate:

 

1\. "Are our civil conditions in the world the destinations that seem to
be the end of our nature, or the purposes for which man was placed on
this earth, or are they not? Do

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

states, civil obligations, popular religion, fulfill the intentions of
men who established them? Do secret associations promote instruction and
true human happiness, or are they the children of necessity, of the
multifarious wants, of unnatural conditions, or the inventions of vain
and cunning men?"

 

2\. "What civil association, what science do you think to the purpose,
and what are not?"

 

3\. "Has there ever been any other in the world, is there no other more
simple condition, and what do you think of it?"

 

4\. "Does it appear possible, after having gone through all the
nonentities of our civil constitutions, to recover for once our first
simplicity, and get back to this honorable uniformity?"

 

5\. "How can one begin this noble attempt; by means of open support, by
forcible revolution, or by what other way?"

 

6\. "Does Christianity give us any hint to this purpose? does it not
recognize such a blessed condition as once the lot of man, and as still
recoverable?"

 

7\. "But is this holy religion the religion that is now professed by any
sect on earth, or is it a better?"

 

8\. "Can we learn this religion--can the world, as it is, bear the
light? Do you think that it would be of service, before numerous
obstacles are removed, if we taught men this purified religion, sublime
philosophy, and the art of governing themselves? Or would not this hurt,
by rousing the interested passions of men habituated to prejudices, who
would oppose this as wicked?"

 

9\. "May it not be more advisable to do away these corruptions bit by
bit, in silence, and for this purpose to propagate these salutary and
heart-consoling doctrines in secret?"

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

10\. "Do we not perceive traces of such a secret doctrine in the ancient
schools of philosophy, in the doctrines and instructions of the Bible,
which Christ, the Redeemer and Liberator of the human race, gave to his
trusty disciples? Do you not observe an education, proceeding by steps
of this kind, handed down to us from his time till the present?"

 

In the ceremonial of Reception, crowns and sceptres are represented as
tokens of human degradation. "The plan of operation, by which our higher
degrees act, must work powerfully on the world, and must give another
turn to all our present constitutions."

 

Many other questions are put to the pupil during his preparation, and
his answers are given in writing. Some of these rescripts are to be
found in the secret correspondence. Thus, "How far is the position true,
that all those means may be used for a good purpose which the wicked
have employed for a bad?" And along with this question there is an
injunction to take counsel from the opinions and conduct of the learned
and worthy out of the society. In one of the answers, the example of a
great philosopher and Cosmo-polite is adduced, who betrayed a private
correspondence entrusted to him, for the service of freedom; the case
was Dr. Franklin's. In another, the power of the Order was extended to
the putting the individual to death; and the reason given, was, that
"this power was allowed to all Sovereignties, for the good of the State,
and therefore belonged to the Order, which was to govern the
world."--"N. B. We must acquire the direction of education--of
church-management--of the professorial chair, and of the pulpit. We must
bring our opinions into fashion by every art--spread them among the
people by the help of young writers. We must preach the warmest concern
for humanity, and make people indifferent to all other relations. We
must take care that our writers be well puffed, and that the Reviewers
do not depreciate them; therefore we must endeavour by every mean to
gain over the Reviewers and Journalists; and we must also try to gain
the booksellers, who in time will see that it is their interest to side
with us."

 

I conclude this account of the degree of Presbyter with remarking, that
there were two copies of it employed occasionally.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

In one of them all the most offensive things in respect of church and
state were left out.

 

In the Regent degree, the proceedings and instructions are conducted in
the same manner. Here, it is said, "We must as much as possible select
for this degree persons who are free, independent of all princes;
particularly such as have frequently declared themselves discontented
with the usual institutions, and their wishes to see a better government
established."

 

Catching questions are put to the candidate for this degree; such as,

 

1\. "Would the Society be objectionable which should (till the greater
revolution of nature should be ripe) put monarchs and rulers out of the
condition to do harm; which in silence prevents the abuse of power, by
surrounding the great with its members, and thus not only prevents their
doing mischief, but even makes them do good?"

 

2\. "Is not the objection unjust, That such a Society may abuse its
power. Do not our rulers frequently abuse their power, though we are
silent? This power is not so secure as in the hands of our Members, whom
we train up with so much care, and place about princes after mature
deliberation and choice. If any government can be harmless which is
erected by man, surely it must be ours, which is founded on morality,
fore-sight, talents, liberty, and virtue," &c.

 

The candidate is presented for reception in the character of a slave;
and it is demanded of him what has brought him into this most miserable
of all conditions. He answers--Society--the State--Submissiveness--False
Religion. A skeleton is pointed out to him, at the feet of which are
laid a Crown and a Sword. He is asked, whether that is the skeleton of a
King, a Nobleman, or a Beggar? As he cannot decide, the President of the
meeting says to him, "the character of being a Man is the only one that
is of importance."

 

In a long declamation on the hackneyed topics, we have

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

here and there some thoughts which have not yet come before us.

 

"We must allow the underlings to imagine (but without telling them the
truth) that we direct all the Free Mason Lodges, and even all other
Orders, and that the greatest monarchs are under our guidance, which
indeed is here and there the case.

 

"There is no way of influencing men so powerfully as by means of the
women. These should therefore be our chief study; we should insinuate
ourselves into their good opinion, give them hints of emancipation from
the tyranny of public opinion, and of standing up for themselves; it
will be an immense relief to their enslaved minds to be freed from any
one bond of restraint, and it will fire them the more, and cause them to
work for us with zeal, without knowing that they do so; for they will
only be indulging their own desire of personal admiration.

 

"We must win the common people in every corner. This will be obtained
chiefly by means of the schools, and by open, hearty behaviour, show,
condescension, popularity, and toleration of their prejudices, which we
shall at leisure root out and dispel.

 

"If a writer publishes any thing that attracts notice, and is in itself
just, but does not accord with our plan, we must endeavour to win him
over, or decry him.

 

"A chief object of our care must be to keep down that slavish veneration
for princes which so much disgraces all nations. Even in the
*soi-disant* free England, the silly Monarch says, We are graciously
pleased, and the more simple people say, Amen. These men, commonly very
weak heads, are only the farther corrupted by this servile flattery. But
let us at once give an example of our spirit by our behaviour with
Princes; we must avoid all familiarity--never entrust ourselves to
them--behave with precision, but with civility, as to other men--speak
of them on an equal footing--this will in time teach them that they are
by nature men, if they have sense and spirit, and that only by
convention they are Lords. We must assiduously collect anecdotes, and

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the honorable and mean actions, both of the least and the greatest, and
when their names occur in any records which are read in our meetings,
let them ever be accompanied by these marks of their real worth.

 

"The great strength of our Order lies in its concealment; let it never
appear in any place in its own name, but always covered by another name,
and another occupation. *None is fitter than the three lower degrees of
Free Masonry; the public is accustomed to it, expects little from it,
and therefore takes little notice of it*. Next to this, the form of a
learned or literary society is best suited to our purpose, and had Free
Masonry not existed, this cover would have been employed; and it may be
much more than a cover, *it may be a powerful engine in our hands. By
establishing reading societies, and subscription libraries, and taking
these under our direction, and supplying them through our labours, we
may turn the public mind which way we will*.

 

In like manner we must try to obtain an influence in the military
academies (this may be of mighty consequence) the printing-houses,
booksellers shops, chapters, and in short in all offices which have any
effect, either in forming, or in managing, or even in directing the mind
of man: painting and engraving are highly worth our care." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

 

"Could our Prefect (observe it is to the *Illuminati Regentes* he is
speaking, whose officers are *Prefecti*) fill the judicatories of a
state with our worthy members, he does all that man can do for the
Order. It is better than to gain the Prince himself. Princes should
never get beyond the Scotch knighthood. They either never prosecute any
thing, or they twist every thing to their own advantage.

 

"A Literary Society is the most proper form for the introduction of our
Order into any state where we are yet strangers." (Mark this!)

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

"The power of the Order must surely be turned to the advantage of its
Members. All must be assisted. They must be preferred to all persons
otherwise of equal merit. Money, services, honor, goods, and blood, must
be expended for the fully proved Brethren, and the unfortunate must be
relieved by the funds of the Society."

 

As evidence that this was not only their instructions, but also their
assiduous practice, take the following report from the overseer of
Greece (Bavaria.)

#### In Cato's hand-writing.

"The number (about 600) of Members relates to Bavaria alone.

 

"In Munich there is a well-constituted meeting of *Illuminati Mejores*,
a meeting of excellent *Illuminati Minores*, a respectable Grand Lodge,
and two Minerval Assemblies. There is a Minerval Assembly at Freyssing,
at Landsberg, at Burghausen, at Strasburg, at Ingolstadt, and at last at
Regensburg. <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6)

 

"At Munich we have bought a house, and by clever measures have brought
things so far, that the citizens take no notice of it, and even speak of
us with esteem. We can openly go to the house every day, and carry on
the business of the Lodge. This is a great deal for this city. In the
house is a good museum of natural history, and apparatus for
experiments; also a library which daily increases. The garden is well
occupied by botanic specimens, and the whole has the appearance of a
society of zealous naturalists.

 

"We get all the literary journals. We take care, by well-timed pieces,
to make the citizens and the Princes a little more noticed for certain
little slips. We oppose the monks with all our might, and with great
success.

 

"The Lodge is constituted entirely according to our system, and has
broken off entirely from Berlin, and we have

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

nearly finished our transactions with the Lodges of Poland, and shall
have them under our direction.

 

"By the activity of our Brethren, the Jesuits have been kept out of all
the professorial chairs at Ingolstadt, and our friends prevail."

 

"The Widow Duchess has set up her academy entirely according to our
plan, and we have all the Professors in the Order. Five of them are
excellent, and the pupils will be prepared for us.

 

"We have got Pylades put at the head of the Fisc, and he has the
church-money at his disposal. By properly using this money, we have been
enabled to put our Brother ------'s household in good order; which he
had destroyed by going to the Jews. We have supported more Brethren
under similar misfortunes.

 

"Our Ghostly Brethren have been very fortunate this last year, for we
have procured for them several good benefices, parishes, tutorships, &c.

 

"Through our means Arminius and Cortez have gotten Professorships, and
many of our younger Brethren have obtained Bursaries by our help.

 

"We have been very successful against the Jesuits, and brought things to
such a bearing, that their revenues, such as the Mission, the Golden
Alms, the Exercises, and the Conversion Box, are now under the
management of our friends. So are also their concerns in the university
and the German school foundations. The application of all will be
determined presently, and we have six members and four friends in the
Court. This has cost our senate some nights want of sleep.

 

"Two of our best youths have got journies from the Court, and they will
go to Vienna, where they will do us great service.

 

"All the German Schools, and the Benevolent Society, are at last under
our direction.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

"We have got several zealous members in the courts of justice, and we
are able to afford them pay, and other good additions.

 

"Lately, we have got possession of the Bartholomew Institution for young
clergymen, having secured all its supporters. Through this we shall be
able to supply Bavaria with fit priests.

 

"By a letter from Philo we learn, that one of the highest dignities in
the church was obtained for a zealous Illuminatus, in opposition even to
the authority and right of the Bishop of Spire, who is represented as a
bigotted and tyrannical priest."

 

Such were the lesser mysteries of the Illuminati. But there remain the
higher mysteries. The system of these has not been printed, and the
degrees were conferred only by Spartacus himself, from papers which he
never entrusted to any person. They were only read to the candidate, but
no copy was taken. The publisher of the *Neueste Arbeitung* says that he
has read them (so says Grollman.) He says, "that in the first degree of
MAGUS or PHILOSOPHUS, the doctrines are the same with those of Spinoza,
where all is material, God and the world are the same thing, and all
religion whatever is without foundation, and the contrivance of
ambitious men." The second degree, or REX, teaches, "that every peasant,
citizen, and householder is a sovereign, as in the Patriarchal state,
and that nations must be brought back to that state, by whatever means
are conducible--peaceably, if it can be done; but, if not, then by
force--for all subordination must vanish from the face of the earth."

 

The author says further, that the German Union was, to his certain
knowledge, the work of the Illuminati.

 

The private correspondence that has been published is by no means the
whole of what was discovered at Landshut and Bassus Hoff, and government
got a great deal of useful information, which was concealed, both out of
regard to the families of the persons concerned, and also that the

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

rest might not know the utmost extent of the discovery, and be less on
their guard. A third collection was found under the foundation of the
house in which the Lodge *Theodor von guten Rath* had been held. But
none of this has appeared. Enough surely has been discovered to give the
public a very just idea of the designs of the Society and its
connections.

 

Lodges were discovered, and are mentioned in the private papers already
published, in the following places.

|                        |                      |
|------------------------|----------------------|
| Munich                 | Hesse (many)         |
| Ingolstadt             | Buchenwerter         |
| Frankfort              | Monpeliard           |
| Echstadt               | Stutgard (3)         |
| Hanover                | Carlsruhe            |
| Brunswick              | Anspach              |
| Calbe                  | Neuwied (2)          |
| Magdenburgh            | Mentz (2)            |
| Cassel                 | Poland (many)        |
| Osnabruck              | Turin                |
| Weimar                 | England (8)          |
| Upper Saxony (several) | Scotland (2)         |
| Austria (14)           | Warsaw (2)           |
| Westphalia (several)   | Deuxponts            |
| Heidelberg             | Cousel               |
| Mannheim               | Treves (2)           |
| Strasburgh (5)         | Aix-la-Chappelle (2) |
| Spire                  | Bartschied           |
| Worms                  | Hahrenberg           |
| Dusseldorf             | Switzerland (many)   |
| Cologne                | Rome                 |
| Bonn (4)               | Naples               |
| Livonia (many)         | Ancona               |
| Courland (many)        | Florence             |
| Frankendahl            | France               |
| Alsace (many)          | Halland (many)       |
| Vienna (4)             | Dresden (4)          |

America (several). N. B. This was before 1786.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

I have picked up the names of the following members.

|                                   |                                     |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Spartacus                         | Weishaupt, Professor.               |
| Philo,                            | Knigge, Freyherr, *i.e.* Gentleman. |
| Amelius,                          | Bode, F. H.                         |
| Bayard,                           | Busche, F. H.                       |
| Diomedes,                         | Constanza, Marq.                    |
| Cato,                             | Zwack, Lawyer.                      |
|                                   | Torring, Count.                     |
|                                   | Kreitmaier, Prince.                 |
|                                   | Utschneider, Professor.             |
|                                   | Cossandey, Professor.               |
|                                   | Renner, Professor.                  |
|                                   | Grunberger, Professor.              |
|                                   | Balderbusch, F. H.                  |
|                                   | Lippert, Counsellor.                |
|                                   | Kundl, ditto.                       |
|                                   | Bart, ditto.                        |
|                                   | Leiberhauer, Priest.                |
|                                   | Kundler, Professor.                 |
|                                   | Lowling, Professor.                 |
|                                   | Vachency, Councellor.               |
|                                   | Morausky, Count.                    |
|                                   | Hoffstetter, Surveyor of Roads.     |
|                                   | Strobl, Bookseller.                 |
| Pythagoras,                       | Westenrieder, Professor.            |
|                                   | Babo, Professor.                    |
|                                   | Baader, Professor.                  |
|                                   | Burzes, Priest.                     |
|                                   | Pfruntz, Priest.                    |
| Hannibal,                         | Bassus, Baron.                      |
| Brutus,                           | Savioli, Count.                     |
| Lucian,                           | Nicholai, Bookseller.               |
|                                   | Bahrdt, Clergyman.                  |
| Zoroaster, Confucius,             | Baierhamer.                         |
| Hermes Trismegistus,              | Socher, School Inspector.           |
|                                   | Dillis, Abbé.                       |
| Sulla,                            | Meggenhoff, Paymaster.              |
|                                   | Danzer, Canon.                      |
|                                   | Braun, ditto.                       |
|                                   | Fischer, Magistrate.                |
| <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> |                                     |
|                                   | Frauenberger, Baron.                |
|                                   | Kaltner, Lieutenant.                |
| Pythagoras,                       | Drexl, Librarian.                   |
| Marius,                           | Hertel, Canon.                      |
|                                   | Dachsel.                            |
|                                   | Dilling, Counsellor.                |
|                                   | Seefeld, Count.                     |
|                                   | Gunsheim, ditto.                    |
|                                   | Morgellan, ditto.                   |
| Saladin,                          | Ecker, ditto.                       |
|                                   | Ow, Major.                          |
|                                   | Werner, Counsellor.                 |
| Cornelius Scipio,                 | Berger, ditto.                      |
|                                   | Wortz, Apothecary.                  |
|                                   | Mauvillon, Colonel.                 |
|                                   | Mirabeau, Count.                    |
|                                   | Orleans, Duke.                      |
|                                   | Hochinaer.                          |
| Tycho Brahe,                      | Gaspar, Merchant.                   |
| Thales,                           | Kapfinger.                          |
| Attila,                           | Sauer.                              |
| Ludovicus Bavarus,                | Losi.                               |
| Shaftesbury,                      | Steger.                             |
| Coriolanus,                       | Tropponero, Zuschwartz.             |
| Timon,                            | Michel.                             |
| Tamerlane,                        | Lange.                              |
| Livius,                           | Badorffer.                          |
| Cicero,                           | Pfelt.                              |
| Ajax,                             | Massenhausen, Count.                |

 

I have not been able to find who personated Minos, Euriphon, Celsius,
Mahomet, Hercules, Socrates, Philippo Strozzi, Euclides, and some others
who have been uncommonly active in carrying forward the great cause.

 

The chief publications for giving us regular accounts of the whole
(besides the original writings) are,

1\. *Grosse Absicht des Illuminaten Ordens*.

2\. -------- *Nachtrages* (*3*.) *an denselben*.

3\. *Weishaupt's improved System*.

4\. *System des Ilium. Ordens aus dem Original-Schriften gezogen*.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

I may now be permitted to make a few reflections on the accounts already
given of this Order, which has so distinctly concentrated the casual and
scattered efforts of its prompters, the *Chevaliers Bienfaisants*, the
*Philalèthes*, and *Amis Réunis* of France, and carried on the system of
enlightening and reforming the world.

 

The great aim professed by the Order is to *make men happy;* and the
means professed to be employed, as the only and surely effective, is
*making them good;* and this is to be brought about by *enlightening the
mind*, and *freeing it from the dominion of superstition and
prejudices*. This purpose is effected by its *producing a just and
steady morality*. This done, and becoming universal, there can be little
doubt but that the peace of society will be the consequence--that
government, subordination, and all the disagreeable coercions of civil
governments will be unnecessary--and that society may go on peaceably in
a state of perfect liberty and equality.

 

But surely it requires no angel from heaven to tell us that if every man
is virtuous, there will be no vice; and that there will be peace on
earth, and good will between man and man, whatever be the differences of
rank and fortune; so that Liberty and Equality seem not to be the
necessary consequences of this just Morality, nor necessary requisites
for this national happiness. We may question, therefore, whether the
Illumination which makes this a necessary condition is a clear and a
pure light. It may be a false glare, showing the object only on one
side, tinged with partial colours thrown on it by neighbouring objects.
We see so much wisdom in the general plans of nature, that we are apt to
think that there is the same in what relates to the human mind, and that
the God of nature accomplishes his plans in this as well as in other
instances. We are even disposed to think that human nature would suffer
by it. The rational nature of man is not contented with meat and drink,
and raiment, and shelter, but is also pleased with exerting many powers
and faculties, and with gratifying many tastes, which could hardly have
any existence in a society where all are equal. We say that there can be
no doubt that the pleasure arising from the contemplation of the works
of art--the pleasure of intellectual

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

cultivation, the pleasure of mere ornament, are rational, distinguish
man from a brute, and are so general, that there is hardly a mind so
rude as not to feel them. Of all these, and of all the difficult
sciences, all most rational, and in themselves most innocent, and most
delightful to a cultivated mind, we should be deprived in a society
where all are equal. No individual could give employment to the talents
necessary for creating and improving these ornamental comforts of life.
We are absolutely certain that, even in the most favorable situations on
the face of the earth, the most untainted virtue in every breast could
not raise man to that degree of cultivation that is possessed by
citizens very low in any of the states of Europe; and in the situation
of most countries we are acquainted with, the state of man would be much
lower: for, at our very setting out, we must grant that the liberty and
equality here spoken of must be complete; for there must not be such a
thing as a farmer and his cottager. This would be as unjust, as much the
cause of discontent, as the gentleman and the farmer.

 

This scheme therefore seems contrary to the designs of our Creator, who
has every where placed us in these situations of inequality that are
here so much scouted, and has given us strong propensities by which we
relish these enjoyments. We also find that they may be enjoyed in peace
and innocence. And lastly, We imagine that the villain, who, in the
station of a professor, would plunder a Prince, would also plunder the
farmer if he were his cottager. The illumination therefore that appears
to have the best chance of making mankind happy, is that which will
teach us the Morality which will respect the comforts of cultivated
Society, and teach us to protect the possessors in the innocent
enjoyment of them; that will enable us to perceive and admire the taste
and elegance of Architecture and Gardening, without any wish to sweep
the gardens and their owner from off the earth, merely because he is
their owner.

 

We are therefore suspicious of this Illumination, and apt to ascribe
this violent antipathy to Princes and subordination to the very cause
that makes true Illumination, and just Morality proceeding from it, so
necessary to public happiness, namely, the vice and injustice of those
who cannot

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

innocently have the command of those offensive elegancies of human life.
Luxurious tastes, keen desires, and unbridled passions, would prompt to
all this, and this Illumination is, as we see, equivalent to them in
effect. The aim of the Order is not to enlighten the mind of man, and
show him his moral obligations, and by the practice of his duties to
make society peaceable, possession secure, and coercion unnecessary, so
that all may be at rest and happy, even though all *were* equal; but to
get rid of the coercion which must be employed in place of Morality,
that the innocent rich may be robbed with impunity by the idle and
profligate poor. But to do this, an unjust casuistry must be employed in
place of a just Morality; and this must be defended or suggested, by
misrepresenting the true state of man, and of his relation to the
universe, and by removing the restrictions of religion, and giving a
superlative value to all those constituents of human enjoyment, which
true Illumination shows us to be but very small concerns of a rational
and virtuous mind. The more closely we examine the principles and
practice of the Illuminati, the more clearly do we perceive that this is
the case. Their first and immediate aim is to get the possession of
riches, power, and influence, without industry; and, to accomplish this,
they want to abolish Christianity; and then dissolute manners and
universal profligacy will procure them the adherence of all the wicked,
and enable them to overturn all the civil governments of Europe; after
which they will think of farther conquests, and extend their operations
to the other quarters of the globe, till they have reduced mankind to
the state of one undistinguishable chaotic mass.

 

But this is too chimerical to be thought their real aim. Their Founder,
I dare say, never entertained such hopes, nor troubled himself with the
fate of distant lands. But it comes in his way when he puts on the mask
of humanity and benevolence: it must embrace all mankind, only because
it must be stronger than patriotism and loyalty, which stand in his way.
Observe that Weishaupt took a name expressive of his principles.
Spartacus was a gladiator, who headed an insurrection of Roman slaves,
and for three years kept the city in terror. Weishaupt says in one of
his letters, "I never was fond of empty titles; but surely that man has
a childish soul who would not as readily chuse the name

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

of Spartacus as that of Octavius Augustus." The names which he gives to
several of his gang express their differences of sentiments. Philo,
Lucian, and others, are very significantly given to Knigge, Nicholai,
&c. He was vain of the name Spartacus, because he considered himself as
employed somewhat in the same way, leading slaves to freedom. Princes
and Priests are mentioned by him on all occasions in terms of
abhorrence.

 

Spartacus employs powerful means. In the style of the Jesuits (as he
says) he considers every mean as consecrated by the end for which it is
employed, and he says with great truth,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo*."

</div>

To save his reputation, he scruples not to murder his innocent child,
and the woman whom he had held in his arms with emotions of fondness and
affection. But lest this should appear too selfish a motive, he says,
"had I fallen, my precious Order would have fallen with me; the Order
which is to bless mankind. I should not again have been able to speak of
virtue so as to make any lasting impression. My example might have
ruined many young men." This he thinks will excuse, nay sanctify any
thing. "My letters are my greatest vindication." He employs the
Christian Religion, which he thinks a falsehood, and which he is
afterwards to explode, as the mean for inviting Christians of every
denomination, and gradually cajoling them, by clearing up their
Christian doubts in succession, till he lands them in Deism; or, if he
finds them unfit, and too religious, he gives them a *Sta bene*, and
then laughs at the fears, or perhaps madness, in which he leaves them.
Having got them this length, they are declared to be fit, and he
receives them into the higher mysteries. But lest they should still
shrink back, dazzled by the Pandemonian glare of Illumination which will
now burst upon them, he exacts from them, for the first time, a bond of
perseverance. But, as Philo says, there is little chance of
tergiversation. The life and honor of most of the candidates are by this
time in his hand. They have been long occupied in the vile and
corrupting office of spies on all around them, and they are found fit
for their present honors, because they have

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

discharged this office to his satisfaction, by the reports which they
have given in, containing stories of their neighbours, nay even of their
own gang. They may be ruined in the world by disclosing these, either
privately or publicly. A man who had once brought himself into this
perilous situation durst not go back. He might have been left indeed in
any degree of Illumination; and, if Religion has not been quite
eradicated from his mind, he must be in that condition of painful
anxiety and doubt that makes him desperate, fit for the full operation
of fanaticism, and he may be engaged *in the cause of God*, "to commit
all kind of wickedness with greediness." In this state of mind, a man
shuts his eyes, and rushes on. Had Spartacus supposed that he was
dealing with good men, his conduct would have been the reverse of all
this. There is no occasion for this bond from a person convinced of the
excellency of the Order. But he knew them to be unprincipled, and that
the higher mysteries were so daring, that even some of such men would
start at them. But they must not blab.

 

Having thus got rid of Religion, Spartacus could with more safety bring
into view the great aim of all his efforts--to rule the world by means
of his Order. As the immediate mean for attaining this, he holds out the
prospect of freedom from civil subordination. Perfect Liberty and
Equality are interwoven with every thing; and the flattering thought is
continually kept up, that "by the wise contrivance of this Order, the
most complete knowledge is obtained of the real worth of every person;
the Order will, *for its own sake*, and therefore *certainly*, place
every man in that situation in which he can be most effective. The
pupils are convinced that the Order *will* rule the world. Every member
therefore becomes a ruler." We all think ourselves qualified to rule.
The difficult task is to obey with propriety; but we are honestly
generous in our prospects of future command. It is therefore an alluring
thought, both to good and bad men. By this lure the Order will spread.
If they are active in insinuating their members into offices, and in
keeping out others (which the private correspondence shows to have been
the case) they may have had frequent experience of their success in
gaining an influence on the world. This must whet their zeal. If
Weishaupt was a sincere Cosmo-polite,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

he had the pleasure of seeing "his work prospering in his hands."

 

It surely needs little argument now to prove, that the Order of
Illuminati had for its immediate object the abolishing of Christianity
(at least this was the intention of the Founder) with the sole view of
overturning the civil government, by introducing universal dissoluteness
and profligacy of manners, and then getting the assistance of the
corrupted subjects to overset the throne. The whole conduct in the
preparation and instruction of the Presbyter and *Regens* is directed to
this point. Philo says, "I have been at unwearied pains to remove the
fears of some who imagine that our Superiors want to abolish
Christianity; but by and by their prejudices will wear off, and they
will be more at their ease. Were I to let them know that our General
holds all Religion to be a lie, and uses even Deism, only to lead men by
the nose.--Were I to connect myself again with the Free Masons, and tell
them our designs to ruin their Fraternity by this circular letter (a
letter to the Lodge in Courland)--Were I but to give the least hint to
any of the Princes of Greece (Bavaria)--No, my anger shall not carry me
so far.--An Order forsooth, which in this manner abuses human
nature--which will subject men to a bondage more intolerable than
Jesuitism.--I could put it on a respectable footing, and the world would
he ours. Should I mention our fundamental principles (even after all the
pains I have been at to mitigate them) so unquestionably dangerous to
the world, who would remain? What signifies the innocent ceremonies of
the Priest's degree, as I have composed it, in comparison with your
maxim, that we may use for a good end those means which the wicked
employ for a base purpose?"

 

Brutus writes, "Numenius now acquiesces in the mortality of the soul;
but, I fear we shall lose Ludovicus Bavarus. He told Spartacus, that he
was mistaken when he thought that he had swallowed his stupid Masonry.
No, he saw the trick, and did not admire the end that required it. I
don't know what to do; a *Sta bene* would make him mad, and he will blow
us all up.

 

"The Order must possess the power of life and death

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

in consequence of our Oath; and with propriety, for the same reason, and
by the same right, that any government in the world possesses it: For
the Order comes in their place, making them unnecessary. When things
cannot be otherwise, and ruin would ensue if the Association did not
employ this mean, the Order must, as well as public rulers, employ it
for the good of mankind; therefore for its own preservation. (N. B.
Observe here the casuistry.) Nor will the political constitutions suffer
by this, for there are always thousands equally ready and able to supply
the place."

 

We need not wonder that Diomedes told the Professors, "that death,
inevitable death, from which no potentate could protect them, awaited
every traitor of the Order;" nor that the French Convention proposed to
take off the German Princes and Generals by sword or poison, &c.

 

Spartacus might tickle the fancy of his Order with the notion of ruling
the world; but I imagine that his darling aim was ruling the Order. The
happiness of mankind was, like Weishaupt's Christianity, a mere tool, a
tool which the *Regentes* made a joke of. But Spartacus would rule the
*Regentes;* this he could not so easily accomplish. His despotism was
insupportable to most of them, and finally brought all to light. When he
could not persuade them by his own firmness, and indeed by his superior
wisdom and disinterestedness in other respects, and his unwearied
activity, he employed jesuitical tricks, causing them to fall out with
each other, setting them as spies on each other, and separating any two
that he saw attached to each other, by making the one a Master of the
other; and, in short, he left nothing undone that could secure his
uncontrouled command. This caused Philo to quit the Order, and made
*Bassus*, *Von Torring*, *Kreitmaier*, and several other gentlemen,
cease attending the meetings; and it was their mutual dissentions which
made them speak too freely in public, and call on themselves so much
notice. At the time of the discovery, the party of Weishaupt consisted
chiefly of very mean people, devoted to him, and willing to execute his
orders, that by being his servants, they might have the pleasure of
commanding others.

 

The objects, the undoubted objects of this Association,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

are surely dangerous and detestable; viz. to overturn the present
constitutions of the European States, in order to introduce a chimera
which the history of mankind shows to be contrary to the nature of man.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Naturam expellas furcâ, tamen usque recurret*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Suppose it
possible, and done in peace, it could not stand, unless every principle
of activity in the human mind be enthralled, all incitement to exertion
and industry removed, and man brought into a condition incapable of
improvement; and this at the expence of every thing that is valued by
the best of men--by misery and devastation--by loosening all the bands
of society. To talk of morality and virtue in conjunction with such
schemes, is an insult to common sense; dissoluteness of manners alone
can bring men to think of it.

 

Is it not astonishing therefore, to hear people in this country express
any regard for this institution? Is it not grieving to the heart to
think that there are Lodges of Illuminated among us? I think that
nothing bids fairer for weaning our inconsiderate countrymen from having
any connection with them, than the faithful account here given. I hope
that there are few, very few of our countrymen, and none whom we call
friend, who can think that an Order which practised such things can be
any thing else than a ruinous Association, a gang of profligates. All
their professions of the love of mankind are vain; nay, their
Illumination must be a bewildering blaze, and totally ineffectual for
its purpose, for it has had no such influence on the leaders of the
band; yet it seems quite adequate to the effects it has produced; for
such are the characters of those who forget God.

 

If we in the next place attend to their mode of education, and examine
it by those rulers of common sense that we apply in other cases of
conduct, we shall find it equally unpromising. The system of
Illuminatism is one of the explanations of Free Masonry; and it has
gained many partisans. These explanations rest their credit and their
preference on their own merits. There is something in themselves, or in
one of them as distinguished from another, which procures it the
preference for its own sake. Therefore,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

to give this Order any dependence on Free Masonry, is to degrade the
Order. To introduce a Masonic Ritual into a manly institution is to
degrade it to a frivolous amusement for great children. Men really
exerting themselves to reform the world, and qualified for the task,
must have been disgusted with such occupations. They betray a frivolous
conception of the talk in which they are really engaged. To imagine that
men engaged in the struggle and rival-ship of life, under the influence
of selfish, or mean, or impetuous passions, are to he wheedled into
candid sentiments, or a generous conduct, as a froward child may
sometimes be made gentle and tractable by a rattle or a humming-top,
betrays a great ignorance of human nature, and an arrogant self-conceit
in those who can imagine that all but themselves are babies. The further
we proceed, the more do we see of this *want of wisdom*. The whole
procedure of their instruction supposes such a complete surrender of
freedom of thought, of common sense, and of common caution, that it
seems impossible that it should not have alarmed every sensible mind.
This indeed happened before the Order was seven years old. It was wise
indeed to keep their *Areopagitæ* out of sight; but who can be so silly
as to believe that their unknown superiors were all and always faultless
men. But had they been the men they were represented to be--if I have
any knowledge of my own heart, or any capacity of drawing just
inferences from the conduct of others, I am persuaded that the knowing
his superiors would have animated the pupil to exertion, that he might
exhibit a pleasing spectacle to such intelligent and worthy judges. Did
not the Stoics profess themselves to be encouraged in the scheme of
life, by the thought that the immortal Gods were looking on and passing
their judgments on their manner of acting the part assigned them? But
what abject spirit will be contented with working, zealously working,
for years, after a plan of which he is *never* to learn the full
meaning. In short, the only knowledge that he can perceive is knowledge
in its worst form, *Cunning*. This must appear in the contrivances by
which he will soon find that he is kept in complete subjection. If he is
a true and zealous Brother, he has put himself in the power of his
Superiors by his rescripts, which they required of him on pretence of
their learning his own character, and of his learning how to know the
characters of other men. In these rescripts

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

they have got his thoughts on many delicate points, and on the conduct
of others. His Directors may ruin him by betraying him: and this without
being seen in it. I should think that wise men would know that none but
weak or bad men would subject themselves to such a task. They exclude
the good, the manly, the only fit persons for assisting them in their
endeavours to inform and to rule the world. Indeed I may say that this
exclusion is almost made already by connecting the Order with Free
Masonry. Lodges are not the resorts of such men. They may sometimes be
found there for an hour's relaxation. But these places are the haunts of
the young, the thoughtless, the idle, the weak, the vain, or of
designing Literati; and accordingly this is the condition of
three-fourths of the Illuminati whose names are known to the public. I
own that the reasons given to the pupil for prescribing these tasks are
clever, and well adapted to produce their effect. During the flurry of
reception, and the glow of expectation, the danger may not be suspected;
but I hardly imagine that it will remain unperceived when the pupil sits
down to write his first lesson. Mason Lodges, however, were the most
likely places for finding and enlisting members. Young men, warmed by
declamations teeming with the flimsy moral cant of Cosmo-politism, are
in the proper frame of mind for this Illumination. It now appears also,
that the dissentions in Free Masonry must have had great influence in
promoting this scheme of Weishaupt's, which was, in many particulars, so
unpromising, because it presupposes such a degradation of the mind. But
when the schismatics in Masonry disputed with warmth, trifles came to
acquire unspeakable importance. The hankering after wonder was not in
the least abated by all the tricks which had been detected, and the
impossibility of the wished-for discovery had never been demonstrated to
persons prepossessed in its favor. They still *chose* to believe that
the symbols contained some important secret; and happy will be the man
who finds it out. The more frivolous the symbols, the more does the
heart cling to the mystery; and, to a mind in this anxious state,
Weishaupt's proffer was enticing. He laid before them a scheme which was
somewhat feasible, was magnificent, surpassing our conceptions, but at
the same time such as permitted us to expatiate on the subject, and even
to amplify it at pleasure in our imaginations without absurdity.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It does not appear
to me wonderful, therefore, that so many were fascinated till they
became at last regardless of the absurdity and inconsistency of the
means by which this splendid object was to be attained. Hear what
Spartacus himself says of hidden mysteries. "Of all the means I know to
lead men, the most effectual is a concealed mystery. The hankering of
the mind is irresistible; and if once a man has taken it into his head
that there is a mystery in a thing, it is impossible to get it out,
either by argument or experience. And then, we can so change notions by
merely changing a word. What more contemptible than *fanaticism;* but
call it *enthusiasm;* then add the little word *noble*, and you may lead
him over the world. Nor are we, in these bright days, a bit better than
our fathers, who found the pardon of their sins mysteriously contained
in a much greater sin, viz. leaving their family, and going barefooted
to Rome."

 

Such being the employment, and such the disciples, should we expect the
fruits to be very precious? No. The doctrines which were gradually
unfolded were such as suited those who continued in the *Cursus
Academicus*. Those who did not, because they did not like them, got a
*Sta bene;* they were not fit for advancements. The numbers however were
great; Spartacus boasted of 600 in Bavaria alone in 1783. We don't know
many of them; few of those we know were in the upper ranks of life; and
I can see that it required much wheedling, and many letters of long
worded German compliments from the proud Spartacus, to win even a young
Baron or a Graf just come of age Men in an easy situation in life could
not brook the employment of a spy, which is base, cowardly, and
corrupting, and has in all ages and countries degraded the person who
engages in it. Can the person be called wise who thus enslaves himself?
Such persons give up the right of private judgment, and rely on their
unknown Superiors with the blindest and most abject confidence. For
their sakes, and to rivet still faster their own fetters, they engage in
the most corrupting of all employments--and for what?--To learn
something more of an order, of which every degree explodes the doctrine
of a former one. Would it have hurt the young *Illuminatus* to have it
explained to him all at once? Would not this fire his mind--when he sees
with

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the same glance the great object, and the fitness of the means for
attaining it? Would not the exalted characters of the Superior, so much
excelling himself in talents, and virtue, and happiness (otherwise the
Order is good for nothing) warm his heart, and fill him with emulation,
since he sees in them, that what is so strongly preached to him is an
attainable thing? No, no--it is all a trick; he must be kept like a
child, amused with rattles, and stars, and ribands--and all the
satisfaction he obtains is, like the Masons, the fun of seeing others
running the same gauntlet.

 

Weishaupt acknowledges that the great influence of the Order may be
abused. Surely, in no way so easily or so fatally as by corrupting or
seductive lessons in the beginning. The mistake or error of the pupil is
undiscoverable by himself (according to the genuine principles of
Illumination) for the pupil must believe his Mentor to be
infallible--with him alone he is connected--his lessons only must he
learn. Who can tell him that he has gone wrong--or who can set him
right? yet he certainly may be misled.

 

Here, therefore, there is confusion and deficiency. There must be some
standard to which appeal can be made; but this is inaccessible to all
within the pale of the Order; it is therefore without this pale, and
independent of the Order--and it is attainable only by abandoning the
Order. The QUIBUS LICET, the PRIMO, the SOLI, can procure no light to
the person who does not know that he has been led out of the right road
to virtue and happiness. The Superiors indeed draw much useful
information from these reports, though they affect to stand in no need
of it, and they make a cruel return.

 

All this is so much out of the natural road of instruction, that, on
this account alone, we may presume that it is wrong. We are generally
safe when we follow nature's plans. A child learns in his father's
house, by seeing, and by imitating, and in common domestic education, he
gets much useful knowledge, and the chief habits which are afterwards to
regulate his conduct. Example does almost every thing; and, with respect
to what may be called living, as distinguishable from profession,
speculation and argumentative instruction are seldom employed, or of any
use. The indispensableness of mutual forbearance and obedience, for
domestic

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

peace and happiness, forms most of these habits; and the child, under
good parents, is kept in a situation that makes virtue easier than vice,
and he becomes wise and good without any express study about the matter.

 

But this Illumination plan is darkness over all--it is too
artificial--and the topics, from which counsel is to be drawn, cannot be
taken from the peculiar views of the Order--for these are yet a secret
for the pupil--and must ever be a secret for him while under tuition.
They must therefore be drawn from common sources, and the Order is of no
use; all that can naturally be effectuated by this Association is the
forming, and assiduously fostering a narrow, Jewish, corporation spirit,
totally opposite to the benevolent pretensions of the Order. The pupil
can see nothing but this, that there is a set of men, whom he does not
know, who may acquire incontroulable power, and may perhaps make use of
him, but for what purpose, and in what way, he does not know; how can he
know that his endeavours are to make man happier, any other way than as
he might have known it without having put this collar round his own
neck?

 

These reflections address themselves to all men who profess to conduct
themselves by the principles and dictates of common sense and prudence,
and who have the ordinary share of candour and good will to others. It
requires no singular sensibility of heart, nor great generosity, to make
such people think the doctrines and views of the Illuminati false,
absurd, foolish, and ruinous. But I hope that I address them to
thousands of my countrymen and friends, who have much higher notions of
human nature, and who cherish with care the affections and the hopes
that are suited to a rational, a benevolent, and a high-minded being,
capable of endless improvement.

 

To those who enjoy the cheering confidence in the superintendance and
providence of God, who consider themselves as creatures whom he has
made, and whom he cares for, as the subjects of his moral government,
this Order must appear with every character of falsehood and absurdity
on its countenance. What CAN BE MORE IMPROBABLE than this, that He, whom
we look up to as the contriver,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the maker, and director, of this goodly frame of things, should have so
far mistaken his own plans, that this world of rational creatures should
have subsisted for thousands of years, before a way could be found out,
by which his intention of making men good and happy could be
accomplished; and that this method did not occur to the great Artist
himself, nor even to the wisest, and happiest, and best men upon earth;
but to a few persons at Munich in Bavaria, who had been trying to raise
ghosts, to change lead into gold, to tell fortunes, or discover
treasures, but had failed in all their attempts; men who had been
engaged for years in every whim which characterises a weak, a greedy, or
a gloomy mind. Finding all these beyond their reach, they combined their
powers, and, at once, found out this infinitely more important
SECRET--for secret it must still be, otherwise not only the Deity, but
even those philosophers, will still be disappointed.

 

Yet this is the doctrine that must be swallowed by the Minervals and the
*Illuminati Minores*, to whom it is not yet safe to disclose the grand
secret, *that there is no such superintendance of Deity*. At last,
however, when the pupil has conceived such exalted notions of the
knowledge of his teachers, and such low notions of the blundering
projector of this world, it may be no difficult matter to persuade him
that all his former notions were only old wives tales. By this time he
must have heard much about superstition, and how [men's](errata.htm#7)
minds have been dazzled by this splendid picture of a Providence and a
moral government of the universe. It now appears incompatible with the
great object of the Order, the principles of universal liberty and
equality--it is therefore rejected without farther examination, for this
reason alone. This was precisely the argument used in France for
rejecting revealed religion. It was incompatible with their Rights of
Man.

 

It is richly worth observing how this principle can warp the judgment,
and give quite another appearance to the same object. The reader will
not be displeased with a most remarkable instance of it, which I beg
leave to give at length.

 

Our immortal Newton, whom the philosophers of Europe

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

look up to as the honor of our species, whom even Mr. Bailly, the
President of the National Assembly of France, and Mayor of Paris, cannot
find words sufficiently energetic to praise; this patient, sagacious,
and successful observer of nature, after having exhibited to the
wondering world the characteristic property of that principle of
material nature by which all the bodies of the solar system are made to
form a connected and permanent universe; and after having shown that
this law of action alone was adapted to this end, and that if gravity
had deviated but one thousandth part from the inverse duplicate ratio of
the distances, the system must, in the course of a very few revolutions,
have gone into confusion and ruin--he sits down, and views the goodly
scene--and then closes his Principles of Natural Philosophy with this
reflection (his *Scholium generale*.)

 

"This most elegant frame of things could not have arisen, unless by the
contrivance and the direction of a wise and powerful Being; and if the
fixed stars are the centres of systems, these systems must be similar;
and all these, constructed according to the same plan, are subject to
the government of one Being. All these he governs, not as the soul of
the world, but as the Lord of all; therefore, on account of his
government, he is called the Lord God--*Pantokrator;* for God is a
relative term, and refers to subjects. Deity is God's government, not of
his own body, as those think who consider him as the soul of the world,
but of his servants. The supreme God is a Being eternal, infinite,
absolutely perfect. But a being, however perfect, without government, is
not God; for we say, *my* God, *your* God, the God of Israel. We cannot
say *my* eternal, *my* infinite. We may have some notions indeed of his
attributes, but can have none of his nature. With respect to bodies, we
see only shapes and colour--hear only sounds--touch only surfaces. These
are attributes of bodies; but of their essence we know nothing. As a
blind man can form no notion of colours, we can form none of the manner
in which God perceives, and understands, and influences every thing.

 

"Therefore we know God only by his attributes. What are these? The wise
and excellent contrivance, structure, and final aim of all things. In
these his perfections we

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

admire him, and we wonder. In his direction or government, we venerate
and worship him--we worship him as his servants; and God, without
dominion, without providence, and final aims, is Fate--not the object
either of reverence, of hope, of love, or of fear."

 

But mark the emotions which affected the mind of another excellent
observer of Nature, the admirer of Newton, and the person who has put
the finishing stroke to the Newtonian philosophy, by showing that the
acceleration of the moon's mean motion, is the genuine result of a
gravitation decreasing in the precise duplicate ratio of the distance
inversely; I mean Mr. Delaplace, one of the most brilliant ornaments of
the French academy of sciences. He has lately published the *Système du
Monde* a most beautiful compend of astronomy and of the Newtonian
philosophy. Having finished his work with the same observation, "That a
gravitation inversely proportional to the squares of the distances was
the only principle which could unite material Nature into a permanent
system;" he also sits down--surveys the scene--points out the parts
which he had brought within our ken--and then makes this reflection:
"Beheld in its totality, astronomy is the noblest monument of the human
mind, its chief title to intelligence. But, seduced by the illusions of
sense, and by self conceit, we have long considered ourselves as the
centre of these motions; and our pride has been punished by the
groundless fears which we have created to ourselves. We imagine,
forsooth, that all this is for us, and that the stars influence our
destinies! But the labours of ages have convinced us of our error, and
we find ourselves on an insignificant planet, almost imperceptible in
the immensity of space. But the sublime discoveries we have made richly
repay this humble situation. Let us cherish these with care, as the
delight of thinking beings--they have destroyed our mistakes as to our
relation to the rest of the universe; errors which were the more fatal,
because the social Order depends on justice and truth alone. Far be from
us the dangerous maxim, that it is sometimes useful to depart from
these, and to deceive men, in order to insure their happiness; but cruel
experience has shewn us that these laws are never totally extinct."

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

There can be no doubt as to the meaning of these last words--they cannot
relate to astrology--this was entirely out of date. The "attempts to
deceive men, in order to insure their happiness," can only be those by
which we are made to think too highly of ourselves. "Inhabitants of this
pepper-corn, we think ourselves the peculiar favorites of Heaven, nay,
the chief objects of care to a Being, the Maker of all; and then we
imagine that, after this life, we are to be happy or miserable,
according as we accede or not to this subjugation to opinions which
enslave us. But truth and justice have broken these bonds."--But where
is the force of the argument which entitles this perfecter of the
Newtonian philosophy to exult so much? It all rests on this, That this
earth is but as a grain of mustard-seed. Man would be more worth
attention had he inhabited Jupiter or the Sun. Thus may a Frenchman look
down on the noble creatures who inhabit Orolong or Pelew. But whence
arises the absurdity of the intellectual inhabitants of this pepper-corn
being a proper object of attention? it is because our shallow
comprehensions cannot, at the same glance, see an extensive scene, and
perceive its most minute detail.

 

David, a King, and a soldier had some notions of this kind. The heavens,
it is true, pointed out to him a Maker and Ruler, which is more than
they seem to have done to the Gallic philosopher; but David was afraid
that he would be forgotten in the crowd, and cries out, "Lord! what is
man, that thou art mindful of *him?*" But David gets rid of his fears,
not by becoming a philosopher, and discovering all this to be absurd--he
would still be forgotten--he at once thinks of what he is--a noble
creature--high in the scale of nature. "But," says he, "I had forgotten
myself. Thou hast made man but a little lower than the angels--thou hast
crowned him with glory and honor--thou hast put all things under his
feet." Here are exalted sentiments, fit for the creature whose ken
pierces through the immensity of the visible universe, and who sees his
relation to the universe, being nearly allied to its Sovereign, and
capable of rising continually in his rank, by cultivating those talents
which distinguish and adorn it.

 

Thousands, I trust, there are, who think that this life is but a
preparation for another, in which the mind of

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

man will have the whole wonders of creation and of providence laid open
to its enraptured view, where it will see and comprehend with one glance
what Newton, the most patient and successful of all the observers of
nature, took years of meditation to find out--where it will attain that
pitch of wisdom, goodness, and enjoyment, of which our consciences tell
us we are capable, tho’ it far surpasses that of the wisest, the best,
and the happiest of men. Such persons will consider this Order as
degrading and detestable, and as in direct opposition to their most
confident expectations: For it pretends to what is impossible, to
perfect peace and happiness in this life. They believe, and they feel,
that man must be made perfect through sufferings, which shall call into
action powers of mind that otherwise would never have unfolded
themselves--powers which are frequently sources of the purest and most
soothing pleasures, and naturally make us rest our eyes and hopes on
that state where every tear shall be wiped away, and where the kind
affections shall become the never-failing sources of pure and unfading
delight. Such persons see the palpable absurdity of a preparation which
is equally necessary for all, and yet must be confined to the minds of a
few, who have the low and indelicate appetite for frivolous play-things,
and for gross sensual pleasures. Such minds will turn away from this
boasted treat with loathing and abhorrence.

 

I am well aware that some of my readers may smile at this, and think it
an enthusiastical working up of the imagination, similar to what I
reprobate in the case of Utopian happiness in a state of universal
Liberty and Equality. It is like, they will say, to the declamation in a
sermon by persons of the trade, who are trained up to finesse, by which
they allure and tickle weak minds.

 

I acknowledge, that in the present case, I do not address myself to the
cold hearts, who contentedly

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*Sink and slumber in their cells of clay;*"

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --Peace to all
such; but to the *felices animæ, quibus hæc cognoscere cura;*"--to those
who *have enjoyed* the pleasures of science, who have been
successful--who have made discoveries--who have really illuminated the
world--

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

to the Bacons, the Newtons, the Lockes.--Allow me to mention one, Daniel
Bernoulli, the most elegant mathematician, the only philosopher, and the
most worthy man, of that celebrated family. He said to a gentleman (Dr.
Staehling) who repeated it to me, that "when reading some of those
wonderful guesses of Sir Isaac Newton, the subsequent demonstration of
which has been the chief source of fame to his most celebrated
commentators--his mind has sometimes been so overpowered by thrilling
emotions, that he has wished that moment to be his last; and that it was
this which gave him the clearest conception of the happiness of heaven."
If such delightful emotions could be excited by the perception of mere
truth, what must they be when each of these truths is an instance of
wisdom, and when we recollect, that what we call wisdom in the works of
nature, is always the nice adaptation of means for producing
*beneficent* ends; and that each of these affecting qualities is
susceptible of degrees which are boundless, and exceed our highest
conceptions. What can this complex emotion or feeling be but rapture?
But Bernoulli is a Doctor of Theology--and therefore a suspicious
person, perhaps one of the combination hired by despots to enslave us. I
will take another man, a gentleman of rank and family, a soldier, who
often signalised himself as a naval commander--who at one time forced
his way through a powerful fleet of the Venetians with a small squadron,
and brought relief to a distressed garrison. I would desire the reader
to peruse the conclusion of Sir Kenhelm Digby's *Treatises on Body and
Mind;* and after having reflected on the state of science at the time
this author wrote, let him coolly weigh the incitements to manly conduct
which this soldier finds in the differences observed between body and
mind; and then let him say, on his conscience, whether they are more
feeble than those which he can draw from the eternal sleep of death. If
he thinks that they are--he is in the proper frame for initiation into
Spartacus's higher mysteries. He may be either MAGUS or REX.

 

Were this a proper place for considering the question as a question of
science or truth, I would say, that every man who has been a
*successful* student of nature, and who will rest his conclusions on the
same maxims of probable reasoning that have procured him success in his
past researches,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

will consider it as next to certain that there is another state of
existence for rational man. For he must own, that if this be not the
case, there is a most singular exception to a proposition which the
whole course of his experience has made him consider as a truth founded
on universal induction, viz. that *nature accomplishes all her plans*,
and that every class of beings attains all the improvement of which it
is capable. Let him but turn his thoughts inward, he will feel that his
intellect is capable of improvement, in comparison with which Newton is
but a child. I could pursue this argument very far, and (I think) warm
the heart of every man whom I should wish to call my friend.

 

What opinion will be formed of this Association by the modest, the
lowly-minded, the candid, who acknowledge that they too often feel the
superior force of present and sensible pleasures, by which their minds
are drawn off from the contemplation of what their consciences tell them
to be right--to be their dutiful and filial sentiments and emotions
respecting their great and good Parent--to be their dutiful and
neighbourly affections, and their proper conduct to all around them--and
which diminish their veneration for that purity of thought and
moderation of appetite which becomes their noble natures. What must
*they* think of this Order? Conscious of frequent faults, which would
offend themselves if committed by their dearest children, they look up
to their Maker with anxiety--are sorry for having so far forgotten their
duty, and fearful that they may again forget it. Their painful
experience tells them that their reason is often too weak, their
information too scanty, or its light is obstructed by passion and
prejudices, which distort and discolour every thing; or it is unheeded
during their attention to present objects. Happy should they be, if it
should please their kind Parent to remind them of their duty from time
to time, or to influence their mind in any way that would compensate for
their own ignorance, their own weakness, or even their indolence and
neglect. They dare not expect such a favor, which their modesty tells
them they do not deserve, and which they fear may be unfit to be
granted; but when such a comfort is held out to them, with eager hearts
they receive it--they bless the kindness that granted it, and the hand
that brings it.--Such amiable characters have appeared in all ages, and
in

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

all situations of mankind. They have not in all instances been
wise--often have they been precipitate, and have too readily catched at
any thing which pretended to give them the so much wished-for
assistances; and, unfortunately, there have been enthusiasts, or
villains, who have taken advantage of this universal wish of anxious
man; and the world has been darkened by cheats, who have misrepresented
God to mankind, have filled us with vain terrors, and have then quieted
our fears by fines, and sacrifices, and mortifications, and services,
which they said made more than amends for all our faults. Thus was our
duty to our neighbour, to our own dignity, and to our Maker and Parent,
kept out of sight, and religion no longer came in aid to our sense of
right and wrong; but, on the contrary, by these superstitions it opened
the doors of heaven to the worthless and the wicked.--But I wish not to
speak of these men, but of the good, the candid, the MODEST, the HUMBLE
who know their failings, who love their duties, but wish to know, to
perceive, and to love them still more. These are they who think and
believe that "the Gospel has brought life and immortality to light,"
that is, within their reach. They think it worthy of the Father of
mankind, and they receive it with thankful hearts, admiring above all
things the simplicity of its morality, comprehended in one sentence, "Do
to another what you can reasonably wish that another should do to you,"
and THAT PURITY OF THOUGHT AND MANNERS WHICH DISTINGUISHES IT FROM ALL
THE SYSTEMS OF MORAL INSTRUCTION THAT HAVE EVER BEEN OFFERED TO MEN.
Here they find a ground of resignation under the troubles of life, and a
support in the hour of death, quite suited to the diffidence of their
character. Such men are ready to grant that the Stoics were persons of
noble and exalted minds, and that they had worthy conceptions of the
rank of man in the scale of God's works; but they confess that they
themselves do not feel all that support from Stoical principles which
man too frequently needs; and they say that they are not singular in
their opinions, but that the bulk of mankind are prevented, by their
want of heroic fortitude, by their situation, or their want of the
opportunities of cultivating their native strength of mind, from ever
attaining this hearty submission to the will of Deity.--They maintain,
that the Stoics were but a few, a very few, from among many
millions--and therefore

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

*their* being satisfied was but a trifle amidst the general discontent,
and fretting, and despair.--Such men will most certainly start back from
this Illumination with horror and fright--from a Society which gives the
lie to their fondest hopes, makes a sport of their grounds of hope, and
of their deliverer; and which, after laughing at their credulity, bids
them shake off all religion whatever, and denies the existence of that
Supreme Mind, the pattern of all excellence, who till now had filled
their thoughts with admiration and love--from an Order which pretends to
free them from spiritual bondage, and then lays on their necks a load
ten times more oppressive and intolerable, from which they have no power
of ever escaping. Men of sense and virtue will spurn at such a proposal;
and even the profligate, who trade with Deity, must be sensible that
they will be better off with their priests, whom they know, and among
whom they may make a selection of such as will with patience and
gentleness clear up their doubts, calm their fears, and encourage their
hopes.

 

And all good men, all lovers of peace and of justice, will abhor and
reject the thought of overturning the present constitution of things,
faulty as it may he, merely in the endeavour to establish another, which
the vices of mankind may subvert again in a twelvemonth. They must see,
that in order to gain their point, the proposers have found it necessary
to destroy the grounds of morality, by permitting the most wicked means
for accomplishing any end that our fancy, warped by passion or interest,
may represent to us as of great importance. They see, that instead of
morality, vice must prevail, and that therefore there is no security for
the continuance of this Utopian felicity; and, in the mean time,
desolation and misery must lay the world waste during the struggle, and
half of those for whom we are striving will be swept from the face of
the earth. We have but to look to France, where in eight years there
have been more executions and spoilations and distresses of every kind
by the *pouvoir revolutionnaire*, than can be found in the long records
of that despotic monarchy.

 

There is nothing in the whole constitution of the Illuminati that
strikes me with more horror than the proposals of Hercules and Minos to
enlist the women in this shocking

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

warfare with all that "is good, and pure, and lovely, and of good
report." They could not have fallen on any expedient that will be more
effectual and fatal. If any of my countrywomen shall honor these pages
with a reading, I would call on them, in the most earnest manner, to
consider this as an affair of the utmost importance to themselves. I
would conjure them by the regard they have for their own dignity, and
for their rank in society, to join against these enemies of human
nature, and profligate degraders of the sex; and I would assure them
that the present state of things almost puts it in their power to be the
saviours of the world. But if they are remiss, and yield to the
seduction, they will fall from that high state to which they have arisen
in Christian Europe, and again sink into that insignificancy or slavery
in which the sex is found in all ages and countries out of the hearing
of Christianity.

 

I hope that my countrywomen will consider this solemn address to them as
a proof of the high esteem in which I hold them. They will not be
offended then if, in this season of alarm and anxiety, when I wish to
impress their minds with a serious truth, I shall wave ceremony which is
always designing, and speak of them in honest but decent plainness.

 

Man is immersed in luxury. Our accommodations are now so numerous that
every thing is pleasure. Even in very sober situations in this highly
cultivated Society, there is hardly a thing that remains in the form of
a necessary of life, or even of a mere conveniency--every thing is
ornamented--it must not appear of use--it must appear as giving some
sensible pleasure. I do not say this by way of blaming--it is
nature--man is a refining creature, and our most boasted acquirements
are but refinements on our necessary wants. Our hut becomes a palace,
our blanket a fine dress, and our arts become sciences. This discontent
with the natural condition of things, and this disposition to
refinement, is a characteristic of our species, and is the great
employment of our lives. The direction which this propensity chances to
take in any age or nation, marks its character in the most conspicuous
and interesting manner. All have it in some degree, and it is very
conceivable that, in some, it may constitute the chief object of
attention. If

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

this be the case in any nations, it is surely most likely to be so in
those where the accommodations of life are the most numerous--therefore
in a rich and luxurious nation. I may surely, without exaggeration or
reproach, give that appellation to our own nation at this moment. If you
do not go to the very lowest class of people, who must labour all day,
is it not the chief object of all to procure *perceptible pleasure* in
one way or another? The sober and busy struggle in the thoughts and
hopes of getting the means of enjoying the *comforts* of life without
farther labour--and many have no other object than pleasure.

 

Then let us reflect that it is woman that is to *grace* the whole--It is
in nature, it is the very constitution of man, that woman, and every
thing connected with woman, must appear as the ornament of life. That
this mixes with every other social sentiment, appears from the conduct
of our species in all ages and in every situation. This I presume would
be the case, even though there were no qualities or talents in the sex
to justify it. This sentiment respecting the sex is necessary, in order
to rear so helpless, so nice, and so improveable a creature as man;
without it, the long abiding task could not be performed:--and I think
that I may venture to say that it is performed in the different states
of society nearly in proportion as this preparatory and indispensable
sentiment is in force.

 

On the other hand, I think it no less evident that it is the desire of
the women to be agreeable to the men, and that they will model
themselves according to what they think will please. Without this
adjustment of sentiments by nature, nothing would go on. We never
observe any such want of symmetry in the works of God. If, therefore,
those who take the lead, and give the fashion in society, were wise and
virtuous, I have no doubt but that the women would set the brightest
pattern of every thing that is excellent. But if the men are nice and
fastidious sensualists, the women will be refined and elegant
voluptuaries.

 

There is no deficiency in the female mind, either in talents or in
dispositions; nor can we say with certainty that there is any subject of
intellectual or moral discussion in which women have not excelled. If
the delicacy of their

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

constitution, and other physical causes, allow the female sex a smaller
share of some mental powers, they possess others in a superior degree,
which are no less respectable in their own nature, and of as great
importance to society. Instead of descanting at large on their powers of
mind, and supporting my assertions by the instances of a Hypatia, a
Schurman, a Zenobia, an Elisabeth, &c. I may repeat the account given of
the sex by a person of uncommon experience, who saw them without
disguise, or any motive that could lead them to play a feigned
part.--Mr. Ledyard, who traversed the greatest part of the world, for
the mere indulgence of his taste for observation of human nature;
generally in want, and often in extreme misery.

 

"I have (says he) always remarked that women, in all countries, are
civil, obliging, tender, and humane; that they are ever inclined to be
gay and cheerful, timorous and modest; and that they do not hesitate,
like man, to perform a kind or generous action.--Not haughty, not
arrogant, not supercilious, they are full of courtesy, and fond of
society--more liable in general to err than man, but in general, also,
more virtuous, and performing more good actions than he. To a woman,
whether civilized or savage, I never addressed myself in the language of
decency and friendship, without receiving a decent and friendly
answer--with man it has often been otherwise.

 

"In wandering over the barren plains of inhospitable Denmark, through
honest Sweden, and frozen Lapland, rude and churlish Finland,
unprincipled Russia, and the wide spread regions of the wandering
Tartar--if hungry, dry, cold, wet, or sick, the women have ever been
friendly to me, and uniformly so; and to add to this virtue (so worthy
of the appellation of benevolence) these actions have been performed in
so free and so kind a manner, that if I was thirsty, I drank the
sweetest draught, and if hungry, I ate the coarse meal with a double
relish."

 

And these are they whom Weishaupt would corrupt! One of these, whom he
had embraced with fondness, would he have murdered, to save his honor,
and qualify himself to preach virtue! But let us not be too severe on
Weishaupt--let us wash ourselves clear of all stain before we think

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

of reprobating him. Are we not guilty in some degree, when we do not
cultivate in the women those powers of mind, and those dispositions of
heart, which would equally dignify them in every station as in those
humble ranks in which Mr. Ledyard most frequently saw them? I cannot
think that we do this. They are not only to grace the whole of
cultivated society, but it is in their faithful and affectionate
personal attachment that we are to find the sweetest pleasures that life
can give. Yet in all the situations where the manner in which they are
treated is not dictated by the stern laws of necessity, are they not
trained up for mere amusement--are not serious occupations considered as
a task which hurts their loveliness? What is this but selfishness, or as
if they had no virtues worth cultivating? Their *business* is supposed
to be the ornamenting themselves, as if nature did not dictate this to
them already, with at least as much force as is necessary. Every thing
is prescribed to them *because it makes them more lovely*--even their
moral lessons are enforced by this argument, and Miss Woolstoncroft is
perfectly right when she says that the fine lessons given to young women
by Fordyce or Rousseau are nothing but selfish and refined
voluptuousness. This advocate of her sex puts her sisters in the proper
point of view, when she tells them that they are, like man, the subjects
of God's moral government--like man, preparing themselves for boundless
improvement in a better state of existence. Had she adhered to this view
of the matter, and kept it constantly in sight, her book (which
doubtless contains many excellent things, highly deserving of their
serious consideration) would have been a most valuable work. She justly
observes, that the virtues of the sex are great and respectable, but
that in our mad chace of pleasure, only pleasure, they are little
thought of or attended to. Man trusts to his own uncontroulable power,
or to the general goodness of the sex, that their virtues will appear
when we have occasion for them;--"but we will send for these some other
time;"--Many noble displays do they make of the most difficult
attainments. Such is the patient bearing up under misfortunes, which has
no brilliancy to support it in the effort. This is more difficult than
braving danger in an active and conspicuous situation. How often is a
woman left with a family and the shattered remains of a fortune, lost
perhaps by dissipation or by indolence

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

and how seldom, how very seldom, do we see woman shrink from the task,
or discharge it with negligence? Is it not therefore folly next to
madness, not to be careful of this our greatest blessing--of things
which so nearly concern our peace--nor guard ourselves, and these our
best companions and friends, from the effects of this fatal
Illumination? It has indeed brought to light what dreadful lengths men
will go, when under the fanatical and dazzling glare of happiness in a
state of liberty and equality, and spurred on by insatiable luxury, and
not held in check by moral feelings and the restraints of religion--and
mark, reader, that the women have here also taken the complexion of the
men, and have even gone beyond them. If we have seen a son present
himself to the National Assembly of France, professing his satisfaction
with the execution of his father three days before, and declaring
himself a true citizen, who prefers the nation to all other
considerations; we have also seen, on the same day, wives denouncing
their husbands, and (O shocking to human nature!) mothers denouncing
their sons, as bad citizens and traitors. Mark too what return the women
have met with for all their horrid services, where, to express their
sentiments of civism and abhorrence of royalty, they threw away the
character of their sex, and bit the amputated limbs of their murdered
countrymen. <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) Surely these patriotic
women merited that the rights of their sex should be considered in full
council, and they were well entitled to a seat; but there is not a
single act of their government in which the sex is considered as having
any rights whatever, or that they are things to be cared for.

 

Are not the accursed fruits of Illumination to be seen in the present
humiliating condition of woman in France? pampered in every thing that
can reduce them to the mere instrument of animal pleasure. In their
present state of national moderation (as they call it) and security, see
Madame Talien come into the public theatre, accompanied by other
*beautiful* women (I was about to have misnamed

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

them Ladies) laying aside all modesty, and presenting themselves to the
public view, with bared limbs, *à la Sauvage*, as the alluring objects
of desire. I make no doubt but that this is a serious matter,
encouraged, nay, prompted by government. To keep the minds of the
Parisians in the present fever of dissolute gaiety, they are at more
expence from the national treasury for the support of the sixty
theatres, than all the pensions and honorary offices in Britain, three
times told, amount to. Was not their abominable farce in the church of
Notre Dame a bait of the same kind, in the true spirit of Weishaupt's
*Eroterion?* I was pleased to see among the priests of that solemnity
Mr. Brigonzi, an old acquaintance, formerly *Machiniste* (and excellent
in his profession) to the opera at the palace in St. Petersburg. He was
a most zealous Mason, and Chevalier de l’Orient; and I know that he went
to Paris in the same capacity of *Machiniste de l’Opera;* so that I am
next to certain that this is the very man. But what will be the end of
all this? The fondlings of the wealthy will be pampered in all the
indulgences which fastidious voluptuousness finds necessary for varying
or enhancing its pleasures; but they will either be slighted as toys, or
they will be immured; and the companions of the poor will be drudges and
slaves.

 

I am fully persuaded that it was the enthusiastic admiration of Grecian
democracy that recommended to the French nation the dress *à la
Grecque*, which exhibits, not the elegant, ornamented beauty, but the
beautiful female, fully as well as Madame Talien's dress *à la Sauvage*.
It was no doubt with the same adherence to *serious principle*, that
Mademoiselle Therouanne was most beautifully dressed *à l’Amazonne* on
the 5th of October 1789, when she turned the heads of so many young
officers of the regiments at Versailles. The Cytherea, the *hominum
divumque voluptas*, at the cathedral of Notre Dame, was also dressed à
la Grecque; and in this, and in much of the solemnities of that day, I
recognized the taste and invention of my old acquaintance Brigonzi. I
recollected the dresses of our *premiere & seconde Surveillantes* in the
*Loge de la Fidelité*. There is a most evident and characteristic change
in the whole system of female dress in France. The *Filles de l’Opera*
always gave the *ton*, and were surely withheld

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

by no rigid principle. They sometimes produced very extravagant and
fantastic forms, but these were almost always in the style of the
highest ornament, and they trusted, for the rest of the impression which
they wished to make, to the fascinating expression of elegant movements.
This indeed was wonderful, and hardly conceivable by any who have not
seen a grand ballet performed by good actors. I have shed tears of the
most sincere and tender sorrow during the exhibition of Antigone, set to
music by Traetta, and performed by Madame Meilcour and S<sup>re</sup>
Torelli, and Zantini. I can easily conceive the impression to be still
stronger, though perhaps of another kind, when the former superb dresses
are changed for the expressive simplicity of the Grecian. I cannot help
thinking that the female ornaments in the rest of Europe, and even among
ourselves, have less elegance since we lost the *imprimatur* of the
French court. But see how all this will terminate, when we shall have
brought the sex so low, and will not even wait for a Mahometan paradise.
What can we expect but such a dissoluteness of manners, that the
endearing ties of relation and family, and mutual confidence within
doors, will be slighted, and will cease; and every man must stand up for
himself, single and alone, in perfect equality, and full liberty to do
whatever his own arm (but that alone) is able to accomplish. This is not
the suggestion of prudish fear, I think it is the natural course of
things, and that France is at this moment giving to the world the
fullest proof of Weishaupt's sagacity, and the judgment with which he
has formed his plans. Can it tend to the improvement of our morals or
manners to have our ladies frequent the gymnastic theatres, and see them
decide, like the Roman matrons, on the merits of a naked gladiator or
wrestler? Have we not enough of this already with our vaulters and
posture-masters, and should we admire any lady who had a rage for such
spectacles? Will it improve our taste to have our rooms ornamented with
such paintings and sculptures as filled the cenaculum, and the study of
the refined and elegant moralist Horace, who had the art--*ridendo
dicere verum?* Shall we be improved when such indulgences are thought
compatible with such lessons as he generally gives for the conduct of
life? The pure Morality of Illuminatism is now employed in stripping
Italy of all those precious remains of ancient art and voluptuousness;
and Paris will ere long be the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

deposit and the resort of artists from all nations, there to study the
works of ancient masters, and to return from thence pandars of public
corruption. The plan is masterly, and the low-born Statesmen and
Generals of France may in this respect be set on a level with a Colbert
or a Condé. But the consequences of this Gallic dominion over the minds
of fallen man will be as dreadful as their dominion over their lives and
fortunes.

 

Recollect in what manner Spartacus proposed to corrupt his sisters (for
we need not speak of the manner in which he expected that this would
promote his plan--this is abundantly plain.) It was by destroying their
moral sentiments, and their sentiments of religion.--Recollect what is
the recommendation that the Atheist Minos gives of his step-daughters,
when he speaks of them as proper persons for the Lodge of Sisters. "They
have got over all prejudices, and, in matters of religion, they think as
I do." These profligates judged rightly that this affair required much
caution, and that the utmost attention to decency, and even delicacy,
must be observed in their rituals and ceremonies, otherwise they would
be *disgusted*. This was judging fairly of the feelings of a female
mind. But they judged falsely, and only according to their own coarse
experience, when they attributed their disgust and their fears to
coyness. Coyness is indeed the instinctive attribute of the female. In
woman it is very great, and it is perhaps the genuine source of the
*disgust* of which the Illuminati were suspicious. But they have been
dim-sighted indeed, or very unfortunate in their acquaintance, if they
never observed any other source of repugnance in the mind of woman to
what is immoral or immodest--if they did not see dislike--moral
disapprobation. Do they mean to insinuate, that in that regard which
modest women express in all their words and actions, for what every one
understands by the terms decency, modesty, filthiness, obscenity, they
only show female coyness? Then are they very blind instructors. But they
are not so blind. The account given of the initiation of a young Sister
at Frankfort, under the feigned name *Psycharion*, shows the most
scrupulous attention to the moral feelings of the sex; and the confusion
and disturbance which it occasioned among the ladies, after all their
care, shows, that when they thought all right and delicate, they had
been but coarse

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

judges. Minos damns the ladies there, because they are too free, too
rich, too republican, and too wise, for being led about by the nose
(this is his own expression). But Philo certainly thought more correctly
of the sex in general, when he says, Truth is a modest girl: She may be
handed about like a lady, by good sense and good manners, but must not
be bullied and driven about like a strumpet. I would give the discourses
or addresses which were made on that occasion to the different classes
of the assembly, girls, young ladies, wives, young men, and strangers,
which are really well composed and pretty, were they not such as would
offend my fair countrywomen.

 

The religious sentiments by which mortals are to be assisted, even in
the discharge of their moral duties, and still more, the sentiments
which are purely religious, and have no reference to any thing here, are
precisely those which are most easily excited in the mind of woman.
Affection, admiration, filial reverence, are, if I mistake not
exceedingly, those in which the women far surpass the men; and it is on
this account that we generally find them so much disposed to devotion,
which is nothing but a sort of fond indulgence of these affections
without limit to the imagination. The enraptured devotee pours out her
soul in expressions of these feelings, just as a fond mother mixes the
caresses given to her child with the most extravagant expressions of
love. The devotee even endeavours to excite higher degrees of these
affections, by expatiating on such circumstances in the divine conduct
with respect to man as naturally awaken them; and he does this without
any fear of exceeding; because Infinite Wisdom and Goodness will always
justify the sentiment, and free the expression of it from all charge of
hyperbole or extravagance.

 

I am convinced, therefore, that the female mind is well adapted to
cultivation by means of religion, and that their native softness and
kindness of heart will always be sufficient for procuring it a favorable
reception, from them. It is therefore with double regret that I see any
of them join in the arrogant pretensions of our Illuminated
philosophers, who see no need of such assistances for the knowledge and
discharge of their duties. There is nothing so unlike that general
modesty of thought, and that diffidence, which we

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

are disposed to think the character of the female mind. I am inclined to
think, that such deviations from the general conduct of the sex are
marks of a harsher character, of a heart that has less sensibility, and
is on the whole less amiable than that of others; yet it must be owned
that there are some such among us. Much, if not the whole of this
perversion, has, I am persuaded, been owing to the contagion of bad
example in the men. They are made familiar with such expressions--their
first horror is gone, and (would to heaven that I were mistaken!) some
of them have already wounded their consciences to such a degree, that
they have some reason to wish that religion may be without foundation.

 

But I would call upon all; and *these* women in particular, to consider
this matter in another light--as it may affect themselves in this life;
as it may affect their rank and treatment in ordinary society. I would
say to them, that if the world shall once adopt the belief that this
life is our all, then, the true maxim of rational conduct will be, to
"eat and to drink, since to-morrow we are to die;" and that when they
have nothing to trust to but the fondness of the men, they will soon
find themselves reduced to slavery. The crown which they now wear will
fall from their heads, and they will no longer be the arbiters of what
is lovely in human life. The empire of beauty is but short; and even in
republican France, it will not be many years that Madame Talien can
fascinate the Parisian Theatre by the exhibition of her charms. Man is
fastidious and changeable, and he is stronger than they, and can always
take his own will with respect to woman. At present he is with-held by
respect for her moral worth--and many are with-held by religion--and
many more are with-held by public laws, which laws were framed at a time
when religious truths influenced the minds and the conduct of men. When
the sentiments of men change, they will not be so foolish as to keep in
force laws which cramp their strongest desires. Then will the rich have
their Harems, and the poor their drudges.

 

Nay, it is not merely the circumstance of woman's being considered as
the moral companion of man that gives the sex its empire among us. There
is something of this to be observed in all nations. Of all the
distinctions which set our

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

species above the other sentient inhabitants of this globe, making us as
unlike to the best of them as they are to a piece of inanimate matter,
there is none more remarkable than the differences observable in the
appearances of those desires by which the race is continued. As I
observed already, such a distinction is indispensably necessary. There
must be a moral connection, in order that the human species may be a
race of rational creatures, improveable, not only by the encreasing
experience of the individual, but also by the heritable experience of
the successive generations. It may be observed between the solitary
pairs in Labrador, where human nature starves, like the stunted oak in
the crevice of a baron rock; and it is seen in the cultivated societies
of Europe, where our nature in a series of ages becomes a majestic tree.
But, alas! with what differences of boughs and foliage! Whatever may be
the native powers of mind in the poor but gentle Esquimaux, she can do
nothing for the species but nurse a young one, who cannot run his race
of life without incessant and hard labour to keep soul and body
together--here therefore her station in society can hardly have a name,
because there can hardly be said that there is an association, except
what is necessary for repelling the hostile attacks of Indians, who seem
to hunt them without provocation as the dog does the hare. In other
parts of the world, we see that the consideration in which the sex is
held, nearly follows the proportions of that aggregate of many different
particulars, which we consider as constituting the cultivation of a
society. We may perhaps err, and we probably do err, in our estimation
of these degrees, because we are not perfectly acquainted with what is
the real excellence of man. But as far as we can judge of it, I believe
that my assertion is acknowledged. On this authority, I might presume to
say, that it is in Christian Europe that man *has* attained his highest
degree of cultivation--and it is undoubtedly here that the women have
attained the highest rank. I may even add, that it is in that part of
Europe where the essential and distinguishing doctrines of Christian
morality are most generally acknowledged and attended to by the laws of
the country, that woman acts the highest part in general society. But
here we must be very careful how we form our notion, either of the
society, or of the female rank--it is surely not from the two or three
dozens who fill the highest ranks in the

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

state. Their number is too small, and their situation is too particular,
to afford the proper average. Besides, the situation of the individuals
of this class in all countries is very much the same--and in all it is
very artificial--accordingly their character is fantastical. Nor are we
to take it from that class that is the most numerous of all, the lowest
class of society, for these are the labouring poor, whose conduct and
occupations are so much dictated to them by the hard circumstances of
their situation, that scarcely any thing is left to their choice. The
situation of women of this class must be nearly the same in all nations.
But this class is still susceptible of some variety--and we see it--and
I think that even here there is a perceptible superiority of the female
rank in those countries where the purest Christianity prevails. We must
however take our measures or proportions from a numerous class, but also
a class in somewhat of easy circumstances, where moral sentiments call
some attention, and persons have some choice in their conduct. And here,
although I cannot pretend to have had many opportunities of observation,
yet I have had some. I can venture to say that it is not in Russia, nor
in Spain, that woman is, on the whole, the most important as a member of
the community. I would say, that in Britain her important rights are
more generally respected than any where else. No where is a man's
character so much hurt by infidelity--no where is it so difficult to rub
off the stigma of bastardy, or to procure a decent reception or society
for an improper connection; and I believe it will readily be granted,
that their share in successions, their authority in all matters of
domestic trust, and even their opinions in what concerns life and
manners, are fully more respected here than in any country.

 

I have been of the opinion (and every observation that I have been able
to make since I first formed it confirms me in it) that woman is
indebted to Christianity alone for the high rank she holds in society.
Look into the writings of antiquity--into the works of the Greek and
Latin poets--into the numberless panegyrics of the sex, to be found both
in prose and verse--I can find little, very little indeed, where woman
is treated with respect--there is no want .of love, that is, of
fondness, of beauty, of charms, of graces. But of woman as the equal of
man, as a moral companion,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

travelling with him the road to felicity--as his adviser--his solace in
misfortune--as a pattern from which he may sometimes copy with
advantage;--of all this there is hardly a trace. Woman is always
mentioned as an object of passion. Chastity, modesty, sober-mindedness,
are all considered in relation to this single point; or sometimes as of
importance in respect of œconomy or domestic quiet. Recollect the famous
speech of Metellus Numidicus to the Roman people, when, as Censor, he
was recommending marriage.

 

"Si fine uxore possemus Quirites esse, omnes eâ molestiâ careremus. Sed
quoniam ita natura tradidit, ut nec cum illis commode, nec fine illis
ullo modo vivi posset, saluti perpetuæ potius quam brevi voluptati
consulendum."  
                          *Aul. Gell. Noct. Att. I. 6*.

 

What does Ovid, the great panegyrist of the sex, say for his beloved
daughter, whom he had praised for her attractions in various places of
his Tristia and other compositions? He is writing her Epitaph--and the
only thing he can say of her as a rational creature is, that she
is--*Domifida*--not a Gadabout.--Search Apuleius, where you will find
many female characters *in abstracto*--You will find that his little
Photis was nearest to his heart, after all his philosophy. Nay, in his
pretty story of Cupid and Psyche, which the very wise will tell you is a
fine lesson of moral philosophy, and a representation of the operations
of the intellectual and moral faculties of the human soul, a story which
gave him the finest opportunity, nay, almost made it necessary for him,
to insert whatever can ornament the female character; what is his Psyche
but a beautiful, fond, and silly girl; and what are the whole fruits of
any acquaintance with the sex?--Pleasure. But why take more pains in the
search?--Look at their immortal goddesses--is there one among them whom
a wise man would for a wife or a friend?--I grant that a Lucretia is
praised--a Portia, an Arria, a Zenobia--but these are individual
characters--not representatives of the sex. The only Grecian ladies who
made a figure by intellectual talents, were your Aspasias, Sapphos,
Phrynes, and other nymphs of this cast, who had emerged from the general
insignificance of the sex, by throwing away what we are accustomed to
call its greatest ornament.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

I think that the first piece in which woman is pictured as a respectable
character, is the oldest novel that I am acquainted with, written by a
Christian Bishop, Heliodorus--I mean the Adventures of Theagenes and
Chariclea. I think that the Heroine is a greater character than you will
meet with in all the annals of antiquity. And it is worth while to
observe what was the effect of this painting. The poor Bishop had been
deposed, and even excommunicated, for doctrinal errors, and for drawing
such a picture of a heathen. The magistrates of Antioch, the most
voluptuous and corrupted city of the East, wrote to the Emperor, telling
him that this book had reformed the ladies of their city, where Julian
the Emperor and his Sophists had formerly preached in vain, and they
therefore prayed that the good Bishop might not be deprived of his
mitre.--It is true, we read of Hypatia, daughter of Theon, the
mathematician at Alexandria, who was a prodigy of excellence, and taught
philosophy, *i.e.* the art of leading a good and happy life, with great
applause in the famous Alexandrian school.--But she also was in the
times of Christianity, and was the intimate friend of Syncellus and
other Christian Bishops.

 

It is undoubtedly Christianity that has set woman on her throne, making
her in every respect the equal of man, bound to the same duties, and
candidate for the same happiness. Mark how woman is described by a
Christian poet,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

------"Yet when I approach  
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems,  
And in herself complete, so well to know  
Her own, that what she wills to do or say  
Seems *wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best*.

Neither her outside, form’d so fair,------  
So much delights me, as *those graceful acts*,  
*Those thousand decencies* that daily flow  
From all her words and actions, mix’d with love  
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeign’d  
*Union of mind, or in us both one soul*.

------And, to consummate all,  
*Greatness of mind*, and *nobleness*, their feat  
Build in her loveliest, *and create an awe  
About her, as a guard angelic plac’d*."  
                                       MILTON.

</div>

This is really moral painting, without any abatement of female charms.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

This is the natural consequence of that purity of heart, which is so
much insisted on in the Christian morality. In the instructions of the
heathen philosophers, it is either not mentioned at all, or at most, it
is recommended coldly, as a thing proper, and worthy of a mind attentive
to great things.--But, in Christianity, it is insisted on as an
indispensable duty, and enforced by many arguments peculiar to itself.

 

It is worthy of observation, that the most prominent superstitions which
have dishonored the Christian churches, have been the excessive
refinements which the enthusiastic admiration of heroic purity has
allowed the holy trade to introduce into the manufacture of our
spiritual fetters. Without this enthusiasm, cold expediency would not
have been able to make the Monastic vow so general, nor have given us
such numbers of convents. These were generally founded by such
enthusiasts--the rulers indeed of the church *encouraged* this to the
utmost, as the best levy for the spiritual power--but they could not
*enjoin* such foundations. From the same source we may derive the chief
influence of auricular confession. When these were firmly established,
and were venerated, almost all the other corruptions of Christianity
followed of course. I may almost add, that though it is here that
Christianity has suffered the most violent attacks, it is here that the
place is most tenable.--Nothing tends so much to knit all the ties of
society as the endearing connections of family, and whatever tends to
lessen our veneration for the marriage contract, weakens them in the
most effectual manner. Purity of manners is its most effectual support,
and pure thoughts are the only sources from which pure manners can flow.
I readily grant that this. veneration for personal purity was carried to
an extravagant height, and that several very ridiculous fancies and
customs arose from this. Romantic love, and chivalry, are strong
instances of the strange vagaries of our imagination, when carried along
by this enthusiastic admiration of female purity; and so unnatural and
forced, that they could only be temporary fashions. But I believe that,
with all their ridicule, it would be a happy nation where this was the
general creed and practice. Nor can I help thinking a nation on its
decline, when the domestic connections cease to be venerated, and the
illegitimate offspring of a nabob

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

or a nobleman are received with ease into good company.

 

Nothing is more clear than that the design of the Illuminati was to
abolish Christianity--and we now see how effectual this would be for the
corruption of the fair sex, a purpose which they eagerly wished to gain,
that they might corrupt the men. But if the women would retain the rank
they now hold, they will be careful to preserve in full force on their
minds this religion so congenial to their dispositions, which nature has
made affectionate and kind.

 

And with respect to the men, is it not egregious folly to encourage any
thing that can tend to blast our sweetest enjoyments? Shall we not do
this most effectually if we attempt to corrupt what nature will always
make us consider as the highest elegance of life? The divinity of the
Stoics was, "*Mens sana in corpore sano*"--but it is equally true,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus*."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If therefore,
instead of professedly tainting what is of itself beautiful, we could
really work it up to

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"That fair form, which, wove in fancy's loom,  
"Floats in light visions round the poet's head,"</span>

</div>

and make woman a pattern of perfection, we should undoubtedly add more
to the heartfelt happiness of life than by all the discoveries of the
Illuminati. See what was the effect of Theagenes and Chariclea.

 

And we should remember that with the fate of woman that of man is
indissolubly knit. The voice of nature spoke through our immortal bard,
when he made Adam say,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">--------------------------------- "From thy state  
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Should we suffer
the contagion to touch our fair partner, all is gone, and too late shall
we say,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O fairest of creation! last and best  
Of all God's works, creature in whom excell’d  
Whatever can to fight or thought be form’d,  
*Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!*  
How art thou lost--and now to death devote?--  
And me with thee hast ruin’d: for with thee  
Certain my resolution is to die."</span>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[78:\*](pc05.htm#fr_1) This is evidently the
*Mystere du Mithrus* mentioned by Barruel, in his History of Jacobinism,
and had been carried into France by Bede and Busche.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[86:\*](pc05.htm#fr_2) I observe, in other parts
of his correspondence where he speaks of this, several singular phrases,
which are to be found in two books; *Antiquité devoilée par ses Usages*,
and *Origine du Despotisme Oriental*. These contain indeed much of the
maxims inculcated in the reception discourse of the degree *Illuminatus
Minor*. Indeed I have found, that Weishaupt is much less an inventor
than he is generally thought.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[89:\*](pc05.htm#fr_3) It means an attempt made
by *David Williams*, \[Am: Ed\]

<span id="fn_4"></span>[92:\*](pc05.htm#fr_4) Happy France! Cradle of
illumination, where the morning of Reason has dawned, dispelling the
clouds of Monarchy and Christianity, where the babe has sucked the blood
of the unenlightened, and Murder! Fire! Help! has been the lullaby to
sing it to sleep.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[112:\*](pc05.htm#fr_5) (They were strongly
suspected of having published some scandalous caricatures, and some very
immoral prints.) They scrupled at no mean, however base, for corrupting
the nation. Mirabeau had done the same thing at Berlin. By political
caricatures and filthy prints, they corrupt even such as cannot read.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[113:\*](pc05.htm#fr_6) In this small *turbulent*
city there were eleven secret societies of Masons, Rosycrucians,
Clairvoyants," &c.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[145:\*](pc05.htm#fr_7) I say this on the
authority of a young gentleman, an emigrant, who saw it, and who said,
that they were women, not of the dregs of the Palais Royal, not of
infamous character, but well dressed.--I am sorry to add, that the
relation, accompanied with looks of horror and disgust, only provoked a
contemptuous smile from an illuminated British Fair one.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The German Union](pc06)

</div>
