[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mrm02)  [Next](mrm04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PRIMITIVE RELIGION AND MYTHOLOGY.

## CHAPTER I.

### ARYANS AND POLYNESIANS.

{Greek *Nómikse sautw^j toûs goneîs è?inai Ðeoús*}

THE religious feeling may be traced to the natural veneration of the
child for the parent, joined to an innate belief in the immortality of
the soul. What we know of the primitive religion of Aryans and
Polynesians points to this source. They both venerated the spirits of
deceased ancestors, believing that these spirits took an interest in
their living descendants: moreover, they feared them, and were careful
to observe the precepts handed down by tradition, as having been
delivered by them while alive.

The souls of men deified by death were by the Latins called "Lares" or
"Mânes," by the Greeks "Demons" or "Heroes." Their tombs were the
temples of these divinities, and bore the inscription "Dis manibus,"
"{Greek *Ðeoìs xðóniois*};" and before the tomb was an altar for
sacrifice. The term used by the Greeks and Romans to signify the worship
of the dead is significant. The former used the word

{p. 2}

"{Greek *patriáksein*}" the latter "parentare," showing that the prayers
were addressed to forefathers. "I prevail over my enemies," says the
Brahmin, "by the incantations which my ancestors and my father have
handed down to me."\[1\]

Similar to this was the common belief of the *Maori* of Polynesia, and
still exists. A *Maori* of *New Zealand* writes thus: "The origin of
knowledge of our native customs was from Tiki (the progenitor of the
human race). Tiki taught laws to regulate work, slaying, man-eating:
from him men first learnt to observe laws for this thing, and for that
thing, the rites to be used for the dead, the invocation for the
new-born child, for battle in the field, for the assault of fortified
places, and other invocations very numerous. Tiki was the first
instructor, and from him descended his instructions to our forefathers,
and have abided to the present time. For this reason they have power.
Thus says the song:--

E tama, tapu-nui, tapu-whakaharahara,  
He mauri wehewehe na o tupuna,  
Na Tiki, na Rangi, na Papa.

O child, very sacred--very, very sacred,  
Shrine set apart by your ancestors,  
By Tiki, by Rangi, by Papa.

The researches of philologists tend to show that all known languages are
derived from one original parent source. The parent language from which
the Aryan and Polynesian languages are derived must have been spoken at
a very remote time; for no two forms of

\[1. La Cité Antique par De Coulange.\]

{p. 3}

language are now more diverse than these two are. In the Polynesian
there is but the slightest trace of inflexion of words which is a
general character of Aryan languages. The Polynesian language seems to
have retained a very primitive form, remaining fixed and stationary; and
this is confirmed by the fact that the forms of Polynesian language,
whether spoken in the Sandwich Islands or in New Zealand, though their
remoteness from each other indicates a very early separation, differ to
so small a degree that they may be regarded as only different dialects
of the same language. The Maori language is essentially conservative,
containing no principle in its structure facilitating change. The
component parts or roots of words are always apparent.

When we consider the great remoteness of time at which it is possible
that a connection between Aryans and Polynesians could have existed, we
are carried back to the contemplation of a very primitive condition of
the human race. In the Polynesian family we can still discover traces of
this primitive condition. We can also observe a similarity between the
more antient form of religious belief and mythological tradition of the
Aryans and that still existing among Polynesians; for which reason we
think it allowable to apply to the interpretation of old Aryan myths the
principle we discover to guide us as to the signification of Polynesian
Mythology.

It was a favourite opinion with Christian apologists, Eusebius and
others, that the Pagan deities represented deified men. Others consider
them to signify

{p. 4}

the powers of external nature personified. For others they are, in many
cases, impersonations of human passions and propensities reflected back
from the mind of man. A fourth mode of interpretation would treat them
as copies distorted and depraved of a primitive system of religion given
by God to man.\[1\]

The writer does not give any opinion as to which of these theories he
would give a preference. If, however, we look at the mythology of Greek
and Latin Aryans from the *Maori* point of view the explanation of their
myths is simple.

This mythology personified and deified the Powers of Nature, and
represented them as the ancestors of all mankind; so these personified
Powers of Nature were worshipped as deified ancestors. There is no
authority for any other supposition. With regard to the two latter
theories above referred to it may be remarked that fiction is always
liable to be interpreted in a manner conformable to the ideas prevailing
at any particular time, so that there would be a natural tendency, in
modern times, to apply meanings never originally thought of to the
interpretation of mythology. Man in early days, ignorant of the causes
of natural phenomena, yet having a mind curious to inquire and trace
observed effects to some cause, formulated his conceptions on imaginary
grounds, which, although now manifestly false and absurd, yet were
probably sufficiently credible in the infancy of knowledge.

There is a notable mental condition of the Polynesian

\[1. Juventus mundi, p. 203.\]

{p. 5}

to which we desire to direct attention. The *Maori* has a very limited
notion of the abstract. All his ideas take naturally a concrete form.
This inaptitude to conceive any abstract notions was, it is believed,
the early mental condition of man. Hence the Powers of Nature were
regarded by him as concrete objects, and were consequently designated as
persons. And this opinion is confirmed by the fact that the researches
of comparative philologists give proof that all words are, in their
origin or roots, expressive of visible and sensuous phenomena,\[1\] and
consequently that all abstract words are derivable from such roots. The
absence, too, of all abstract and metaphysical ideas from Homer has been
noticed by Mr Gladstone as very remarkable.

I have seen it stated in print that the New Zealander has no sentiment
of gratitude; in proof of which it was mentioned that he has no word in
his language to express gratitude. This is true; but the reason is that
gratitude is an abstract word, and that *Maori* is deficient in abstract
terms. It is an error to infer that he is ignorant of the sentiment of
gratitude, or that he is unable to express that sentiment in appropriate
arid intelligible words.

### ARYAN MYTHOLOGY

The Aryans do not appear to have had any tradition of a Creation. They
seem to have conceived of the Powers of Nature very much in the same way
as the

\[1. Max Müller, "Science of Language." Farrar, "Chapters on Language,"
p. 6.\]

{p. 6}

Maori did,--namely, that the mysterious power of Generation was the
operative cause of all things.

Hesiod in his Theogony relates that the first parent of all was Chaos.

From Chaos sprung Gaia (=Earth), Tartarus, Eros (=Love), Erebus, a dark
son, Night, a dark daughter, and lastly, Day.

From Gaia alone sprung Ouranos (=Heaven), Hills, Groves, and Thalassa
(=Sea).

From Heaven and Earth sprung Okeanos (=Ocean), Japetus, Kronos
(=Saturn), Titans.

Hesiod also relates how Heaven confined his children in the dark caverns
of Earth, and how Kronos avenged himself.

In the "Works and Days" Hesiod gives an account of the formation of the
first human female out of Earth, from the union of whom, with
Epimetheus, son of the Titan Japetus, sprung the human race.

So far Hesiod's account may be derived from Aryan myths. The latter and
greater part, however, of Hesiod's Theogony cannot be accepted as a
purely Aryan tradition; for colonists from Egypt and Phœnicia had
settled in Greece, at an early period, and had brought with them alien
mythical fables which were adopted in a modified form, in addition to
the antient family religion of worship of ancestors.

Herodotus asserts that Homer and Hesiod made the Theogony of the Greeks;
and to a certain extent this may be true, for the bard was then invested
with a kind of sacredness, and what he sung was held to be the

{p. 7}

effect of an inspiration. When he invoked the Muses his invocation was
not a mere formal set of words introduced for the sake of ornament, but
an act of homage due to the Divinities addressed, whose aid he
solicited.\[1\]

The traditions prevalent in Bœotia would naturally be strongly imbued
with fables of foreign origin; and Hesiod, who was a Bœotian by birth,
by collecting these local traditions and presenting them to the public
in an attractive form, no doubt contributed, as well as Homer, to
establish a national form of religion, made up of old Aryan tradition
and what had been imported by Phoenician and Egyptian colonists.

Thus Zeus and the other Olympian deities formed the centre of a national
religious system; but at the same time the old Aryan religion of worship
of ancestors maintained a paramount influence, and every tribe and every
family had its separate form of worship of its own ancestors. The prayer
of the son of Achilles, when in the act of sacrificing, Polyxena to the
manes of his father, is a striking instance of the prevalent belief that
the deified spirits of ancestors had power to influence the destinies of
the living.

"O son of Peleus, my father, receive from me this libation, appeasing,
alluring, the dead. Come now, that you may drink the black pure blood of
a virgin, which we give to thee--both I and the army. And be kindly
disposed to us, and grant us to loose the sterns

\[1. Hom. Il., 2-484. Invocat. to Muses:--

Tell me now, O Muses, ye who dwell in Olympus;  
For ye are goddesses, and are present, and know all things,  
But we hear only rumour, and know not anything.

\]

{p. 8}

of our ships, and the cables fastening to the shore, and all to reach
home favoured with a prosperous return from Ilium."\[1\]

Euripides would not have put these words into the mouth of the son of
Achilles had they not been in accord with the sympathies of an Athenian
audience.

Comparing the Greek mythological traditions, such as they have come down
to us, with those of the *Maori*, some striking resemblance is to be
observed. First, there is the fact that both treat the elements of
nature, and abstract notions as persons capable of propagating from each
other by generation. In both Light springs out of Darkness. The sons of
Heaven and Earth in both accounts conspire against their father for the
same reason-that their father had confined them in darkness. And lastly
the first human female, in both, is said to have been formed out of
earth. The first woman, in the *Maori* Mythology, drags down her
offspring to Po (=Night), meaning to death. And the first woman of the
Greek Mythology, Pendora, {*sic--Pandora*} introduces all kinds of
afflictions as an heritage for hers.

It is also to be noticed that just as Zeus and the Olympian Gods were
national deities for Greeks, so their old mythical deities--Po, Rangi,
Papa, Tiki, &c., were invoked alike by the whole *Maori* race,
especially in the ceremonies required to free a person from the sacred
restrictions comprised under the term *tapu*. They were the *Maori*
national Gods, for they were their common ancestors. But at the same
time

\[1. Hecuba, l. 533-9.\]

{p. 9}

every *Maori* tribe and family invoked independently each its own tribal
and family ancestors, just as was the practice of the Greeks and Latins.

{p. 10}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Maori Cosmogony and Mythology](mrm04)
