[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar094)  [Next](bar096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

## TREATISE XIII.

<span id="img_24200"></span> ![The Daily Sacrifice.](img/24200.jpg)

<span class="small">Guarding the Temple at Night—Taking the Ashes off
the Altar—Casting Lots—Opening the Temple in the Morning—Arranging the
Fire on the Altar—The Wood-kindling—Allotting Services—Examination of
the Daily Sacrifice—Slaughter-house—Sounds heard at Jericho—Snuffing the
Candlestick—Position of the Lamb when slain—Pouring out its
Blood—Preparations for Burning—Order of carrying the Members to the
Altar—Blessings—Cleansing the Vessels of the Holy Place—The High Priest
on the Altar—Music and Psalm-singing.</span>

### CHAPTER I.

1\. <span class="smallcaps">The</span> Priests guarded the sanctuary in
three places, <span id="fr_536"></span>[1](#fn_530)—in the House
Abtinas, in the House Nitzus, and in the House Moked. The House Abtinas
and the House Nitzus had upper chambers, and the young priests guarded
there. The house Moked was arched, and its large chamber was surrounded
with stone divans, and the elders of the House of the Fathers slept
there, with the keys of the court in their hands; and the younger
priests also slept there, each with his cushion on the ground. They did
not sleep in the holy garments, but they undressed, and folded them, and
put them under their heads, and they covered themselves with their own
dresses. If legal defilement happened to one of them, he went out, and
proceeded in the circuit that went under the Temple, and candles flamed
on either side, until he arrived in the house of baptism. And the fire
pile was there, and the place of the seat of honour; and this was its
honour, when he found it closed, he knew that some one was

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

there; when he found it open he knew that no one was there. He descended
and washed; he came up and wiped himself, and warmed himself before the
fire pile. He came and sat beside his brethren the priests, till the
doors were opened; then he went out on his own way.

2\. He who wished to take the ashes from the altar, rose up early and
bathed before the Captain of the Temple came. And in what hour did the
Captain come? All times were not equal; sometimes he came at cockcrow,
or near to it, before or after it. The Captain came, and knocked for
them, and they opened to him. He said to them, "let whoever is washed,
come, and cast lots." They cast lots, and he gained who gained.

3\. He took the key and opened the wicket door, and entered from the
House Moked to the court, and the priests went after him with two
lighted torches in their hands. And they divided themselves into two
parties. These went in the gallery eastward, and those went in the
gallery westward. They observed everything as they walked till they
approached the place of the pancake-makers. They arrived. Both parties
said, peace! all peace! The pancake-makers began to make pancakes.

4\. He who gained the lot to take the ashes from the altar, took them;
and they said to him, "be careful that thou touch not the vessels, till
thou dost sanctify thy hands and thy feet from the laver." And the ash
dish was placed in the corner between the ascent to the altar and the
west of the ascent. No man entered with the priest, and there was no
candle in his hand, but he walked towards the light of the fire on the
altar. They did not see him, and they did not hear his voice, till they
heard the creaking of the wheel, which the son of Kattin made for the
laver, and they said, "the time has come to sanctify his hands and feet
from the laver." He took the silver ash dish, and he went up to the top
of the altar, and he turned the live coals on one side, and he piled up
those that were well burned inwards, and he descended, and came on the
pavement of the altar. He turned his face northwards, and went eastward
of the ascent

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

about ten cubits. He packed the coals on the pavement three handbreadths
distant from the ascent, at the place where they put the crops of the
fowls, and the ashes of the inner altar, and of the candlestick.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_530"></span>[242:1](bar095.htm#fr_536) See the Treatise on
*Measurements*, chap. i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](bar096)
