[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar024)  [Next](bar026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

1\. The Sabbatical year of white figs <span
id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_56) is the second after the Sabbatical year,
because they produce in three years. Rabbi Judah said, "the Sabbatical
year of the Persian figs is

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the close of the Sabbatical year, because they produce in two years."
The Sages replied to him, "they only said white figs."

2\. "If one store eschalots in the Sabbatical year?" R. Maier said,
"there must be not less than two seahs, <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) in height three handbreadths, and over
them an handbreadth of dust." But the Sages say, "not less than four
cabs, in height an handbreadth, and an handbreadth of dust over them,
and they must be stored in a place where men tread." <span
id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58)

3\. "Eschalots over which the Sabbatical year has passed?" Rabbi Eleazar
said, "if the poor have gathered the leaves they are theirs; but if not,
the owner must reckon with the poor." R. Joshua said, "if the poor have
gathered the leaves, they are theirs; but if not, the poor cannot reckon
with the owner."

4\. "Eschalots of the eve of the Sabbatical year which have entered on
the Sabbatical year, and summer onions, and also dye <span
id="fr_59"></span>[3](#fn_59) plants of the best ground?" The school of
Shammai say, "they are to be rooted out with wooden spades." But the
school of Hillel say, "with metal axes." But they both agree with regard
to dye plants on rocky ground, that they are to be rooted out with metal
axes.

5\. "From what time is it allowed to buy eschalots on the departure of
the Sabbatical year?" R. Judah said, "off hand;" but the Sages say,
"when the new ones become plenty."

6\. These are the implements which the farmer is not permitted to sell
in the Sabbatical year—the plough with all its implements, the yoke, the
shovel, and the goad. But he may sell the hand-sickle, and the
harvest-sickle, and the waggon, with all its implements. This is the
rule: "all implements, the use of which may be misapplied for
transgression, are forbidden; but if they be (partly for things)
forbidden and (partly for things) allowed, they are permitted."

7\. The potter may sell five oil-jugs, and fifteen wine-

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

jugs, because it is usual to collect fruits from the free property. And
if one bring more than these, it is allowed, and he may sell them to
idolaters in the land, and to Israelites out of the land.

8\. The school of Shammai say, "a man must not sell a ploughing heifer
on the Sabbatical year;" but the school of Hillel allow it, "because the
buyer may slaughter her." He may sell fruits in the time of sowing, and
may lend another man his measure, even if he know that the other man
have a threshing-floor, and he may change money for him, even if he know
that he have labourers. But if it be openly declared, all is forbidden.

9\. A woman may lend to her companion on the Sabbatical year, even when
she is suspicious, a flour-sieve or a grain-sieve, and an hand-mill and
an oven; but she is neither to pick the wheat nor grind it with her. A
woman of a special religious society may lend to the wife <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) of an ordinary man a flour-sieve, or a
grain-sieve, and may pick wheat, or grind it, or sift it, with her. But
when she (the wife of an ordinary man) pours in the water, she (a woman
of a special religious society) must not touch the flour (to knead it)
with her, lest she strengthen the hands of a transgressor. And all these
things were not said save for the sake of peace. And we may strengthen
the hands of idolaters in the Sabbatical year, but not the hands of
Israel; and in salutation we may ask after their peace, for the sake of
peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[70:3](bar025.htm#fr_56) Lit. "daughters of the
pit." "Adam's apples," (Jer. Tal.) Supposed to be the fruit which
tempted Eve. The decision in the text assumes that the trees began to
bud in the Sabbatical year, and that the fruit would not be ripe for
three years.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[71:1](bar025.htm#fr_57) Twelve cabs.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[71:2](bar025.htm#fr_58) To prevent their
growth.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[71:3](bar025.htm#fr_59) "Puah, for dyeing red"
(?)

<span id="fn_60"></span>[72:1](bar025.htm#fr_60) This permission has
reference to certain laws with regard to legal cleanness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](bar026)
