[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar079)  [Next](bar081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

1\. A son stubborn and rebellious. <span id="fr_405"></span>[1](#fn_399)
"From what time is he decidedly a son stubborn and rebellious?" "From
the time the two hairs have come, and up to the time the beard has
sprouted; but the Sages spoke in modest language. As is usually said,
when a man has a son—a son, but not a daughter; a son, but not a man; a
child as yet free from coming under the rule of the commandments."

2\. "From what time is he guilty?" "From the time he ate three quarters
of a pound of flesh, and drank half a log of Italian wine." R. José
said, "a pound of flesh and a log of wine." "He ate it in an appointed
feast; he ate it in the intercalary month; he ate it during the second
tithes in Jerusalem; he ate of a carcase and of things torn, abominable
things and creeping things; he ate of that which had not paid tithes,
and the first tithes before the heave-offering was separated from them,
and the second tithes and holy things which were not redeemed; he ate of
a thing which is commanded, and of a thing which is a transgression; he
ate every kind of meat, but he did not eat flesh; he drank every kind of
fluid, but he did not drink wine?" "He is not a son stubborn and
rebellious till he eat flesh and drink wine," as is said, "A glutton and
a drunkard;" <span id="fr_406"></span>[2](#fn_400) and even though there
is no conclusive evidence, there is a memorial to the matter, as is
said, "Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh." <span
id="fr_407"></span>[3](#fn_401)

3\. "If he steal it from his father, and eat it (with permission) on the
property of his father; from others, and eat it on the property of
others; from others, and eat it on the property of his father?" "He is
not a son stubborn and rebellious till he steal it from his father and
eat it on the property of others." R. José, the son of R. Judah, said,
"till he steal it from his father and from his mother."

4\. "If his father desires (his punishment), and his mother does not
desire it; his father does not desire it, and

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

his mother does desire it?" "He is not declared a son stubborn and
rebellious until both of them desire it." R. Judah said, "if his mother
was not suitable for his father, he is not declared a son stubborn and
rebellious." "One of them was broken-handed, or lame, or dumb, or blind,
or deaf?" "He is not declared a son stubborn and rebellious," as is
said, "'Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him,' <span
id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_402) which is impossible if they be
broken-handed; 'and bring him out,' which is impossible if they be lame;
'and they shall say,' which is impossible if they be dumb; 'this our
son,' which is impossible if they be blind; 'he will not obey our
voice,' which is impossible if they be deaf. They must warn him before
three judges, and then flog him." "He returned to his bad habits?" "He
is to be judged before twenty-three judges, but he is not to be stoned
till the three first (judges) are present, as is said, 'this our son'
who was flogged before you." "He ran away before his judgment was
finished, and afterwards came to puberty?" "He is free." "But if he ran
away after the decision and then came to puberty?" "He is guilty."

5\. A son stubborn and rebellious is judged for the sake of his future
prospects. The law says, "better die when he is innocent, and not die
when he is guilty." The death of the wicked is pleasant for them, and
pleasant for the world; but the death of the righteous is evil for them,
and evil for the world. Wine and sleep are pleasant to the wicked, and
pleasant to the world; but for the righteous, it is evil for them, and
evil for the world. Separation for the wicked is pleasant for them, and
pleasant for the world; but for the righteous, it is evil for them, and
evil for the world. Union for the wicked is evil for them, and evil for
the world; but for the righteous, it is pleasant for them, and pleasant
for the world. Rest for the wicked is evil for them, and evil for the
world; but for the righteous, it is pleasant for them, and pleasant for
the world.

6\. If one engaged in burglary, he is judged for the sake of his future
prospects. "He engaged in burglary and broke

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

a barrel?" "If the owner might not kill him, he must pay for the barrel;
but if the owner might kill him, he is freed from paying for the
barrel."

7\. These are they who are rescued <span id="fr_409"></span>[1](#fn_403)
with their souls,—he who pursued after his companion to kill him, and
one after a betrothed girl. But one about to profane the Sabbath, and
one about to serve idols, such cannot be saved with their souls. <span
id="fr_410"></span>[2](#fn_404)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_399"></span>[194:1](bar080.htm#fr_405) Deut. xxi. 18.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[194:2](bar080.htm#fr_406) Deut. xxi. 20.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[194:3](bar080.htm#fr_407) Prov. xxiii. 20.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[195:1](bar080.htm#fr_408) Deut. xxi. 19, 20.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[196:1](bar080.htm#fr_409) *i.e.* they are
saved from crime by immediately depriving them of life. This summary
mode of procedure was called "the rebel's beating." It was a kind of
Lynch law inflicted by the people at once. John viii. 59.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[196:2](bar080.htm#fr_410) As the former class
of intending criminals could at once be killed, so this latter class
must be guilty of the act, and they are then judged for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](bar081)
