[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar045)  [Next](bar047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

1\. "The married woman, while she is in the house of her husband?" "Her
husband slaughtered on her account, and her father slaughtered on her
account?" "She must eat the passover with her husband." "She went to
spend the first feast after her marriage in the house of her father—her
father slaughtered on her account, and her husband slaughtered on her
account?" "She may eat in the place which she wishes." "An orphan on
whose account the guardians slaughtered?" "He may eat in the place which
he wishes." "A slave of two partners?" "He must not eat with both." "A
slave who is half free?" "He must not eat with his master."

2\. One said to his slave, "go and slaughter for me the passover." "He
slaughtered a kid?" "He may eat it." "He slaughtered a lamb?" "He may
eat it." "He slaughtered a kid and a lamb?" "He may eat of the first."
"He forgot what his master said to him—what shall he do?" "He must
slaughter a lamb and a kid, and shall say, "If my master said to me—a
kid, the kid is on his account, and the lamb is on my account; and if my
master said to me—a lamb, the lamb is for him, and the kid is for me."
"If his master forgot what he said to him?" "Both animals must go forth
to the house of burning; and they are free from keeping the second
passover."

3\. One said to his sons, "I am ready to slaughter the passover for you
who shall first go up to Jerusalem." As soon as one of them entered with
his head and the greater part of his body inside the city gate, he
gained his own share of the passover, and gained it for his brothers
with him. They may always be reckoned in one company, when each one
obtains the size of an olive. They may first be reckoned, and afterwards
withdraw from a company till

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the passover be slaughtered. Rabbi Simon said, "until its blood be
poured out on their account."

4\. "He who reckoned others with himself in his portion of the lamb?"
"The members of the company are allowed to give to him his share, and he
may eat it with his own guests; and they may eat their portion with
their own guests."

5\. "If one observed an issue twice?" "They may slaughter the lamb on
his account on the seventh day of the issue if it be the fourteenth day
of Nisan." "If he observed it thrice?" <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_169) "They may only slaughter on his account
on the eighth day of the issue" (if it be the fourteenth day of Nisan).

6\. "The mourner and the person who opened a heap, <span
id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_170) and also the person who has the promise
of release from prison, and the sick, and the aged, who are able to eat
the size of an olive?" "They may slaughter the passover for them." For
all of them they must not slaughter the lamb on their own account alone,
lest they bring the passover into contempt, <span
id="fr_174"></span>[3](#fn_171) because there might happen to them some
abomination. They are freed from keeping a second passover—excepting him
who in opening the heap was unclean from the beginning.

7\. "They must not slaughter the passover for one person." The words of
Rabbi Judah; but Rabbi José "allowed it." Even for a company of an
hundred, when they cannot eat the size of an olive, they must not
slaughter the passover; and they must not form a company of women, of
slaves, and of little ones.

8\. A mourner may be baptized, and eat his passover in the evening, but
not other holy things. "He who heard of a death, or had the bones of his
relations collected?" "He may be baptized and eat holy things." "A
stranger who was proselytized on the eve of the passover?" The school of
Shammai say, "He may be baptized and eat his passover in

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the evening;" but the school of Hillel say, "he who just departed from
the foreskin is as legally unclean as he who just departs from the
grave."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[112:1](bar046.htm#fr_172) If one observed the
issue three times on the same day, he could not be considered clean
before he brought a sacrifice.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[112:2](bar046.htm#fr_173) In which there is a
dead body.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[112:3](bar046.htm#fr_174) The mourner might be
too sorrowful to eat, the sick too ill to eat, and the prisoner might be
detained in prison, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](bar047)
