[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar052)  [Next](bar054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

1\. They brought out for him the cup and the censer, and filled his hand
full (of incense), and put it into the cup, the large according to his
largeness, <span id="fr_217"></span>[2](#fn_214) and the smaller
according to his smallness, and so was its measure. He took the censer
in his right hand, and the spoon in his left. He proceeded in the
Sanctuary until he came between the two vails dividing between the holy
and the holy of holies, and intermediate was a cubit. R. Joseph said,
"there was one vail only," as He said, "the vail is the division for you
between the Holy and the Holy of Holies" (Exod. xxvi. 33). Outside it
was looped up southward, inside northward. He proceeded between them
till he reached the north. When he reached the north his face was turned
southward. He proceeded leftwards near the vail till he came to the ark.
When he came to the ark, he put the censer between its two staves, he
heaped the incense on the live coals, and the whole house was entirely
filled with smoke. He went out, and returned by the way of his entrance,
and he offered a short prayer in the outer house, and he did not prolong
his prayer, lest he should excite terror <span
id="fr_218"></span>[3](#fn_215) in Israel.

2\. When the ark was removed, a stone was there from the days of the
first prophets, and it was called "FOUNDATION." <span
id="fr_219"></span>[4](#fn_216) It was three digits high above the
earth, and upon it he put the censer.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

3\. He took the blood from the mixer. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[1](#fn_217) With it he entered to the place where he
entered, and stood in the place where he stood. He sprinkled of it once
on high, and seven times below, and he did not purpose to sprinkle
neither on high nor below, but unintentionally, <span
id="fr_221"></span>[2](#fn_218) and so he counted, "one, one and one,
one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five, one and six, one
and seven." He went out and placed it on the golden pedestal, which was
in the Sanctuary.

4\. They brought to him the goat, he slaughtered it and caught his blood
in a bowl. He entered to the place where he entered, and stood in the
place where he stood, and sprinkled of it once on high and seven times
below, and he did not purpose to sprinkle neither on high nor below, but
unintentionally; <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_218) and so he
counted, "one, one and one, one and two," etc. He went out, and placed
it on the second pedestal, which was in the Sanctuary. R. Judah said
"there was but one pedestal only." He took the blood of the bullock and
laid down the blood of the goat, and sprinkled of it on the vail
opposite the ark, on the outside, once on high, seven times below, and
he did not purpose, etc., and so he counted. He took the blood of the
goat and laid down the blood of the bullock, and sprinkled of it on the
vail opposite the ark, on the outside, once on high and seven times
below, etc. He poured the blood of the bullock into the blood of the
goat, and infused the full into the empty.

5\. And he went out to the altar which is before the LORD. This was the
golden altar. He began cleansing it, and went down. "From what place did
he begin?" "From the Northeastern corner, the North-western,
South-western, and Southeastern, the place where he began with the
sin-offering of the outer altar, at the same place he finished upon the
inner altar." R. Eliezer said, "he stood in his place and cleansed, and
in general he operated from below upward, excepting that which was
before him, on that he operated from above downwards."

<span id="img_12800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE HIGH PRIEST,
IN LINEN VESTMENTS, SPRINKLING THE BLOOD IN THE HOLY OF
HOLIES.](tn/12800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12800.jpg)  
THE HIGH PRIEST, IN LINEN VESTMENTS, SPRINKLING THE BLOOD IN THE HOLY OF
HOLIES.  
</span>

<span class="small">"For it is the blood that maketh an atonement for
the soul."—Lev. xvii. 11.</span>

<span class="small">PAGE 128</span>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

6\. He sprinkled on the middle <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_219) of
the altar seven times, and the remainder of the blood he poured out on
the western foundation of the outer altar, and the blood from the outer
altar he poured out on the southern foundation. This and that commingled
in the channel, and flowed out to the Kidron Valley, and they were sold
to the gardeners for manure, and they became guilty <span
id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_220) in themselves.

7\. All work of the day of atonement is described in order. If the High
Priest performed one before the other, he did nothing. If the blood of
the goat be sprinkled before the blood of the bullock, he must return,
and sprinkle from the blood of the goat after the blood of the bullock.
And if he had not finished the performances within, the blood was
spilled. He must bring other blood, and return to sprinkle first from
within. And so in the Sanctuary, and so in the golden altar, because all
are an atonement in themselves. R. Eleazer and R. Simon say, "from the
place where he stopped there he began."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[127:2](bar053.htm#fr_217) The size of the
priest's hands was proportionate to his stature.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[127:3](bar053.htm#fr_218) That he had been
struck dead.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[127:4](bar053.htm#fr_219) Supposed by some to
be the <span class="smallcaps">Sukhrah</span> in the present <span
class="smallcaps">Mosque</span> of OMAR. From its position, however, it
seems more probably to have been the foundation of the altar of burnt
offerings. This sacred rock is 60 feet across and 5 feet high. It is
pierced quite through, to allow, as some think, the blood of the
sacrifices to flow off into the "Noble Cave" and the canals beneath it.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[128:1](bar053.htm#fr_220) A priest continued
to stir the blood to prevent its coagulation.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[128:2](bar053.htm#fr_222) Or "as a thrasher."

<span id="fn_219"></span>[129:1](bar053.htm#fr_223) Or "the clean
place."

<span id="fn_220"></span>[129:2](bar053.htm#fr_224) *i.e.* The gardeners
became liable for a trespass offering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](bar054)
