[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar068)  [Next](bar070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

1\. Three times in the year the priests elevate their hands to bless the
people, four times .a day—in the morning prayer, in the following
prayer, in the evening prayer, and at the locking of the gates. These
times are the fast days, on the fasts of the deputies, and on the day of
atonement.

2\. These are the Delegates, according as is said, "Command the children
of Israel, and say unto them, My offering and my bread for my sacrifices
made by fire." <span id="fr_340"></span>[2](#fn_335) And how is it
possible, that the offering of a man should be sacrificed, and he does
not stand by it? Therefore the former prophets decreed four-and-twenty
Watches. For every Watch there were Delegates in Jerusalem of priests,
Levites, and Israelites. When the time approached (for them) to go up,
the priests and Levites went up to Jerusalem, and the Israelites, who
belonged to the Watch, gathered in their cities and read in the history
of Genesis.

3\. And the Delegates used to fast four days in the week, from the
second day till the fifth. But they did not fast on the eve of the
Sabbath, for honour to the Sabbath. Nor on the first day, that they
should not go forth from repose and enjoyment, to toil, and fasting, and
death. On the first day they read in Genesis, <span
id="fr_341"></span>[3](#fn_336) "and let there be a firmament." On the
second, "let there be a firmament and let the waters be gathered
together." On the third day, "let the waters be

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

gathered together, and let there be lights." On the fourth, "let there
be lights, and let the waters bring forth abundantly." On the fifth,
"let the waters bring forth abundantly," and "let the earth bring
forth." On the sixth, "let the earth bring forth," and "the heavens were
finished." Two men read a large portion, but a small portion was read by
one. At morning prayer, at the following prayer, at the evening prayer,
they went in and read orally (by heart), as they read the "Hear," <span
id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_337) etc. On the eve of the Sabbath they did
not go in to evening prayer for honour to the Sabbath.

4\. Every day when there is praise, the Delegates are not at morning
prayer. When there is the additional offering at the following prayer,
there is not the closing prayer at the locking up of the gates. "When
there is the offering of the wood, there is not the evening prayer." The
words of Rabbi Akiba. The son of Azai said to him, R. Joshua thus taught
it: "when there was an additional offering, the Delegates did not come
to evening prayer; when there was the offering of the wood, they did not
come to prayer at the locking up of the gates." R. Akiba changed his
opinion, and taught as the son of Azai.

5\. The times of bringing wood for the altar by priests and people were
nine. On the first of Nisan, <span id="fr_343"></span>[2](#fn_338) the
children of Arach son of Judah brought it. On the twentieth of
Tammuz, <span id="fr_344"></span>[3](#fn_339) the children of David the
son of Judah brought it. On the fifth of Ab, <span
id="fr_345"></span>[4](#fn_340) the children of Parhush the son of Judah
brought it. On the seventh, the children of Jonadab the son of Rechab
brought it. On the tenth, the children of Sinah the son of Benjamin
brought it. On the fifteenth, the children of Zathva the son of Judah
brought it, and with them the priests and Levites and all who were
ignorant of their tribe. And the children of Gonebi Eli <span
id="fr_346"></span>[5](#fn_341) and the children of Kozhi Kezihoth. On
the twentieth, the children of Pachath Moab the son of Judah brought it.
On the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

twentieth of Elul, <span id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_342) the children of
Adin the son of Judah brought it. On the first of Tebeth, the children
of Parhush returned the second time. On the first of Tebeth, <span
id="fr_348"></span>[2](#fn_343) there was no meeting of the Delegates,
as there was on it "The Praise," and the additional offering at the
following prayer, and the offering of the wood.

6\. Five things happened to our fathers on the seventeenth of Tammuz,
and five on the ninth of Ab. On the seventeenth of Tammuz the stone
tables were broken, and the daily offering ceased, and the city was
broken up, and Apostemus <span id="fr_349"></span>[3](#fn_344) burnt the
law, and he set up an image in the Temple. On the ninth of Ab it was
proclaimed to our fathers, that they should not enter the land, and the
House was ruined for the first and second time, and Bither was taken,
and the city was ploughed up. On entering Ab we must diminish joy.

7\. The week in which the ninth of Ab comes, men are not allowed to clip
their hair, or wash their clothes; but on Thursday they are allowed, for
honour to the Sabbath. On the eve of the ninth of Ab one must not eat
from two dishes, must not eat flesh, and must not drink wine. Rabban
Simon the son of Gamaliel said, "one must change the style of living."
R. Judah "enjoined to turn over the beds," but the Sages did not approve
him.

8\. Said Rabban Simon the son of Gamaliel, "there were no holidays in
Israel like the fifteenth of Ab, or like the day of atonement. Because
in them the daughters of Jerusalem promenaded in white garments
borrowed, that no one might be ashamed of her poverty. All these
garments must be baptized. And the daughters of Jerusalem promenaded and
danced in the vineyards. And what did they say? 'Look here, young man,
and see whom you choose; look not for beauty, look for family;' 'Favour
is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that feareth the Lord, she
shall be praised;' and it is said 'Give her of the fruit of her hands,
and let her own works praise her in the gates,' <span
id="fr_350"></span>[4](#fn_345) and also it is

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

said, 'Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with
the crown, wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals,
and in the day of the gladness of his heart.' <span
id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_346) The day of his espousals, this is the
gift of the Law; and in the day of the gladness of his heart, this is
the building of the Sanctuary, and may it be speedily built in our days.
Amen."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_335"></span>[165:2](bar069.htm#fr_340) Numbers xxviii. 2.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[165:3](bar069.htm#fr_341) Gen. i. 6, etc.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[166:1](bar069.htm#fr_342) Deut. vi. 4, etc.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[166:2](bar069.htm#fr_343) Part of March and
April.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[166:3](bar069.htm#fr_344) Part of June and
July.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[166:4](bar069.htm#fr_345) Part of July and
August.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[166:5](bar069.htm#fr_346) *i.e.* "Thieves of
the pestle and dried figs;" because when forbidden by Jeroboam to go up
to the Temple with the first-fruits and wood, they deceived the watchers
by saying they were only going to press figs.—Jer. Tal.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[167:1](bar069.htm#fr_347) Part of August and
September.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[167:2](bar069.htm#fr_348) Part of December and
January.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[167:3](bar069.htm#fr_349) Antiochus Epiphanes.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[167:4](bar069.htm#fr_350) Prov. xxxi. 30, 31.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[168:1](bar069.htm#fr_351) Sol. Song, iii. 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar070)
