[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar064)  [Next](bar066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

1\. When the feast of New Year happened on the Sabbath, they used to
sound the cornet in the Sanctuary; but not in the provinces. After the
destruction of the Sanctuary, R. Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed that
they should sound it in every place in which there is a tribunal of
justice. R. Eleazar says, "R. Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed it only
for Jamnia." But the Sages said to him, "it was all one for Jamnia, and
all one for every place in which there is a tribunal of justice."

2\. And again, <span id="fr_308"></span>[3](#fn_304) Jerusalem was
privileged above Jamnia,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

because every city which could be seen, and the sounding heard, and
which was near, and to which it was allowed to go, might sound the
cornet; but in Jamnia they could only sound it before the tribunal of
justice.

3\. At first the palm-branch was taken seven days in the Sanctuary, and
one day in the provinces. After the destruction of the Temple, R.
Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed, "that the palm-branch should be taken
in the provinces for seven days, to commemorate the Sanctuary;" also
"that the whole day of the waving <span id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_305)
it should be forbidden (to eat new corn)."

4\. At first they received evidence of the new moon during the whole
(thirtieth) day; but once the witnesses delayed coming, and the Levites
erred in the chant. They decreed, that they should receive evidence only
till the time of the evening sacrifice; and if witnesses came after the
evening sacrifice, that and the next day were kept holy. After the
destruction of the sanctuary Rabban Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed,
"that they should receive evidence of the new moon during the whole
day." R. Joshua, son of Korcha, says, "and again Rabban Jochanan, son of
Zacai, decreed that wherever the chief of the Sanhedrin might be, the
witnesses need only go to the place of its meeting."

5\. The order of blessings to be said on the New Year is, "The
Fathers," <span id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_306) and "The Mighty," and
"Sanctification of the Name," and there are comprehended the "Kingdoms"
without blowing the trumpet; "The Holiness of the Day," and he blows;
"The Remembrances," and he blows; "The Trumpets," and he blows. And he
says, "The Service," "The Confession," and "Blessing of the Priests."
The words of R. Jochanan, son of Nourri. Said R. Akivah to him, "if the
trumpet be not blown after 'The Kingdoms,' why are they mentioned?" But
the order is, "The Fathers," and "The Mighty," and "Sanctification of
the Name," and there are comprehended "The Kingdoms," with
"[Sanctification](errata.htm#3)

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of the Day," and he blows; "The Remembrances," and he blows; "The
Trumpets," and he blows. And he says, "The Service," "The Confession,"
and "Blessing of the Priests."

6\. They cannot read less than ten (texts of Scripture) relating to "The
Kingdom," ten relating to "Remembrances," and ten to "Trumpets." <span
id="fr_311"></span>[1](#fn_307) R. Jochanan, son of Nourri, says, "if
three be read from all of them, the duty is fulfilled, but they mention
not the remembrance of the kingdom, and trumpet of vengeance. <span
id="fr_312"></span>[2](#fn_308) They must begin with the Law and end
with the Prophets." R. José says, "if they end with the Law, the duty is
fulfilled."

7\. (The minister of the congregation) must go over to the reading desk
on the feast of the New Year. The second minister must blow the trumpet.
But at the hour for the hymn the first must read the hymn.

8\. For sounding the trumpet of the New Year they may, not transgress
the Sabbatical limit, they may not remove for it a heap of stones, they
may not climb a tree, and they may not ride a beast, or swim over water.
Nor may they cut it <span id="fr_313"></span>[3](#fn_309) with anything
that violates the Sabbatical rest, or violates a negative command. But
if one wish he may pour into it water or wine. <span
id="fr_314"></span>[4](#fn_310) They may not prevent children from
blowing, but they may practise in teaching them. But he who practises
blowing is not freed from his obligation, and he who listens to the
practice is not freed from his obligation.

9\. The order of blowing the trumpet is, three blasts blown thrice. The
measure of the blast is as six alarms. The measure of the alarm is as
three shrieks. If one blew the first and prolonged the blast for the
second to be as two, it reckons but as one. He who has said the
blessings, and afterwards a trumpet is given to him, must blow a blast,
an alarm, and a blast three times. As the minister of the congregation
is bound, so is each individual bound. R. Gamaliel says, "the minister
of the congregation releases the public from their obligations."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[155:3](bar065.htm#fr_308) There is a supposed
hiatus in the Mishna text to the following effect: "In Jerusalem they
sounded through the whole city during the session of the Sanhedrin
(*i.e.* till noon); but in Jamnia they did not sound in the city, but
only before the tribunal of justice. And again," etc.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[156:1](bar065.htm#fr_309) *i.e.* Of the sheaf
of the first-fruits, Lev. xxiii. 10.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[156:2](bar065.htm#fr_310) The titles or the
headings of the blessings which were used in the services of the Temple
and of the synagogues out of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[157:1](bar065.htm#fr_311) Three were read from
the law, three from the Psalms, and three from the Prophets,—such
passages as Exod. xv. 18, Ps. xxiv., Ezek. xx. 33, Zech. xiv. 9, etc.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[157:2](bar065.htm#fr_312) *i.e.* They would
not read such passages as Ps. lxxviii. 39.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[157:3](bar065.htm#fr_313) *i.e.* To improve
its tone.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[157:4](bar065.htm#fr_314) To clear its tone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar066)
