[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar042)  [Next](bar044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

1\. The daily offering was slaughtered at half-past eight, <span
id="fr_149"></span>[5](#fn_146) and offered at half-past nine. On the
eve of the passover it was slaughtered at half-past seven and offered at
half-past eight, whether the passover fell on a week-day or on the
Sabbath. When the eve of the passover began on the eve of the Sabbath
(Friday), it was slaughtered at half-past six, and offered at half-past
seven, and the passover followed after it.

2\. "The passover offering, which was slaughtered without intention—and
the priest took its blood, and he went and sprinkled it without
intention?" or "with intention, and without intention?" or "without
intention and with intention?" "It is disallowed." "How can it be with
intention and without intention?" "With intention partly for the
passover, and with intention partly for peace-offerings." "Without
intention and with intention?" "With intention partly for
peace-offerings, and with intention partly for the passover-offering."

3\. "If he slaughtered the passover for those who may not legally eat
it,—for those who are not reckoned in one company, for the
uncircumcised, and for the unclean?" "It is disallowed." "For those who
may eat, and for those who may not eat it?" "For those who are reckoned
in one company, and for those who are not so reckoned?" "For
circumcised, and for uncircumcised?" "For unclean, and for

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

clean?" "It is allowed." "If he slaughtered it before noon?" "It is
disallowed." Because it is said "between the evenings." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_147) "If he slaughtered it before the daily
offering?" "It is allowed." Except that one must keep stirring <span
id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_148) its blood, till the blood of the daily
offering be sprinkled. "But if it be even sprinkled (before?)" "It is
lawful."

4\. "He who slaughtered the passover-offering possessing leaven?" "He
transgressed a negative command." <span id="fr_152"></span>[3](#fn_149)
Rabbi Judah said, "this applies even to the daily offering (of that
evening)." Rabbi Simon said, "the slaughter of the passover on the
fourteenth with intention for the passover makes (a man possessing
leaven) guilty; but if it be slaughtered without intention for the
passover he is free." "And in all other sacrifices during the feast,
whether one sacrifice with or without the proper intention?" "He is
free." "When one thus offers in the feast itself with proper intention?"
"He is free." "Without proper intention?" "He is guilty." "And in all
the other sacrifices, when one possessing leaven offers either with or
without intention?" "He is guilty, only excepting the sin-offering,
which was slaughtered without intention."

5\. The passover was slaughtered <span id="fr_153"></span>[4](#fn_150)
for three bands in succession, as is said, "The whole assembly of the
congregation of Israel" <span id="fr_154"></span>[5](#fn_151)—assembly,
congregation, Israel. The first band entered, the court was filled, the
doors of the court were locked. The trumpeters blew with the trumpets,
blew an alarm, and blew. The priests stood in rows, and in their hands
were bowls of silver and bowls of gold. All the silver row was entirely
silver, and all the golden row was entirely gold. They were not mingled.
And the bowls were not flat-bottomed, lest they should lay them down,
and the blood be coagulated.

6\. When an Israelite slaughtered, and a priest caught

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the blood, he gave it to his companion, and his companion to his
companion, and he took the full, and returned the empty bowl. The priest
nearest the altar poured it out at once in front of the foundation of
the altar.

7\. The first band went out, the second band entered; the second went
out, the third entered. As was the proceeding of the first, so was the
proceeding of the second and the third. They read the praise. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_152) When they finished they repeated it, and
after repeating it they read it a third time, even though they did not
complete it thrice in their time. R. Judah said, "during the time of the
third band they did not reach to 'I love the Lord, for He hath heard,'
because the people were few."

8\. As was the proceeding in ordinary days, so was the proceeding on the
Sabbath, save that the priests washed out the court, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_153) though not with the will of the Sages.
R. Judah said, "a cup was filled with mixed-up blood, <span
id="fr_157"></span>[3](#fn_154) and poured out at once upon the altar;"
but the Sages "did not admit it."

9\. "How did they hang up and skin the passover sacrifices?" "Iron hooks
were fixed in the walls and pillars, and on them they hung them, and
skinned them." "And every one who had not a place to hang them up and
skin them?" "Thin smooth rods were there, and he rested one on his
shoulder and on the shoulder of his companion, and hung it up and
skinned it." Rabbi Eliezer said, "when the fourteenth began on a
Sabbath, he rested his hand on the shoulder of his companion, and the
hand of his companion on his shoulder, and he hung it up and skinned
it."

10\. He cut it open, and took out its entrails. He put them on a dish
and incensed them on the altar. The first party went out, and sat down
on the Mountain of the House. The second party were in the Chel, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[4](#fn_155) and the third party remained in their
place. When it grew dark they went out and roasted their Passovers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[103:5](bar043.htm#fr_149) *i.e.* 2.30 p.m.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[104:1](bar043.htm#fr_150) Exod. xii. 6.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[104:2](bar043.htm#fr_151) To prevent its
coagulating.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[104:3](bar043.htm#fr_152) Exod. xxiii. 18.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[104:4](bar043.htm#fr_153) Josephus mentions
the number of lambs slain at a particular passover to have been numbered
by the high priest, and they were found to have been 256,500. Allowing
not less than ten persons to the eating of each lamb, he computes those
present at the feast to have been 2,700,200 persons.—Josephus’ *Wars*,
vi. 9, 3.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[104:5](bar043.htm#fr_154) Exod. xii. 6.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[105:1](bar043.htm#fr_155) Psalms
cxiii.-cxviii.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[105:2](bar043.htm#fr_156) They washed the
court *indirectly* by stopping a canal of water which overflowed the
court; they afterwards opened it, when all flowed off again.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[105:3](bar043.htm#fr_157) Taken from the
intermingled blood of the many offerings.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[105:4](bar043.htm#fr_158) See measurements,
ii. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](bar044)
