[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar029)  [Next](bar031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X.

1\. The Sabbatical year releases <span id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_80) a
loan, whether it be with or without a bill. The credit of a shop is not
released.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But if one made it
as a loan, it is released. Rabbi Judah said, "all the first credit is
released, the wages of an hireling is not released." "But if one made it
as a loan?" "It is released." Rabbi José said, "every work which ceases
on the Sabbatical year is released; but that which does not cease on the
Sabbatical year is not released from payment."

2\. The butcher who slaughtered a heifer (at the end of the Sabbatical
year), and divided her head (for sale on the first of the two feast
days) of the new year, remains a debtor; but if he did so in an
intercalary month, <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_81) he is released
(Deut. xv. 1). But if it be not an intercalary month, he is not
released. He who forced, or enticed, or uttered a slander, and every act
of the tribunal, have no release. "He who lent on security, or delivered
his bills to the tribunal?" "There is no release for him."

3\. The Defence <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_82) (for the poor) has
no release. This is one of the things which the old Hillel ruled. When
he saw that the people refrained from mutual loans, and transgressed
what is written in the law, "Beware that there be not a thought in thy
wicked heart," <span id="fr_84"></span>[3](#fn_83) etc., Hillel ruled
the Defence.

4\. This is the substance of the Defence, "I hand over to you judges
such and such men in such a place, that every debt which belongs to me I
may collect, whenever I please." And the judges or witnesses sealed it
below.

5\. The Defence written before the Sabbatical year is valid, but
afterwards it is disallowed. Bills written before the Sabbatical year
are disallowed, but afterwards they are valid. He who borrows from five
persons must write a Defence for each of them. If five persons borrow
from one, he writes but one defence for all of them.

6\. Men must not write a Defence save only on ground. "If he have none?"
"The lender may present him with however little from his own field." "If
he had a field in pledge in

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

a city?" "He may write on it the Defence." Rabbi Huzpith said, "a man
may write it on the property of his wife; and for orphans on the
property of their guardians."

7\. "Beehives?" R. Eliezer said, "they are as ground, and men may write
on them a Defence, and they contract no legal uncleanness in their
proper place, but he who takes honey out of them on the Sabbath is
liable (for a sin-offering). The Sages, however, say they are not as
ground, and men must not write on them a Defence, and they do contract
legal defilement in their place, and he who takes honey out of them on
the Sabbath is free."

8\. "He who paid his debt on the Sabbatical year?" "The lender must say
to him, 'I release thee.'" "When he said it to him?" "Even so, he may
receive it from him, as is said, and this is the manner of the
release." <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_84) It is like the slayer who
was banished to the city of refuge, and the men of the city wished to
honour him. He must say to them, "I am a murderer." They say to him,
"Even so." He may receive the honour from them, as is said, "and this is
the case of the slayer." <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_85)

9\. "He who pays a debt in the Sabbatical year?" "The spirit of the
Sages reposes on him." <span id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_86) "He who
borrowed from a proselyte, when his children <span
id="fr_88"></span>[4](#fn_87) became proselytes with him?" "He need not
repay his children." "But if he repay them?" "The spirit of the Sages
reposes on him." All moveables become property by acquisition; but every
one who keeps his word,

THE SPIRIT  
OF THE SAGES  
REPOSES  
ON  
HIM.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[80:3](bar030.htm#fr_81) Deut. xv. 1.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[81:1](bar030.htm#fr_82) This decision supposes
the case of the month Elul having thirty days, and the last day to be in
the Sabbatical year; consequently it would not be one of the two feast
days of the new year, which it should have been if the month had been
the usual lunar month.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[81:2](bar030.htm#fr_83) "The Defence," called
Pruzbul (προσβολή), was a legal document constituted to encourage loans
to the poor, and to protect the interests of the lender.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[81:3](bar030.htm#fr_84) Deut. xv. 9.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[82:1](bar030.htm#fr_85) Deut. xv. 2.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[82:2](bar030.htm#fr_86) Deut. xix. 4.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[82:3](bar030.htm#fr_87) *i.e.* They are well
pleased with him.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[82:4](bar030.htm#fr_88) Money owing to Jewish
proselytes was generally repaid, but it was not obligatory to pay it to
their heirs, as the persons from whom the proselytes came were no longer
in a religious sense their next of kin.

<span class="smallcaps">Note</span>.—At the Feast of Tabernacles in the
Sabbatical year, the following portions of Scripture were appointed to
be read:—Deut. i. 1-6; vi. 4-8; xi. 1322; xiv. 22; xv. 23; xvii. 14;
xxvi. 12-19; xxvii.; xxviii. These portions were read by the king or
high priest from a wooden platform erected in the Temple. The king or
the high priest usually read them sitting. King Agrippa, however, read
them standing, and when he came to the words "Thou mayst not set a
stranger over thee, which is not thy brother" (Deut. xvii. 15), "tears
dropped from his eyes." The people then cried out to encourage him,
"Thou art our brother—thou art our brother" (Sotah, vii. 8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar031)
