[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar044)  [Next](bar046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

1\. "How do men roast the passover?" "They bring a stick of pomegranate
and thrust it through its mouth to its tail. And they put its legs and
intestines inside it." The words of R. José, the Galilean. Rabbi Akiba
said, "that is a kind of boiling, therefore they hang them outside of
it."

2\. Men must not roast the passover on a spit or a gridiron. Said R.
Zaduk, "it happened to Rabban Gamaliel that he said to Zabi, his
servant, 'go and roast for us the passover on the gridiron.'" "If it
touch the side of the oven?" "That part must be peeled off." "If its
gravy drop on the side of the oven, and again return on it?" "That part
must be taken out." "If the gravy drop on the fine flour?" "That part
must be pulled out" (and burned).

3\. "If men anointed (basted) it with oil of the heave-offering?" "If it
be a company of priests, they may eat it." "If it be a company of
Israelites?" "If it be raw they can wash it away." "But if roast?" "They
must peel off the surface." "If it was anointed with oil of the second
tithe?" "Its value in money must not be charged to the members of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the company, because they cannot redeem <span
id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_159) the second tithes in Jerusalem."

4\. Five things may be brought during legal uncleanness, but they must
not be eaten in legal uncleanness: the sheaf, <span
id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_160) the two wave loaves, <span
id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_161) and the shewbread, <span
id="fr_165"></span>[4](#fn_162) sacrifices of peace-offerings of the
congregation, <span id="fr_166"></span>[5](#fn_163) and the kids <span
id="fr_167"></span>[6](#fn_164) on the feast of the New Moon. The
passover which was brought during legal uncleanness, may be eaten in
uncleanness, because in the beginning the command came only for eating.

5\. "If the flesh be legally unclean and the fat unpolluted?" "The
priest must not sprinkle its blood on the altar." "If the fat be unclean
and the flesh unpolluted?" "The priest may sprinkle its blood." But with
other holy offerings it is not so, for though their flesh be unclean,
and their fat remains unpolluted, the priest may sprinkle their blood on
the altar.

6\. "If the congregation be legally unclean, or its majority, or the
priests be legally unclean, and the congregation legally clean?" "The
passover may be kept in legal uncleanness." "If the minority of the
congregation be legally unclean?" "The clean majority can keep the
first, and the unclean minority the second passover" (on the 14th day of
the following month).

7\. When the blood of the passover-offering was poured on the altar, and
it was afterwards known that it was unclean, the (golden) <span
id="fr_168"></span>[7](#fn_165) plate of the High Priest makes it
accepted. When the body of the paschal sacrifice was unclean, "the
plate" cannot make it accepted, as they say the Nazarite and the
celebrant of the passover have the uncleanness of the blood accepted
with "the plate." But "the plate" does not make the legal uncleanness of
the body of the paschal lamb accepted. If it be legally unclean with an
unknown uncleanness, the plate makes it accepted.

8\. "If it be legally unclean in whole or in most part?" "The passover
must be burned in front of 'the palace' <span
id="fr_169"></span>[8](#fn_166) with the wood of the altar." "A little
which is unclean, and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

that which is left over?" "The owners may burn it in their own courts,
or on their roofs with their own wood." The stingy ones burnt it in
front of the palace, that they might use the wood of the altar.

9\. "The passover which was carried out of the city, or became unclean?"
"The owner must burn it off-hand." "Its masters became unclean or died?"
"Let its appearance change, and let it be burned on the
sixteenth." <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_167) Rabbi Jochanan, the
son of Beruka, said, "even it must be burned off-hand, because it has no
one to eat it."

10\. "Bones and tendons and what is left over?" They must be burned on
the sixteenth. "If the sixteenth happened on a Sabbath?" "They must be
burned on the seventeenth, because they cannot abrogate either the laws
of the Sabbath or the holiday."

11\. All that is eaten in a great ox may be eaten in a tender kid, and
the tops of the shoulder-blades, and the gristle. "Whoever broke any
bone in a clean passover?" "He must receive forty stripes." "But for
what is left over in the clean, and broken in an unclean passover?" "He
does not receive the forty."

12\. "A member partly displaced?" "One must cut in till he reach the
bone, and he must peel off the flesh till he reach the joint, and he
cuts it off. But in other holy offerings one may cleave the displaced
members with an axe, since there does not exist any (prohibition of)
breaking the bone for them." (For example), from the door-post and
inwards is inside. From the door-post and outwards is outside. The
windows and thickness of the wall are reckoned as inside.

13\. "Two companies which eat the passover in one house?" "These turn
their faces to this side and eat; and those turn their faces to that
side and eat. And the boiler <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_168) is
between the companies. The servant stands to mix wine. The servant must
shut his mouth till he serve the other

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

company. He afterwards turns his face till he reach his own company, and
then he may eat. And she who is newly married can turn her face aside
and eat it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[109:1](bar045.htm#fr_162) Jer. Tal. reads
"sell."

<span id="fn_160"></span>[109:2](bar045.htm#fr_163) Lev. xxiii. 11.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[109:3](bar045.htm#fr_164) Lev. xxiii. 17.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[109:4](bar045.htm#fr_165) Exod. xxv. 30.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[109:5](bar045.htm#fr_166) Lev. xxiii. 19.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[109:6](bar045.htm#fr_167) Numb. xxviii. 15.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[109:7](bar045.htm#fr_168) Exod. xxviii. 36-38.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[109:8](bar045.htm#fr_169) 1 Chron. xxix. 19.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[110:1](bar045.htm#fr_170) It remained uneaten
overnight, and therefore must be burned, in accordance with Exod. xii.
10.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[110:2](bar045.htm#fr_171) From the need of a
boiler it appears that the wine used at the Passover was mixed with hot
water. The wine itself was always red.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](bar046)
