[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar070)  [Next](bar072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

### CHAPTER II.

1\. Men may not discourse on illegal connections with three, <span
id="fr_358"></span>[1](#fn_353) nor on the work of creation with
two, <span id="fr_359"></span>[2](#fn_354) nor on the cherubs with
one, <span id="fr_360"></span>[3](#fn_355) save when one is wise, and
comprehends it of his own knowledge. Every one who considers four
things, it were suitable for him that he did not come into the world.
What is in the height? what is in the depth? what is before? and what is
behind? And every one who is not anxious for the honour of his Creator,
it were suitable for him that he did not come into the world.

2\. José the son of Joezar said that "one is not to lay his hand on the
offering." José the son of Jochanan said, "he is to lay his hand on the
offering." Joshua the son of Perachia said, that he "is not to lay on
his hand." Nittai the Arbelite said, "he is to lay on his hand." Judah
the son of Tabai said, that "he is not to lay on his hand." Simon the
son of Shatach said, "he is to lay on his hand." Shemaiah said, "he is
to lay on his hand." Abtalion said, "he is not to lay on his hand."
Hillel and Menachem did not dispute. Menachem went out and Shammai
entered. Shammai said, "he is not to lay on his hand." Hillel said, "he
is to lay on his hand." <span id="fr_361"></span>[4](#fn_356) The first
were Princes, and the second were Presidents of the Tribunal.

3\. The school of Shammai said, "men may bring peace-offerings during
the feast, but they are not to lay their hands on them, and they are not
to bring burnt-offerings." But the house of Hillel say, "they may bring
peace-offerings, and burnt-offerings, and lay their hands on them."

4\. "When Pentecost happens to be on the eve of the Sabbath?" The school
of Shammai say, "the day of slaughtering the offering is after the
Sabbath." But the

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

school of Hillel say, "there is no day of slaughtering after the
Sabbath." But they both acknowledge that if it happened to be on the
Sabbath, the day of slaughter is after the Sabbath. And the high priest
must not robe in his vestments, though they are allowed in seasons of
mourning and fasting, for fear of confirming the words of those who say
that "Pentecost is after the Sabbath." <span
id="fr_362"></span>[1](#fn_357)

5\. Men must wash their hands for ordinary eating, but for tithes and
for the heave-offering they must be baptized. And for the sin-offering,
if the hands be unclean, the body is unclean.

6\. He who baptized himself for ordinary eating, and indicated it to be
for ordinary eating, he is prohibited from (eating) the tithe. "If he
baptized for the tithe, and indicated it to be for the tithe?" "He is
prohibited from eating heave-offerings." "If he baptized for
heave-offerings, and indicated it to be for heave-offerings?" "He is
prohibited from eating the holy flesh." "If he baptized for the holy
flesh, and indicated it to be for the holy flesh?" "He is prohibited
from the sin-offering." "If he baptized for the weighty?" "He is
permitted the light" "If he baptized, and did not indicate his
intention?" "It is as no baptism."

7\. Treading on the garments of an ordinary man defiled the Pharisees.
Treading on the garments of the Pharisees defiled those who eat the
heave-offering. Treading on the garments of those who eat the
heave-offering defiled for the holy flesh. Treading on the garments of
those who eat the holy flesh defiles for the sin-offering. Joseph the
son of Joezer was the most pious of the priesthood, and treading on his
cloak defiled for the holy flesh. Jochanan the son of Gudgada used to
eat with the purification for the holy flesh all his life; and treading
on his cloak defiled for the sin-offering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_353"></span>[171:1](bar071.htm#fr_358) From motives of
delicacy.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[171:2](bar071.htm#fr_359) This must be done
only by one Deut. iv. 32).

<span id="fn_355"></span>[171:3](bar071.htm#fr_360) Ezek. x.; Isaiah vi.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[171:4](bar071.htm#fr_361) This decision is for
private sacrifices, but for public sacrifices there seems (according to
the Talmud) to have been no "laying on of hands," except in the case of
the scapegoat and the bullock, when the congregation had sinned through
ignorance.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[172:1](bar071.htm#fr_362) *i.e.* The Sadducees
(Lev. xxiii. 15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bar072)
