[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar087)  [Next](bar089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

1\. "Has an idolater hired an Israelite to make with him wine of
idolatrous libation?" "His wages are forbidden." "But if he hired him to
do with him another work, even though he say to him, 'carry for me a
barrel of wine of libation from place to place?'" "His wages are
allowed." "Has one hired an ass to bring on him wine of idolatrous
libation?" "The hire is not allowed." "Has one hired out the ass for
riding, even though the idolater put his wine flask upon hire?" The hire
is allowed."

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

2\. Wine of idolatrous libation which fell on grapes must be cleansed
away, and they are allowed. But if the grapes be crushed, they are
forbidden. "Has the idolatrous wine fallen on figs or on dates?" "If it
convey to them a taste, they are forbidden." It happened once with
Baithus, son of Zonan, that he brought dried figs in a boat, and a
barrel of wine of idolatrous libation was broken, and it fell upon them,
and he consulted the Sages and they allowed them. This is the rule, In
every use where the taste is conveyed, it is forbidden. But where in its
use no taste is conveyed, it is allowed. It is like vinegar which has
fallen on peas.

3\. "An idolater who was carrying with an Israelite pitchers of wine
from place to place?" "If it be certain that the idolater is watched, it
is allowed." "If the Israelite let him know that he is departing—if
there be time to bore, to close, and to seal the pitcher?" R. Simon, son
of Gamaliel, said, "it is not allowed if there be time to open, to cork,
and to seal it again." "And an Israelite put his wine into a carriage,
or into a boat, and he has gone a near cut—he entered the city and
washed?" "It is allowed." "But if he let the idolater know that he is
departing, if there be time to bore, and cork, and seal it again?" R.
Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, "it is not allowed if there be time to
open the barrel and cork and seal it again." "If he leave the idolater
in the wine-shop, even though he go in and out?" "It is allowed." "But
if he let the idolater know that he departs, if there be time to bore,
and cork, and seal it again?" R. Simon ben Gamaliel said, "it is not
allowed if there be time to open, and to cork, and to seal it again."
"Did he dine with the idolater at table, and he left a flask on the
table, and a flask on the sideboard, and he left them and went out?"
"That one which is on the table is forbidden, but that one on the
sideboard is allowed." "But if be said to him, 'you may mix and drink
wine, even that one on the sideboard is forbidden.'" <span
id="fr_461"></span>[1](#fn_455) "Open barrels are forbidden, also sealed
ones, when there is time to open, and cork, and seal them up again."

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

4\. If foreign banditti have entered into a city in time of peace, open
barrels are forbidden—closed ones are allowed. If the banditti have
entered in time of war, both are equally allowed, because there is no
time for idolatrous libation.

5\. When an idolater has sent to workmen of Israel a barrel of wine of
idolatrous libation for wages, it is allowed to say, "give us its
value." "But if it has come into their possession?" "It is forbidden."

6\. "Has one sold wine to an idolater?" "If he agreed for the price
before it is measured, its payment is allowed." "Has he measured it
before he agreed for the price?" "Its payment is forbidden."

7\. "Has one taken a funnel. and measured wine into the bottle of an
idolater, and he then turned round and measured wine into the bottle of
an Israelite?" "If the funnel retain a drop of the wine of the idolater,
the wine is forbidden." "Has one poured the wine from vessel to vessel?"
"That vessel from which he poured it is allowed, and that one into which
he poured it is forbidden."

8\. Wine of idolatrous libation is forbidden, and even a little of it
renders forbidden—wine in wine, and water in water—how much soever they
be, and wine in water, and water in wine, in giving a taste. This is the
rule,—If both be of one sort, however little; if they be of different
sorts, in giving a taste.

9\. These things are forbidden, and even a little of them renders other
things forbidden. Wine of idolatrous libation, and idols, and skins of
beasts with the hearts torn out, and an ox that was stoned, <span
id="fr_462"></span>[1](#fn_456) and an heifer that is beheaded, <span
id="fr_463"></span>[2](#fn_457) and the birds from the leprosy, and the
hair of the Nazarite, <span id="fr_464"></span>[3](#fn_458) and the
first-born of the ass, and flesh in milk, and the scapegoat, and the
profane animals <span id="fr_465"></span>[4](#fn_459) which were
slaughtered in the Temple court. These are forbidden to be mixed with
other things; and if so mixed, even a little of them renders other
things forbidden.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

10\. "Wine of idolatrous libation which has fallen into a vat?" "All its
use is forbidden." R. Simon ben Gamaliel said, "it may all be sold to
heathens, excepting the value of the wine of idolatrous libation which
is in it."

11\. "A stone press which an idolater has prepared with pitch?" "It must
be cleansed, and it is clean." "And if of wood?" Rabbi said, "it should
be cleansed;" and the Sages said, "one must peel off the pitch; but if
it be made of earthenware, even though one peel off the pitch, it is
forbidden."

12\. "If one buy culinary utensils from an idolater?" "That which it is
usual to dip (in water), one must dip; to scour, one must scour; to
whiten in the fire, one must whiten in fire. The spit and the fork, one
must whiten in the fire; <span id="fr_466"></span>[1](#fn_460) and the
knife must be rubbed down, and it is clean."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_455"></span>[215:1](bar088.htm#fr_461) Because the idolater
might have made an idolatrous libation from both flasks.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[216:1](bar088.htm#fr_462) Exod. xxi. 29.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[216:2](bar088.htm#fr_463) Deut. xxi. 4.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[216:3](bar088.htm#fr_464) Numb. vi. 18.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[216:4](bar088.htm#fr_465) This refers to the
killing or slaughtering of cattle and fowls for profane or domestic
purposes. They were called profane to distinguish them from the holy
sacrifices.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[217:1](bar088.htm#fr_466) Numb. xxxi. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](bar089)
