[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar133)  [Next](bar135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

1\. "If one poured on his hand one gush?" "His hand is clean." "If on
both hands one gush?" R. Meir pronounces them "unclean, until one poured
out of a quarter log (vessel) upon them." "If an heave-loaf fall (on the
water)?" "It is clean." R. José "pronounces it unclean."

2\. "If one poured out his first (ablution) in one place, and his second
in another place, and a heave-loaf fall on the first?" "It is unclean."
"If on the second?" "It is clean." "If one poured out both the first and
second (ablutions) into one place, and a heave-loaf fall on them?" "It
is unclean." "If one poured out his first ablution, and find on his hand
a splinter or small stone?" "His hands are unclean, as the second water
only purifies the first washing on the hand." <span
id="fr_670"></span>[2](#fn_663) R. Simon, the son of Gamaliel, says,
"whatsoever is a creation of the water is clean."

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

3\. The hands become legally unclean, or legally clean up to the wrist.
"How?" "If one poured the first (ablution) up to the wrist, and the
second above the wrist, and the water ran back into the hand?" "It is
clean." "If one poured the first and second (ablutions) above the wrist,
and the water ran back into the hand?" "It is unclean." "If one poured
the first (ablution) over one hand, and afterwards the second over both
hands?" "They are unclean." "If one poured the first (ablution) over
both hands, and afterwards the second over one hand?" "His hand is
clean." "If one poured water on one hand and then rubbed it against its
fellow?" "It is unclean." "If he rubbed it against his head, or against
the wall?" "It is clean." Men may pour water over four or five persons
alongside of each other, or above each other, provided they be
separated, so that the water can come on them.

4\. "There is a doubt if the water has been used; there is a doubt if it
has not been used; there is a doubt if it be the prescribed quantity,
there is a doubt if it be not the prescribed quantity: there is a doubt
if it be (legally) unclean, there is a doubt if it be (legally) clean?"
"In doubting he is clean," because the Sages said, "if there be a doubt
of his hands being unclean, or imparting uncleanness, or being clean, he
is clean." R. José said, "if there be a doubt of cleanness it is
uncleanness." "How?" "His hands are clean, and before him are two
unclean loaves, it is doubtful if he touched them, it is doubtful if he
did not touch them: his hands are unclean, and before him are two clean
loaves, it is doubtful if he touched them, it is doubtful if he did not
touch them?" "His hands are one unclean and one clean." "And before him
are two clean loaves: he touched one of them, it is doubtful if he
touched the unclean, it is doubtful if he touched the clean?" "His hands
are clean." "And before him are two loaves, one unclean and one clean,
he touched one of them, it is doubtful if he touched the unclean, it is
doubtful if he touched the clean?" "His hands are one unclean and one
clean." "And before him are two loaves, one unclean and one clean, he
touched both of them, it is

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

doubtful if it were the unclean (loaf) with the unclean (hand), or the
clean (loaf) with the clean (hand), or the clean loaf with the unclean
(hand), or the unclean loaf with the clean hand?" "The hands remain as
they were, and the loaves as they were." <span
id="fr_671"></span>[1](#fn_664)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_663"></span>[325:2](bar134.htm#fr_670) And consequently
does not purify the place covered by the splinter or stone, which
remained unwashed by the first water.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[327:1](bar134.htm#fr_671) Those that were
legally clean continue clean, and those legally unclean continue
unclean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bar135)
