[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bar122)  [Next](bar124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z4K8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud*, by Joseph Barclay, \[1878\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

1\. Seven days before the burning of the heifer, the priest who burned
the heifer was removed from his house to the chamber in front of the
Temple Palace towards the northeast; <span
id="fr_632"></span>[1](#fn_625) and it was called the Stone House. And
he was sprinkled during all the seven days from all the ashes of red
heifers which were there. R. José said "they did not sprinkle him save
on the third and seventh days only." R. Hananiah, the deputy high
priest, said, "on the priest who burned the heifer they sprinkled during
all the seven days, but on him who took service on the Day of Atonement,
they did not sprinkle save on the third and seventh days only."

2\. There were courts in Jerusalem built of stone, and beneath they were
hollow, <span id="fr_633"></span>[2](#fn_626) through fear of an unseen
grave. And pregnant women were brought, and they were delivered there.
And there they reared their sons, and oxen were brought with doors on
their backs, and the lads were seated

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

on them with stone cups in their hands. They came to Siloam, they
dismounted, and filled them. They remounted, and returned on the backs
of the oxen. R. José said, "from their seats on the backs of the oxen
they let down (the cups) and filled them (with water)."

3\. The lads came back to the Mountain of the House and dismounted. The
Mountain of the House and its courts were hollow below through fear of
an unseen grave. And at the door of the court there were prepared the
ashes of the red heifers; and they brought a ram from the sheep, and
they twisted a rope between his horns, and they twisted a stick and
stuck it into the end of the rope, and it was dipped into the ashes, and
the ram got a blow, and he skipped backwards, and took them, and caused
them to appear on the surface of the water. R. José said, "you should
not give an opportunity to the Sadducees for scoffing: but (the lad)
took and prepared the ashes."

4\. They did not make use of (what pertained) to one red heifer for a
second one, nor did they use another lad for <span
id="fr_634"></span>[1](#fn_627) his (prepared) companion. "And the lads
themselves were in need of sprinkling." The words of Rabbi José the
Galilean. R. Akiba said, "they had no need of sprinkling."

5\. If they did not find (ashes) of seven red heifers, six were
sufficient, five, four, three, two, one. "And who made them?" "Moses
made the first. And Ezra the second, and (there were) five from Ezra and
afterwards." The words of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say, "seven from
Ezra and afterwards." "And who made them?" "Simon the Just, and John the
High Priest made each two. Elihueni son of Hakuf, and Hanamel the
Egyptian, and Ishmael, son of Piani, made one each."

6\. And a causeway was made from the Mountain of the House to the Mount
of Olives, with arches over arches. And there was an arch in front of
the last pillar for fear of an unseen grave. Over it the priest who
burned the heifer, and the heifer with all her attendants, proceeded to
the Mount of Olives.

<span id="img_30500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TOP OF THE MOUNT
OF OLIVES, AS SEEN FROM MOUNT MORIAH.&lt;br&gt; (To illustrate the
Treatise on The Red Heifer.)](tn/30500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/30500.jpg)  
TOP OF THE MOUNT OF OLIVES, AS SEEN FROM MOUNT MORIAH.  
(To illustrate the Treatise on The Red Heifer.)  
</span>

<span class="small">PAGE 305</span>

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

7\. If the heifer were unwilling to go, they did not bring with her a
black one, lest it be said, "they slaughtered a black one" nor a red
one, lest it be said, "they slaughtered two." R. José said, “this was
not the reason, but because it is only said, “That he may bring her
forth.” <span id="fr_635"></span>[1](#fn_628) And the elders of Israel
preceded her on foot to the Mount of Olives. And a house for washing was
there. And the priest who burned the heifer was rendered unclean because
of the Sadducees, <span id="fr_636"></span>[2](#fn_629) lest they should
say, "it is needful for sunset to pass over him." <span
id="fr_637"></span>[3](#fn_630)

8\. The elders put their hands on the priest and said, "my Lord High
Priest, wash once." He descended and washed, and he came up and wiped
himself. And wood was set in order there, cedar, and ash, and cypress,
and figwood smoothed. And it was made like a tower, and windows were
opened in it, and their direction was westward.

9\. The red heifer was bound with a rope of bulrushes, and she was put
on the place of preparation, with her head southward, and with her face
westward. The priest stood in the east with his face westward. He
slaughtered the heifer with his right hand, and received (the blood) in
his left hand. R. Judah said, "he received it in his right hand, and put
it into his left, and sprinkled it with his right hand." He dipped his
hand, and sprinkled the blood seven times in front of the House of the
Holy of Holies. For every sprinkling of blood he dipped his hand. When
he finished sprinkling the blood he wiped his hand on the body of the
heifer. He went down and kindled the fire with chips. Rabbi Akiba said,
"with palm branches."

10\. She burst and moved from her place. He took cedar wood and hyssop,
and scarlet (wool). He said to them, "is this cedar wood, is this cedar
wood?" "is this hyssop, is this hyssop?" "is this scarlet, is this
scarlet?" three times for each thing. And they said to him, "yes,"
"yes," three times for each thing.”

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

11\. He wrapped them in the remainder <span
id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_631) of the tongue of scarlet wool, and cast
them into the midst of the burning. When the fire was burned down, the
ashes were beaten with sticks, and sifted with sieves. R. Ishmael said,
"with stone hammers, and the work was finished with stone sieves." A
black piece in which there are ashes must be pulverized, and that which
has no ashes is left. Bones with or without ashes were pulverized. And
they were divided into three parts. One part was put in the Chel, and
one was put on the Mount of Olives, and one was divided for all the
guards. <span id="fr_639"></span>[2](#fn_632) (*i.e.*, the
representatives of all Israel).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_625"></span>[303:1](bar123.htm#fr_632) Nehem. ii. 8. 1
Chron. xxix. 1.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[303:2](bar123.htm#fr_633) According to Jewish
tradition a dead body covered in with earth conveyed legal uncleanness
to every one who walked over it; but if a vault was over the body, or if
air intervened between the corpse and the surface of the ground, it was
regarded as a non-conductor. There are reckoned six degrees of
uncleanness—the father of fathers—the fathers—the first, second, third,
and fourth children of defilement. There are altogether twenty-nine
fathers of uncleanness, of which eleven arise from contact with a dead
body.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[304:1](bar123.htm#fr_634) Some commentators
explain that "each heifer requires a fresh lad."

<span id="fn_628"></span>[305:1](bar123.htm#fr_635) Numb. xix. 3.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[305:2](bar123.htm#fr_636) The Pharisees
asserted that a priest might be defiled, and that after washing he was
legally clean for burning the red heifer. But the Sadducees maintained
that he was not legally clean before sunset. Numb. xix. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[305:3](bar123.htm#fr_637) Lev. xxii. 7.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[306:1](bar123.htm#fr_638) The cedar, hyssop,
and scarlet wool were laid parallel to each other, and whatever portion
of the scarlet wool remained too long was wrapped round the bundle.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[306:2](bar123.htm#fr_639) Numb. xix. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](bar124)
