[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ltw87)  [Next](ltw89) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3TA0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/t_yy.jpg)](index)  
*Laotzu's Tao and Wu Wei*, by Dwight Goddard and Henri Borel, \[1919\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### CHAPTER II

### ART

"WHAT is art?" I asked the hermit.

We were sitting upon the mountainside, in the shadow of an overhanging
rock. Before us stretched the sea-one endless gleam of light in the
sunshine. Golden sails were driving quietly over it, and white seagulls
sweeping in noble curvings lightly hither and thither, while great,
snow-pure clouds came up and sailed by in the blue, majestic in
progress, steady and slow.

"It is as natural as the sea--the birds--the clouds," he answered. "I do
not think you will find this so hard to gasp and feel as Tao. You have
only to look around you--earth, clouds, atmosphere, everything will
teach it you. Poetry has existed as long as heaven and
earth. [11](ltw90.htm#xref_11)

"Beauty was born with the heavens and the earth. The sun, the moon, and
the red mists of morning and evening illumine each other, and
yet--inexhaustible and wonderful as are the changes presented by
them--Nature's great phenomena--there exist no pigments, as for
garments., to dye them withal. All phenomena of the world bring forth
sound when set in motion, and every sound implies some motion which has
so

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

caused it. The greatest of all sounds are wind and thunder.

"Listen to the mountain stream racing over the rocks! As soon as it is
set in motion the sound of it--high or low, short or long--makes itself
heard, not actually according to the laws of music, it is true, yet
having a certain rhythm and system.

"This is the spontaneous voice of heaven and earth; the voice that is
caused by movement.

"Well! In the purest state of the human heart--when the fire of the
spirit is at its brightest--then; if it be moved, that too will give
forth sound. Is it not a wondrous metamorphosis that out of this a
literature should be created?

"So Poetry is the sound of the heart?"

"You will feel how natural this is. Poetry is to be heard and seen
everywhere, for the whole of Nature is one great poet. But just because
of its simplicity, therefore is it so strict and unalterable. Where the
spring of movement is, there flows the sound of the poem. Any other
sound is no poetry. The sound must come quite of itself--Wu-Wei--it
cannot be generated by any artifices. There are many--how many!--who by
unnatural movement force forth sound; but these are no poets--rather do
they resemble apes and parrots. Few indeed are the true poets. From
these the verse flows of itself, full of music,--powerful as the roaring
of the torrent amongst the rocks, as the rolling of thunder in the
clouds,--soft as the swishing of an evening shower, or the gentle breath
of a summer night-breeze.--Hark!

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

hark to the sea at our feet! Is it not singing a wondrous song? Is it
not a very poem?--is it not pure music? See how the waves sway, in
ceaseless mobility--one after the other--one over the other--swinging
onward and onward--ever further and further--returning to vanish in
music once more! Dost thou hear their rhythmic rushing? Oh! great and
simple must a poet be--like the sea! His movement, like that of the sea,
is an impulse out of Tao, and in that--tranquil, strifeless, obedient as
a child--must he let himself go. Great, great is the sea! Great, great
is the poet. But greater--greater--is Tao, that which is not great!"

He was silent, listening to the sea, and I saw how the music of it
entered into him.

I had reflected much since hearing his first words concerning Tao. I was
fearful lest his great and lofty philosophy should mean death to the
artist, and that I also, in giving myself over to this wisdom of his,
should become incapable of feeling the inspiration of the poet, and of
being any more childishly enraptured at the sight of beauty.

But he himself was standing there in the purest ecstasy, as though he
were now looking upon the sea for the first time; and reverently, with
shining eyes, he listened to the rush of the waves. "Is it not
beautiful?" he said again, "is it not beautiful,--this sound, that came
out of Tao, the soundless?--this light, that shone out of Tao, 'the
lightless? and the word-music: verse, born of Tao the wordless? Do we
not live in an

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

endless mystery?--resolving one day into absolute truth!"

I was a long time silent. But its very simplicity was hard for me to
grasp. And I asked him doubtfully: "Can it really be so easy--to make
and sing poems? It is surely not so easy for us to bring forth verse as
for the stream to rush over the rocks? Must we not first practise and
train ourselves, and learn to know the verse-forms thoroughly? And is
not that voluntary action, rather than involuntary motion?"

My question did not embarrass him, and he answered at once:--

"Do not let that perplex you. All depends on whether a man has in him
the true spring from which the verse should flow, or not. Has lie the
pure impulse from Tao within him? or is his life-motive something less
simply beautiful? If he has that source in him he is a poet, if he has
it not he is none. By this time you surely realize that, considered from
a high standpoint, all men are really poets; for, as I have told you,
there exists in all men the essential, original impulse emanating from
and returning to Tao. But rarely do we find this impulse alert and
strongly developed--rarely are men endowed with perception of the higher
revelations of beauty, through which their bank-bound life-stream flows
till lost in boundless eternity. One might express it thus: that
ordinary men are like still water in swampy ground, in the midst of poor
vegetation; while poets are clear streams, flowing

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

amidst the splendour of luxuriant banks to the endless ocean. But I
would rather not speak so much in symbols, for that is not plain enough.

"You would fain know whether a man who *has* the true inspiration of the
poet must not nevertheless train himself somewhat in his art, or whether
he moves in it entirely of himself, like nature?--The latter is without
doubt the case! For a young poet, having studied verse-form in all its
variety for but a short time, suddenly comes to find these forms so
natural as to preclude his inclination for any other. His verse assumes
beautiful form involuntarily, simply because other movement would be
alien. That is just the difference between the poet and the dilettante:
that the poet sings his verse spontaneously, from his own impulse, and
afterwards, proving it, finds it to be right in sound--in rhythm--in all
its movement; whereas the dilettante, after first marking out for
himself a certain verse-form, according to the approved pattern of the
art-learned, proceeds to project by main force a series of wholly
soulless words upon it. The soulful words of the poet flowed of
themselves just because they were soulful. And, if we view things in
their true light, there do actually exist *no* hard and fast forms for
poetry, and absolutely no laws; for a verse which flows spontaneously
from its source moves of itself, and is independent of all preconceived
human standards! The one law is that there shall be no law. Mayhap you
will find this over-daring, young man! But remember

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

that my demonstrations are taken not from men, but out of Tao, and that
I know, moreover, but very few true poets. The man who is simple and
pure as Nature is rare indeed. Think you that there are many such in
your own land?"

This unexpected question embarrassed me, and I wondered what could be
his drift. It was hard to answer, too, so I asked him first another
question:

"Great Master, I cannot answer until I hear more from you. *Why does* a
poet make a poem?"

That seemed to astonish him mightily, for he repeated it, as though
doubting if he had heard aright:

"Why does a poet make a poem?"

"Yes, Master, why?"

Then he laughed outright, and said:

"Why does the sea roar? Why does the bird sing? Do you know that, my
son?"

"Because they cannot help it, Father, because they simply must give
their nature vent in that way! It is Wu-Wei!"

"Quite so! Well,--and why should it be different with a poet?"

I considered, and my answer came none too readily:

"Yes, but it *may* be different. A poet may sing for the sake of
creating or enriching a literature, where there is none, or it is in
danger of dying out. That has a fine sound, but is no pure motive. Or
some poets sing in order to cover themselves with glory--to be famous,
to be

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

crowned with shining laurels, and to gain smiles from the fair,
bright-eyed maidens strewing flowers on the path before them!"

"You must express yourself with greater exactness," said the hermit,
"and not desecrate words which thousands hold sacred. For poets who sing
for such reasons are no poets at all. A poet sings because he sings. He
cannot sing with any given purpose, or he becomes a dilettante."

"Then, Father, supposing a poet to have sung as simply as a bird, may he
afterwards take pleasure in the laurels and the roses? May he jealously
hate those who wear the laurels of which he deems himself worthy? or can
he believe his soul's convictions, and call beauty ugly, despising the
beauty which he has created?--Can he call the beautiful hateful, because
the laurels come from unwelcome hands?--Can he drape himself in a false
garb, and elect to act differently from other men, in order to gain
prominence through eccentricity?--Can he deem himself better than the
common run of men?--Should he press the common hands which applaud
him?--May he hate them who deride instead of honouring him?--How can you
interpret to me all these things? They all appear so strange to me, in
comparison with the little bird and the great sea!"

"All these questions, young friend, are an answer to *my* question," he
replied; "for the fact that you would know all this is a proof that
there are not many poets in your country. Remember

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

that I understand and use the word 'poet' in its purest, highest
meaning. A poet can only live for his art, which he loves for itself,
and not as a means for securing fleeting earthly pleasures. A poet looks
upon men and things--in their nature and relationship--so simply, that
he himself approaches very nearly to the nature of Tao. Other men see
men and things hazily, as through a fog. The poet realizes this to be an
incontestable fact. How then can he expect his simplicity to be
understood--by this hazy mind of the public? How can he cherish feelings
of hate and grief when it ridicules him? How feel pleasure when it
should do him honour? It is the same in this case as with the four
'seasons' of Chuang-Tse. There is nothing specially agitating in it all,
because it is the natural course of things. Consequently the poet is
neither in despair when he is not heard, nor happy when he is feted. He
looks upon the state of things with regard to the multitude and the way
it comports itself towards him as a natural consequence, of which he
knows the cause. The judgment of the common people is not even so much
as indifferent to him--it simply does not exist for him. He does not
sing his verses for the sake of the people, but because he cannot help
himself. The sound of human comment on his work escapes him entirely,
and he knows not whether he be famous or forgotten. 'The highest fame is
no fame.' <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) You look at me, young man,
as

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

though I were telling stranger things than you have ever dared to dream.
But I am telling nothing but the plainest truth, simple and natural as
the truth in landscape or sea. Having dwelt until so lately mid the
strenuous life of your countrymen, you have never yet seen true
simplicity. For so long you have heard nothing spoken of but 'fame',
'earnings,' 'honour,' 'artists' and 'immortality,' that, for all you
know, these things may be indispensable as air, and veritable as your
soul. But it is all a seeming and deception. Those whom you have seen
may indeed have been poets of true fibre, but they had been led astray
from the impulse derived from Tao which was their life-principle, and
they did not remain what they were, but sank through their weakness to
the nature of commonplace men. So that they have come to do as ordinary
men do, only they do it more strongly. So much do I gather from your
questioning. But all these are poets no longer, and will sing no more
true poetry so long as they remain as they are. For the smallest
deviation from the original impulse is sufficient to kill the poetry
within them. There is but the one direct way: single and simple as a
maiden--uncompromising as a straight line. This straight line is
spontaneity; on either side of it lie false activity and the
unnatural--also the roads to fame and notoriety, where occur murder, and
sudden death, and where one bosom friend will suck the life-blood from
another to further the attainment of his own ends. The straight line

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

cuts its own way, without deviation or secret windings, in simple
continuance into infinity.

"You understand then, that thus, by the nature of things, all those
situations which would convert the poet into the sacrificial victim of
the mob become impossible. You have probably read, in the history alike
of your country and my own, of poets who have died of grief at want of
recognition, or who have taken their own lives on account of undeserved
contumely. I have indeed always felt the pathos of this, yet have
realized that to such poets as these the term truly great cannot be
applied.

"And I am speaking, of course, not of the, artists of speech only, but
of all artists. Shall I show you now something by an artist as true and
simple-minded as I can conceive a man to be?--Come with me then!"

He led me into a small chamber in his hut--a cell with white walls and
no furniture save the bed, a table covered with books, and a few chairs.
He opened a door in the wall, and drew out from it a wooden chest. This
he carried as carefully as though it had been some sacred object or a
little child. He set it gently down upon the floor, opened the lid, and
lifted out a closed shrine of red-brown wood, which he placed upon the
table."

"See," he remarked, "this is a beautiful shrine, to begin with. A
beautiful thing must have a beautiful setting. At present the little
doors are shut. Do you not find this a goodly idea: to

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

be able ever thus to hold it hidden from profane eyes?--But before *you*
I may well open it."

And the two wings of the shrine flew apart.

Against a background of pale blue silk appeared a large figure,
gleaming, and shimmering, and diffusing a wonderful radiance of its own.
It was the Buddha Kwan Yin, seated upon a lotus that reared itself,
straight, and graceful, and modestly opened, above a tumult of wild
waves. [13](ltw90.htm#xref_13)

"Do you perceive the utter simplicity and beauty of this?" he asked me;
and in his voice there spoke a great and tender love. "Is not this the
very embodiment of perfect rest?--How serene is the countenance--how
wonderfully tender, and yet how tensely grave, with its closed eyes
gazing into infinity!--See--the cheek,--how delicate and tender!
See--the mouth--and the lofty curving of the eyebrows--and the pure
pearl gleaming above her forehead [14](ltw90.htm#xref_14)--symbol of a
soul taking its flight from the body! And the body--how few are the
lines of it! Yet see: what infinite love and mercifulness in the
downward pose of the left arm; and in the uplifted right arm--with two
raised fingers, held together as in the act of preaching---what an
indescribable holiness! And how beautiful the repose of the crossed legs
resting so softly upon the lotus!--And see--how tenderly felt,
notwithstanding the immense strength and restraint of the whole--the
delicate soles of the feet, curved with such subtle gentleness!--Is it
not the quintessence of the whole of Buddhism in a single picture?

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You need not to
have read anything of Buddhism in order to appreciate it now, here, in
all its inmost meaning. Rest--is it not absolute rest--this ideally pure
countenance gazing thus stilly into eternity? Love--is it not absolute
love for the world--this simple drooping of the arm? And is not the
essence of the whole doctrine grasped and confined in the pose of the
uplifted fingers?

"And then--the material of which such a figure as this is made! So you
realize, I wonder, that an artist such as this must have laboured for
years and years before his material became as pure and ethereal as he
required it to be? For the nature of stone is so hard--is it not?--and
the general idea of it: matter--that would suit but ill for the plastic
representation of the ideal conception: Rest.--So the artist wrought
upon all kinds of common materials such as clay, sand, and earth, and
transformed them, by means of fit and harmonious combination with
precious stones, pearls, and jasper, into costly substances. And so the
material for this figure became something that was no longer material,
but rather the incarnation of a sublime idea. The artist wished to
symbolize also in his representation the rosy dawn which broke upon
mankind on the appearance of Buddha; and so, shimmering through the
snowy white of his porcelain, he introduced just such a vague rosy glow
as plays upon the morning clouds before the glory of the sun bursts
forth. Is not this half-realized, growing light more instinct

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

with feeling than light itself? Can you perceive this most indefinite,
yet clear and rosy colour shimmering throughout the white? Is it not
chaste as the first soft blush of a maiden? Is it not the godly love of
the artist which thus glows in the pureness of the white? Such a figure
is, in fact, no longer a figure. The idea of material is entirely
obliterated; it is an inspiration."

For a long time I was too much moved to speak. More strongly yet than
the pure wisdom of the old man, did the beauty of this art take hold
upon and purify my soul. At last I asked gently:

"Who has created this marvel? I would fain know, that I may hold his
name with yours in veneration."

"That is of little importance, my young friend! he answered. "The soul
that was in this artist is absorbed again into Tao, just as yours will
be one day. His body has fallen away, like the leaves from a tree, just
as yours in time will fall away. What weight can attach then to his
name? Nevertheless, I will tell it you; he was called Tan
Wei, [15](ltw90.htm#xref_15) and he engraved this name in finely-devised
characters upon the back of the figure, such being the custom at that
time.--Who was he? A common workman, surely, who did not even know,
himself, that he was an artist; who seemed to himself nothing more than
a common peasant, and who had not the least suspicion that his work was
so beautiful. But he must have gazed much at the heavens and clouds
above him, and have loved the wide seas, and the landscapes,

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

and the flowers; otherwise he could not have been so fine in feeling;
for such simple lines and pure colours are only to be found in Nature.
He was certainly not celebrated; you will not find his name in any
history. I could not tell you whence he came, how he lived, or to what
age. I know only that it is more than four hundred years since such
figures as these were made, and that connoisseurs reckon that this one
dates from the first half of the Ming-Dynasty. Most probably the artist
lived quite quietly the same sort of life as the other people, worked
industriously as a common labourer, and died humbly, unconscious of his
own greatness. But his work remained, and this image, which by a
fortunate chance has found its way to this district, where the last wars
never raged, is still the same as when he made it. And thus it may last
on for centuries and centuries, in inextinguishable radiance, in
maidenly majesty. O, to create such a thing, in pure, unconscious
simplicity--that is to be a poet! That is the art which dates not from
time but from eternity!--How beautiful it is! Do you not find it so too?
This porcelain, that is almost indestructible; this radiance, which
never dies away! Here upon the earth it stands, so strong and yet so
tender, and so it will be, long after our successors are dead!--And the
soul of the artist is with Tao!"

We continued long to look upon the image. Then he took careful hold of
the shrine once more.

"It is so delicate," he said, "that I hardly dare

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

to expose it to broad daylight. For this miracle of tenderness--ethereal
as a soul--the daylight is too hard. I feel a kind of anxiety lest the
light should suddenly break it in pieces; or cause it to dissolve like a
little light cloud--so wholly soul-like is its composition!"

And softly, very softly, he replaced the shrine within the chest, which
he closed.

He went out now, before me, and we seated ourselves again beneath the
overhanging rock.

"How beautiful it would be," I said, "if every one could make things
like that, in all simplicity, and surround themselves with them,
everywhere!"

"Every one!" he answered; "well, that is perhaps too much to expect! But
there really was once a time when this great kingdom was one great
temple of art and beauty. You may still see the traces of it here in
China. At that time the greater number of the people were simpleminded
artists. All objects surrounding them were beautiful, the smallest thing
as well as the greatest--whether it were a temple, a garden, a table, a
chair, or a knife. Just examine the little tea-cups, or the smallest
censers of that period! The poorest coolie ate out of vessels as perfect
in their way as my Kwan-Yin image. All objects were beautifully made,
and involuntarily so. The simple artisans did not consider themselves
'artists,' or in any way different from their fellow-men, and no, petty
strife can have arisen between them, otherwise there would have been an
end of their art. Everything was

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

beautiful because they were all single-minded and worked honestly. It
was as natural in those days for things to be beautiful as it is
now-a-days for them to be ugly. The art of China has sunk to its lowest
ebb; that is a consequence of its miserable social condition. You have
surely remarked that the art of the country is deteriorating. And that
is a death-sign for this great Empire. For Art is inseparably connected
with the full-bloom of a country's life. If the art declines, then the
whole country degenerates. I do not mean this in the political, but
rather in the moral sense. For a morally-strong and simple-hearted
people brings forth involuntarily a strong and healthy art.--Yes, what
you said is true; how much better would men's lives be, could they but
create for themselves better surroundings! And how extraordinary that
this is not done! For Nature remains ever and everywhere accessible to
them. See the clouds--the trees--the sea!"

The sea was still, as ever, splashing at our feet--boundless and pure.
Clouds sailed majestically landwards, with a slow motion, in the full
blaze of the light. Golden gleams, falling upon the mountains, vanished
again with the rhythmical sweep of the clouds. Light and motion, sound
and play of colour, everywhere!

The hermit gazed calmly and confidingly at this infinite loveliness; as
though deeply conscious of the intimate relationship existing between
him and all his surroundings. He seemed to guess

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

what was in my mind as I looked at him, for he said:

"We fit as naturally into this beauty around us as a tree or a mountain.
If we can but remain so always, we shall retain the feeling of our own
well-being amid all the great workings of the world-system. So much has
been said about human life; and scholars have created such an endless
labyrinth of theories! And yet in its inmost kernel it is as plain as
Nature. All things are equal in simplicity, and nothing is really in
confusion, however much it may seem as though it were so. Everything
moves surely and inevitably as the sea."

There rang in his voice both the great love of the poet and the quiet
assurance of the scholar who takes his stand upon incontrovertible
truth.

"Are you satisfied for to-day?" was his friendly question; "and have I
helped you forward a little? Do you feel more clearly what poetry is?"

"Father," I answered, "your wisdom is poetry, and your poetry is wisdom!
How can that be?"

"That is quite true, from your point of view," he answered. "But you
have yet to learn that all these words are but a seeming. I know not
what my wisdom is, nor my poetry. It is all one. It is so simple and
natural when you understand this! It is all Tao."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[87:1](ltw88.htm#fr_1) From the "Nan Hwa King,"
chap. xviii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Love](ltw89)
