[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ltw290)  [Next](ltw292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### NOTES

<span id="xref_1">1</span>. [p. 78](ltw288.htm#page_78). This is a fact.
Chinese priests are in the habit of repeating Sutras which, to judge by
the sound, have been translated from the Sanscrit into Chinese phrases
of which they do not understand one word.

<span id="xref_2">2</span>. [p. 80](ltw288.htm#page_80). The "Yellow
Emperor" is a legendary emperor, who appears to have reigned about the
year 2697 B.C.

<span id="xref_3">3</span>. [p. 80](ltw288.htm#page_80). That which
follows in inverted commas is an extract translated from the twelfth
chapter of the "Nan Hwa King."

<span id="xref_4">4</span>. [p. 81](ltw288.htm#page_81). The following
passage, as far as the sentence "and the Millions return again into One"
is an adaptation--not a translation--of the first section of
"Tao-Teh-King." Laotsu's wonderfully simple writing cannot possibly be
translated into equally simple passages in our language. This rendering
of mine--arrived at partly by aid of Chinese commentators--is an
entirely new reading, and is, to the best of my knowledge, the true one.
One of the most celebrated, and in a certain sense, one of the most
competent of the sinologues, Herbert Giles, translates of this first
section only the first sentence, and finds the rest not worth the
trouble of translating! (compare "The Remains of Lao Tzü," by H. A.
Giles, Honkong, *China Mail Office*, 1886). This same scholar translates
"Tao" as "the Way," not perceiving how impossible it is that that which
Laotsu meant--the highest of all, the infinite--should be a "way,"
seeing that a way (in the figurative sense) always leads to something
else, and therefore cannot be the highest. Another still more celebrated
sinologue, Dr. Legge, translates "Tao" as "Course," and out of the
simple sentence: "If Tao could be expressed in words it would not be the
eternal Tao" he makes: "The Course that can be trodden is not the
enduring and unchanging course." The whole secret is this: that the sign
or word "Tao" has a great number of meanings, and that in Confucius's
work "Chung Yung" it does as a matter of fact mean "Way"; but in a
hundred other instances it means: "speech expression, a saying." Laotsu
having, in one sentence, used this sign in two different senses, nearly
all translators have suffered themselves to be misled. The sentence is
as simple as possible, and in two of my Chinese

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

editions the commentators put "spoken," and: "by word of mouth." But of
all the sinologues only Wells Williams has translated this sentence
well, namely thus "The Tao which can be expressed is not the eternal
Tao." Although the construction of the phrase is not accurately
rendered, at any rate Williams has grasped the meaning.

After my work had already appeared in the periodical *De Gids*, I saw
for the first time Professor de Groot's work "Jaarlijksche feesten en
gebruiken der Emoy Chineezen," from which I gathered that he agreed with
me in so far as to say also that "Tao" was untranslatable--a sub-lying
conception "for which the Chinese philosopher himself could find no
name, and which he consequently stamped with the word 'Tao.'" Professor
de Groot adds: "If one translates this word by 'the universal soul of
Nature,' 'the all-pervading energy of nature,' or merely by the word
'Nature' itself, one will surely not be far from the philosopher's
meaning."

Although the term holds for me something still higher yet I find
Professor de Groot's conception of it the most sympathetic of all those
known to me.

<span id="xref_5">5</span>. [p. 84](ltw288.htm#page_84). This
"Wu-Wei"--untranslatable as it is in fact--has been rendered by these
sinologues into "*inaction*"--as though it signified idleness, inertia.
It most certainly does not signify idleness, however, but rather action,
activity--that is to say: "inactivity of the perverted, unnatural
passions and desires," but "activity in the sense of natural movement
proceeding from Tao." Thus, in the "Nan Hwa King" we find the following
"The heavens and the earth do nothing" (in the evil sense "and" (yet)
"there is nothing which they do not do." The whole of nature consists in
"Wu-Wei," in natural, from-Tao-emanating movement. By translating Wu-Wei
into "inaction" the sinologues have arrived at the exact opposite of the
meaning of the Chinese text.

Laotsu himself does not dilate further upon the subject. What follows
here is my own conception of the text. The whole first chapter of the
original occupies only one page in the book, and contains only
fifty-nine characters. It testifies to Laotsu's wonderful subtlety and
terseness of language that he was able in so few words to say so much.

<span id="xref_6">6</span>. [p. 84](ltw288.htm#page_84). This sentence
is translated from the "Tao-Teh-King" (chapter ii).

<span id="xref_7">7</span>. [p. 84](ltw288.htm#page_84). From the 56th
chapter. This sentence is .also to be found in 15th chapter of the "Nan
Hwa King."

<span id="xref_8">8</span>. [p. 89](ltw288.htm#page_89). This runs
somewhat as follows in the 6th chapter of the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nan Hwa King: "The
true men of the early ages slept dreamlessly, and were conscious of self
without care."

<span id="xref_9">9</span>. [p. 90](ltw288.htm#page_90). This episode is
translated from the 18th section of the "Nan Hwa King." By the "Great
House" Chuang-Tse meant, of course, the universe, and this expression
"house" lends to the passage a touch of familiar intimacy, showing
Chuang-Tse to have the feeling that the dead one was well cared for, as
though within the shelter of a house.--H. Giles, who renders it
"Eternity," which does not appear at all in the Chinese text, loses by
his translation the confiding element which makes Chuang-Tse's speech so
touching. (Compare "Chuang Tsy," by H. Giles, London, Bernard Quaritch,
1889.) The actual words are "Ku Shih" = Great House.

<span id="xref_10">10</span>. [p. 92](ltw288.htm#page_92). In almost all
the temples is a chamber in which the Mandarins lodge, and where Western
travellers may usually stay for the night, and probably for longer
periods.

<span id="xref_11">11</span>. [p. 93](ltw289.htm#page_93). The
following, to the end of the sentence: "Poetry is the sound of the
heart," has been translated by me from a preface by Ong Giao Ki to his
edition of the Poetry of the Tang-Dynasty. Ong Giao Ki lived in the
first half of the eighteenth century.

<span id="xref_12">12</span> [p. 101](ltw289.htm#page_101). The Chinese
do really preserve their treasures in this careful manner. It is usual
for an antique figure of Buddha to lie in a silk-lined shrine, the
shrine in a wooden chest, and the chest in a cloth. It is unpacked upon
great occasions.

<span id="xref_13">13</span>. [p. 102](ltw289.htm#page_102). Such a
figure as the above-described is not a mere figment of the author's
imagination--such figures really exist. A similar one is in the
possession of the author.

<span id="xref_14">14</span>. [p. 102](ltw289.htm#page_102). The
Soul-Pearl "Durmâ."

<span id="xref_15">15</span>. [p. 104](ltw289.htm#page_104). The figure
in the author's possession is by Tan Wei. Another great artist was Ho
Chao Tsung, of certain figures by whom I have also, with very great
trouble, become possessed. These names are well known to every artist,
but I have endeavoured in vain to discover anything nearer with regard
to them. They became famous after death; hut they had lived in such
simplicity and oblivion, that now not even their birthplace is
remembered. One hears conjectures, but I could arrive at no certainty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Beginnings of Taoist Philosophy](ltw292)
