[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ltw292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### TAOIST RELIGION

Religion is very different from philosophy, often it becomes quite
opposite and yet it is carried on in its name and claims to be the
original teaching. Sometimes this is caused by the inclusion of some
alien elements, but in case of Taoism in China, from beginning to end it
has been an indigenous faith. It took about 650 years from the time of
Laotzu to its proclamation as a religion, to complete this
transformation. The difference between Taoist philosophy and Taoist
religion is so great that one can hardly find any connection; in fact,
it is doubtful if there is any. All relations asserted by modern Taoists
are uncertain and unreliable. The transformation, however, can be
traced.

After the passing of the early Taoist teachers, its teachings were
invaded and finally dominated by believers in the 'two forces' and the
'five elements' (male and female; earth, water, fire, air, ether) . From
these two schools emerged. The first, the Ch’an Wei School, became mixed
up with a Confucian school and gave birth to witchcraft. The second, the
Shen Hsien School, was dominated by adepts in discerning the 'wind and
water influence (*fang-shih*)' who practiced alchemy and the art of
prolonging life. The first emperor of the Ch’in Dynasty fell a victim to
these adepts and sent out emissaries to seek for this elixir of life. In
the Western Han Dynasty the chief counsel of its founder, Chang Liang,
was fond of this doctrine, and

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the Emperor Wu-ti particularly favored it and made several unsuccessful
attempts to find the philosopher's stone.

Under Emperor Kuang-wu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, in 34 A.D., Chang
Tao-lin was born. It was by him that the Taoist religion was founded. He
was a native of Chekiang Province although he spent most of his life in
the Dragon-tiger mountain in Kang-si, where he lived and taught to an
extremely old age; he spent a great deal of his time in meditation and
lived to be 123 years of age.

A century elapsed. Then came the revolution of the Yellow Turbans who
were followers of Chang Tao-lin and whose leader was a descendant of
him. The revolution was soon suppressed but the religion continued and
spread among the lower classes. Chang Tao-lin who had been called, "the
Divine Teacher," was later honored by having this title (Tien-shih) made
hereditary. This Taoist papacy still continues with its seat in the
Dragon-tiger mountains. In the Western Chin Dynasty two independent
adepts appeared (Ke-hung and Tao Hung-thing) who were famous for their
wisdom and magical achievements. Later another Heavenly Teacher appeared
during the Northern Wei Dynasty, in North China who was highly regarded
by the Tartar Emperors. This man was K’ou Ch’ien-chieh of Chili, and
through his influence Taoism became established for a time as a state
religion. It was during this time (440 A.D.) that Buddhism was
persecuted and [Confucianism](errata.htm#1) was neglected.

Since the founding of the T’ang Dynasty, owing to the fact that its
founder claimed to be a descendant

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

of Laotzu, Taoist philosophy and the Taoist religion have been highly
honored and promoted. The Old Master, Laotzu, was honored and his four
great disciples; many Taoist priests were summoned to court and placed
in high government positions. In the beginning of the Northern Sun
Dynasty, Ch’ien T’uan and Ting Shao-wei, two great Taoist scholars, were
honored by both Emperors T’ai Tzu and T’ai Tsung. Ch’ien T’uan's
philosophy had a strong influence over Confucianism, and was directly
the foundation of the so-called orthodox school of Taoism. Emperor Huei
Tsung of the same Dynasty was a renowned patron of Taoism. He was often
called the Taoist King. He regulated the Taoist priesthood into
twenty-six ranks and two high priests were made ministers of state. He
even went so far as to order all Buddhists to become Taoists. This was
in 1119. It was during this revival of Taoism that meditation (ch’u zan
ch’un) was revived. The first Mongol Emperor Kublai confirmed the Taoist
papacy, and made Chang Tsung-yen, the thirty-sixth generation from Chang
Tao-lin, a member of the hereditary nobility (1275) .

In the Ming Dynasty a famous Taoist named Chang San-feng was summoned by
the Emperor many times but never responded. Emperor Chia Ching in his
long reign (1522-1566) devoted much attention to Taoist affairs and
ordered Taoist sacrificial feasts throughout the Empire. Since the Ming
Dynasty there has been a bureau in the central government to administer
Taoist affairs, together with a similar Buddhist bureau. The Ch’ing
Dynasty followed this system and made the heir of Chang Tao-lin, its
honorary chief, an official of the fourth rank. The Chang

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

family have thus enjoyed hereditary rank second only to the family of
Confucius.

In modern times there have been two great branches of Taoist teachings,
the Cheng Yi and the Ch’uan Chen. The former is the orthodox sect and
follows strictly Chang Tao-lin's religious practices. Each of the two
branches is again divided into two schools. The two schools of the
orthodox branch are called Fu-lu and K’e Chiao, and are both under the
Papacy that had been founded in 1161 in the Ch’in Dynasty. The First
Patriarch of the first orthodox school was Lu Tung-pin, a retired
Chin-shih scholar of the T’ang Dynasty. They practice witchcraft and
most acts of exorcism and necromancy are under this sect; they use
cryptic monograms, charms, spells, amulets in their services, and
produce various psychic phenomena. The ouija board was their invention
and its name originated in Fukien. It is called Fu-chi in Mandarin. The
second Orthodox school, the Ke Ch’iao, confine their attention to the
study of forms and rites and the practice of medicine. They are also
interested in Taoist literature and ceremonies which have been developed
mainly after Buddhist patterns and their costumes and ceremonies are
often decorative and graceful.

The first of the heterodox schools is called the Lien Yang, or Chen
Yang, and is devoted to the practice of physical and mental hygiene.
They believe in strengthening the body and mind as a means of prolonging
life and developing the spirit. This is achieved by secret meditations
and exchange of vibrations. The Fang Chung Shu method for developing
inner character, and the science of 'sexual' transformations (a

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

secret and cryptic word for the positive and negative principles) are
important elements of their practices. The second of the heterodox
schools is called the Fu-shih and their interests are related to the
science of medicine and alchemy. They think that the life elements of
the human body can be supplied either by herbal nourishment or by mental
and spiritual sublimations. They value lead and mercury as means for
transmuting into gold and in making an elixir of immortality. Most of
these schools have northern and southern divisions. In general the
Northern are more materialistic, the Southern more idealistic and less
formal. <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2)

As stated above, the Taoist religion is an abuse of Taoist philosophy.
We find nothing essentially in common between them and, in many
respects, they are conflicting. This is especially so between Laotzu's
teachings and the orthodox Papacy. The true nature of the Taoist
religion is a combination of the ancient animism, spiritism, mythology,
and the popular superstitions of the day. Its formulation was chiefly
influenced by imperial encouragement of the adepts and the social
adoption of Buddhism. From the ancient animism and Buddhism, Chang
Tao-lin made up the Taoist religion just as Mohammed made up

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Islam from early
Judaism and Christianity. They both borrowed foreign faiths and
conformed them to native ideas to suit their own purpose. Against
Laotzu's atheistic tendency the Taoist religion created numerous
divinities. Against his disapproval of names and forms, it manufactured
voluminous scriptures, rituals and elaborate ceremonials. Against his
belief in the simple quiet life it imitated the ranks and standards of
nobles and officials. Misunderstanding and ignoring Laotzu's warning
against greed and lust, many Taoist practices of alchemy and sexual
'gravitation' appeared disguised in secret teachings and cryptic terms.
On the other hand, the Taoist religion borrowed from the Buddhists the
conception of the 'three bodies' of Buddha, but interpreted it as
meaning their ancient belief in the 'three purities':--Virility
(*Ching*), Air (*Ch’i*), and Spirit (*Shen*). It enumerated the eight
immortals and the twenty-eight star gods, and pictured the heavens and
hells after the Buddhist tales, and they have adopted the Buddhist
practice of saying masses for the dead.

Differing somewhat from the Buddhists many orthodox Taoist priests
forsake their temples and brotherhoods to marry and live the ordinary
life of the world. Taoists often use their surnames and wear long hair.
There are none or very few Taoist nuns. During the change of Dynasties,
particularly between the Ming and Ch’ing, many officials, soldiers and
scholars refused to submit to Manchu customs and became Taoists, because
they were the only ones who were allowed to keep old Chinese ways and
wear long hair. Strangely enough, during the recent revolution,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the Taoists were the last to lay aside their queues.

The influence of the Taoist religion in China is neither as strong as
the influence of Buddhism or, the Taoist philosophy, but all the popular
superstitions, practices and resort to geomantic magic, including
spiritism and shamanism, can be regarded as Taoist in some form. The
many revolutions of the Ch’ing Dynasty, besides the T’ai P’ing Christian
and Mohammedan, were all connected more or less closely with the Taoist
sects. Taoism has never created any great literature or art, as Buddhism
and Confucianism has; it has never been the religion of the intellectual
classes and has always been looked down upon by the literati.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[137:\*](ltw293.htm#fr_2) Besides these strictly
Taoist sects, there are minor sects that are often more Buddhistic than
Taoist, that practice meditation and are more spiritual and sincere.
Most of these derive from Yuen Dynasty Ch’u-San-chen. Among these is the
Eternal Life Sect that originated at the close of the Ming Dynasty in
Chekiang Province under the leadership of Chan-sung-tao (Wang Chansung)
as their first patriarch. This is an eclectic sect recognizing Buddha,
Laotzu, and Confucius, as of equal merit. They are generally found in
mountain temples living as small communistic Brotherhoods with their lay
members living in the surrounding villages. They practice meditation and
are very industrious, celibate, earnest and friendly.

As a religion Taoism passed over into Japan and became mixed up with
Japanese history and legends to make up Japanese Shin-tao-ism, which, as
it is involved with the cult of Emperor worship, is almost a state
religion. In Korea it was the source of the T’ien Tao religion which has
exercised a strong influence over political and social life. In the
present Republic of China, Confucianism has been made a kind of state
religion, but the rising of different sects integrating the 'three
religions', such as the Tao Yuan, T’ung Shan She, and others, and a
renaissance of a more spiritual Buddhism among the laity, is an
indication of the undercurrent power of the old Tao conception.
