[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[1st ed.](..\ltw\tao38)   
[Previous](tao37)  [Next](tao39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="38"></span>

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# PART TWO

# TEH

### THIRTY-EIGHT

The *teh* (power, or virtue) of the perfect Sage is not revealed
intentionally. It naturally and spontaneously meets the needs of the
world and, therefore, it is the true teh of TAO. The teh of inferiors
simply makes an outside show of power which is assumed to be virtue,
therefore, it falls short of the true Teh.

The Teh of the perfect Sage does not interfere, it cooperates with open
and sympathetic mind, while the teh of inferiors acts with intention and
under conditions and is influenced by desires. The benevolence of the
perfect Sage flows out naturally in acts of kindness and is
unconditioned by desires, or ideas, or conditions; while righteousness,
even of superior men, is done under conditioning desires and ideas. This
evil is aggravated when these righteous ideas of superior men are made
up into social codes, which if not obeyed willingly are enforced by law.

Therefore, when one loses TAO, he makes use of teh as a standard of
living; when he loses teh, he makes use of benevolence as a standard;
when one loses benevolence, he makes use of righteousness; when he loses
righteousness he makes use of social codes as his standard of conduct.
Thus social codes take the place of loyalty and faith and there is the
beginning of disorder. Cultural civilizations are a mere shadow of TAO
and are the source of allurements and foolishness.

Therefore, the superior man of affairs conforms to

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the spirit of Teh and not to its reduction into codes of loyalty and
righteousness. He abides in the reality of TAO and not in its shadow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39](tao39)
