[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090316)  [Next](0090318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>2.  The Discrepancy Between John and the
First Three Gospels at This Part of the Narrative, Literally Read, the
Narratives Cannot Be Harmonized: They Must Be Interpreted
Spiritually.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p2"></span>The truth of these matters must lie in
that which is seen by the mind.  If the discrepancy between the Gospels
is not solved, we must give up our trust in the Gospels, as being true
and written by a divine spirit, or as records worthy of credence, for
both these characters are held to belong to these works.  Those who
accept the four Gospels, and who do not consider that their apparent
discrepancy is to be solved anagogically (by mystical interpretation),
will have to clear up the difficulty, raised above, about the forty days
of the temptation, a period for which no room can be found in any way in
John’s narrative; and they will also have to tell us when it was that
the Lord came to Capernaum.  If it was after the six days of the period
of His baptism, the sixth being that of the marriage at Cana of Galilee,
then it is clear that the temptation never took place, and that He never
was at Nazara, and that John was not yet delivered up.  Now, after
Capernaum, where He abode not many days, the passover of the Jews was at
hand, and He went up to Jerusalem, where He cast the sheep and oxen out
of the temple, and poured out the small change of the bankers.  In
Jerusalem, too, it appears that Nicodemus, the ruler and Pharisee, first
came to Him by night, and heard what we may read in the Gospel.  “After
these things, <span id="fr_4994"></span>[4995](#fn_4994) Jesus came, and
His disciples, into the land of Judæa, and there He tarried with them
and baptized, at the same time at which John also was baptizing in Ænon
near Salim, because there were many waters there, and they came and were
baptized; for John was not yet cast into prison.”  On this occasion,
too, there was a questioning on the part of John’s disciples with the
Jews about purification, and they came to John, saying of the Saviour,
“Behold, He baptizeth, and all come to Him.”  They had heard words from
the Baptist, the exact tenor of which it is better to take from
Scripture itself.  Now, if we ask when Christ was first in Capernaum,
our respondents, if they follow the words of Matthew, and of the other
two, will say, After the temptation, when, “leaving Nazareth, He came
and dwelt in Capernaum by the sea.”  But how can they show both the
statements to be true, that of Matthew and Mark, that it was because He
heard that John was delivered up that He departed into Galilee, and that
of John, <span id="fr_4995"></span>[4996](#fn_4995) found there, after a
number of other transactions, subsequent to His stay at Capernaum, after
His going to Jerusalem, and His journey from there to Judæa, that John
was not yet cast into prison, but was baptizing in Ænon near Salim? 
There are many other points on which the careful student of the Gospels
will find that their narratives do not agree; and these we shall place
before the reader, according to our power, as they occur.  The student,
staggered at the consideration of these things, will either renounce the
attempt to find all the Gospels true, and not venturing to conclude that
all our information about our Lord is untrustworthy, will choose at
random one of them to be his guide; or he will accept the four, and will
consider that their truth is not to be sought for in the outward and
material letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4994"></span>[382:4995](0090317.htm#fr_4994) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p3"></span> [John iii.
23-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4995"></span>[382:4996](0090317.htm#fr_4995) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p4"></span> [John
3.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0090318)
