[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090251)  [Next](0090253.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>13.  How the Life in the Logos Comes
After the Beginning.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xiii-p2"></span>Here, we must carefully observe, we
have two things which are one, and we have to define the difference
between them.  First, what is before us in *The Word in the beginning,*
then what is implied in *The Life in the Word*.  The Word was not *made*
in the beginning; there was no time when the beginning was devoid of the
Word, and hence it is said, “In the beginning was the Word.”  Of life,
on the other hand, we read, not that it was as the Word, but that it was
made; if at least it be the case that the life is the light of men.  For
when man was not yet, there was no light of men; for the light of men is
conceived only in relation to men.  And let no one annoy us with the
objection that we have put this under the category of time, though it be
the order of the things themselves, that make them first and second and
so on, and even though there should have been no time when the things
placed by the Logos third and fourth were not in existence.  As, then,
all things *were made* by Him, not all things *were* by Him, and as
without Him *was* nothing *made*, not, without Him nothing *was*, so
what *was made* in Him, not what *was* in Him, was life.  And, again,
not what *was made* in the beginning was the Word, but what *was* in the
beginning was the Word.  Some of the copies, it is true, have a reading
which is not devoid of probability, “What was made is life in Him.”  But
if life is the same thing as the light of men, then no one who is in
darkness is living, and none of the living is in darkness; but every one
who is alive is also in light, and every one who is in light is living,
so that not he only who is living, but every one who is living, is a son
of light; and he who is a son of light is he whose work shines before
men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0090253.md)
