[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090357)  [Next](0090359.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>7.  The Parable of the Pearl of Great
Price.  The Formation and Difference of Pearls.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p2"></span>“*Again the kingdom of heaven is
like unto a man that is a merchant seeking goodly pearls.*” <span
id="fr_5187"></span>[5188](#fn_5187.md)   There are many merchants engaged
in many forms of merchandise, but not to any one of these is the kingdom
of heaven like, but only to him who is seeking <span id="page_417">p.
417</span> <span id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-Page_417"></span>goodly pearls, and
has found one equal in value to many, a very costly pearl which he has
bought in place of many.  I consider it reasonable, then, to make some
inquiry into the nature of the pearl. <span
id="fr_5188"></span>[5189](#fn_5188.md)   Be careful however to note, that
Christ did not say, “He sold all the pearls that he had,” for he sold
not only those which one seeking goodly pearls had bought, but also
everything which he had, in order to buy that goodly pearl.  We find
then in those who write on the subject of stones, with regard to the
nature of the pearl, that some pearls are found by land, and some in the
sea.  The land pearls are produced among the Indians only, being fitted
for signet-rings and collets and necklaces; and the sea pearls, which
are superior, are found among the same Indians, the best being produced
in the Red Sea.  The next best pearls are those taken from the sea at
Britain; and those of the third quality, which are inferior not only to
the first but to the second, are those found at Bosporus off Scythia. 
Concerning the Indian pearl these things further are said.  They are
found in mussels, like in nature to very large spiral snail-shells; and
these are described as in troops making the sea their pasture-ground, as
if under the guidance of some leader, conspicuous in colour and size,
and different from those under him, so that he has an analogous position
to what is called the queen of the bees.  And likewise, in regard to the
fishing for the best—that is, those in India—the following is told.  The
natives surround with nets a large circle of the shore, and dive down,
exerting themselves to seize that one of them all which is the leader;
for they say that, when this one is captured, the catching of the troop
subject to it costs no trouble, as not one of those in the troop remains
stationary, but as if bound by a thong follows the leader of the troop. 
It is said also that the formation of the pearls in India requires
periods of time, the creature undergoing many changes and alterations
until it is perfected.  And it is further reported that the shell—I
mean, the shell of the animal which bears the pearl—opens and gapes, as
it were, and being opened receives into itself the dew of heaven; when
it is filled with dew pure and untroubled, it becomes illumined and
brings forth a large and well-formed pearl; but if at any time it
receives dew darkened, or uneven, or in winter, it conceives a pearl
cloudy and disfigured with spots.  And this we also find that if it be
intercepted by lightning when it is on the way towards the completion of
the stone with which it is pregnant, it closes, and, as it were in
terror, scatters and pours forth its offspring, so as to form what are
called “physemata.”  And sometimes, as if premature, they are born
small, and are somewhat cloudy though well-formed.  As compared with the
others the Indian pearl has these features.  It is white in colour, like
to silver in transparency, and shines through as with a radiance
somewhat greenish yellow, and as a rule is round in form; it is also of
tender skin, and more delicate than it is the nature of a stone to be;
so it is delightful to behold, worthy to be celebrated among the more
notable, as he who wrote on the subject of stones used to say.  And this
is also a mark of the best pearl, to be rounded off on the outer
surface, very white in colour, very translucent, and very large in
size.  So much about the Indian pearl.  But that found in Britain, they
say, is of a golden tinge, but somewhat cloudy, and duller in sparkle. 
And that which is found in the strait of Bosporus is darker than that of
Britain, and livid, and perfectly dim, soft and small.  And that which
is produced in the strait of Bosporus is not found in the “pinna” which
is the pearl-bearing species of shells. but in what are called mussels;
and their habitat—I mean those at Bosporus—is in the marshes.  There is
also said to be a fourth class of pearls in Acarnania in the “pinnæ” of
oysters.  These are not greatly sought after, but are irregular in form,
and perfectly dark and foul in colour; and there are others also
different from these in the same Acarnania which are cast away on every
ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5187"></span>[416:5188](0090358.htm#fr_5187.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p3"></span> [Matt. xiii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#045.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5188"></span>[417:5189](0090358.htm#fr_5188.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.vii-p4"></span> *Cf.*Pliny, *Nat. Hist*. ix. 54,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](0090359.md)
