[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090317)  [Next](0090319) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>3.  What We are to Think of the
Discrepancies Between the Different Gospels.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iii-p2"></span>We must, however, try to obtain some
notion of the intention of the Evangelists in such matters, and we
direct ourselves to this.  Suppose there are several men who, by the
spirit, see God, and know His words addressed to His saints, and His
presence which He vouchsafes to them, appearing to them at chosen times
for their advancement.  There are several such men, and they are in
different places, and the benefits they receive from above vary in shape
and character.  And let these men report, each of them separately, what
he sees in spirit about God and His words, and His appearances to His
saints, so that one of them speaks of <span id="page_383">p. 383</span>
<span id="xv.iii.vi.iii-Page_383"></span>God’s appearances and words and
acts to one righteous man in such a place, and another about other
oracles and great works of the Lord, and a third of something else than
what the former two have dealt with.  And let there be a fourth, doing
with regard to some particular matter something of the same kind as
these three.  And let the four agree with each other about something the
Spirit has suggested to them all, and let them also make brief reports
of other matters besides that one; then their narratives will fall out
something on this wise:  God appeared to such a one at such a time and
in such a place, and did to him thus and thus; as if He had appeared to
him in such a form, and had led him by the hand to such a place, and
then done to him thus and thus.  The second will report that God
appeared at the very time of the foresaid occurrences, in a certain
town, to a person who is named, a second person, and in a place far
removed from that of the former account, and he will report a different
set of words spoken at the same time to this second person.  And let the
same be supposed to be the case with the third and with the fourth.  And
let them, as we said, agree, these witnesses who report true things
about God, and about His benefits conferred on certain men, let them
agree with each other in some of the narratives they report.  He, then,
who takes the writings of these men for history, or for a representation
of real things by a historical image, and who supposes God to be within
certain limits in space, and to be unable to present to several persons
in different places several visions of Himself at the same time, or to
be making several speeches at the same moment, he will deem it
impossible that our four writers are all speaking truth.  To him it is
impossible that God, who is in certain limits in space, could at the
same set time be saying one thing to one man and another to another, and
that He should be doing a thing and the opposite thing as well, and, to
put it bluntly, that He should be both sitting and standing, should one
of the writers represent Him as standing at the time, and making a
certain speech in such a place to such a man, while a second writer
speaks of Him as sitting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0090319)
