[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090289)  [Next](0090291.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p1.1"></span>14.  Comparison of the Statements of the
Four Evangelists Respecting John the Baptist, the Prophecies Regarding
Him, His Addresses to the Multitude and to the Pharisees, Etc.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p2"></span>We deem it necessary to compare with
the expression of the passage we are considering the similar expressions
found elsewhere in the Gospels.  This we shall continue to do point by
point to the end of this work, so that terms which appear to disagree
may be shown to be in harmony, and that the peculiar meanings present in
each may be explained.  This we shall do in the present passage.  The
words, “The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way
of the Lord,” are placed by John, who was a disciple, in the mouth of
the Baptist.  In Mark, on the other hand, the same words are recorded at
the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, in accordance with the
Scripture of Isaiah, as thus:  “The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, as it is written in Isaiah the prophet, Behold, I send My
messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.  The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make His paths straight.”  Now the words, “Make straight the way of the
Lord,” added by John, are not found in the prophet.  Perhaps John was
seeking to compress the “Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight
the paths of our God,” and so wrote, “Make straight the way of the
Lord;” while Mark combined two prophecies spoken by two different
prophets in different places, and made one prophecy out of them, “As it
is written in Isaiah the prophet, Behold I send My messenger before thy
face, who shall prepare thy way.  The voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight.” 
The words, “The voice of one crying in the wilderness,” are written
immediately after the narrative of Hezekiah’s recovery from his
sickness, <span id="fr_4894"></span>[4895](#fn_4894.md) while the words,
“Behold I send My messenger before thy face,” are written by
Malachi. <span id="fr_4895"></span>[4896](#fn_4895.md)   What John does
here, abbreviating the text he quotes, we find done by Mark also at
another point.  For while the words of the prophet are, “Prepare ye the
way of the Lord, make straight the paths of our God,” Mark writes,
“Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths straight.”  And John
practises a similar abbreviation in the text, “Behold I send My
messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee,” when
he does not add the words “before thee,” as in the original.  Coming now
to the statement, “They were sent from the Pharisees and they asked
Him,” <span id="fr_4896"></span>[4897](#fn_4896.md) we have been led by our
examination of the passage to prefix the enquiry of the Pharisees—which
Matthew does not mention—to the occurrence recorded in Matthew, when
John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, and
said to them, “Ye generations of vipers,” etc.  For the natural sequence
is that they should first enquire and then come.  And we have to observe
how, when Matthew reports that there went out to John Jerusalem and all
Judæa, and all the region round about Jordan, to be baptized by him in
Jordan, confessing their sins, it was not these people who heard from
the Baptist any word of rebuke or refutation, but only those many
Pharisees and Sadducees whom he saw coming.  They it was who were
greeted with the address, “Ye offspring of vipers,” etc. <span
id="fr_4897"></span>[4898](#fn_4897.md)   Mark, again, does not record any
words of reproof as having been used by John to those who came to him,
being all the country of Judæa and all of them of Jerusalem, who were
baptized by him in the Jordan and confessed their sins.  This is because
Mark does not mention the Pharisees and Sadducees as having come to
John.  A further circumstance which we must mention is that both Matthew
and Mark state that, in the one case, all Jerusalem and all Judæa, and
the whole region round about Jordan, in the other, the whole land of
Judæa and all they of Jerusalem, were baptized, confessing their sins;
but when Matthew introduces the Pharisees and Sadducees as coming to the
baptism, he does not say that they confessed their sins, and this might
very likely and very naturally be the reason why they were addressed as
“offspring of vipers.”  Do not suppose, reader, that there is anything
improper in our adducing in our discussion of the question of those who
were sent from the Pharisees and put questions to John, the parallel
passages from the other Gospels too.  For if we have indicated the
proper connection between the enquiry of the Pharisees, re<span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-Page_364"></span>corded by the disciple John, and their
baptism which is found in Matthew, we could scarcely avoid inquiring
into the passages in question, nor recording the observations made on
them.  Luke, like Mark, remembers the passage, “The voice of one crying
in the wilderness,” but he for his part treats it as follows: <span
id="fr_4898"></span>[4899](#fn_4898.md)   “The word of God came unto John,
the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness.  And he came into all the
region round about Jordan preaching the baptism of repentance unto
remission of sins; as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah
the prophet, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the
way of the Lord, make His paths straight.”  Luke, however, added the
continuation of the prophecy:  “Every valley shall be filled, and every
mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall become
straight, and the rough ways smooth, and all flesh shall see the
salvation of God.”  He writes, like Mark, “Make His ways straight;”
curtailing, as we saw before, the text, “Make straight the ways of our
God.”  In the phrase, “And all the crooked shall become straight,” he
leaves out the “all,” and the word “straight” he converts from a plural
into a singular.  Instead of the phrase, moreover, “The rough land into
a plain,” he gives, “The rough ways into smooth ways,” and he leaves out
“And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed,” and gives what follows,
“And all flesh shall see the salvation of God.”  These observations are
of use as showing how the evangelists are accustomed to abbreviate the
sayings of the prophets.  It has also to be observed that the speech,
“Offspring of vipers,” etc., is said by Matthew to have been spoken to
the Pharisees and Sadducees when coming to baptism, they being a
different set of people from those who confessed their sins, and to whom
no words of this kind were spoken.  With Luke, on the contrary, these
words were addressed to the multitudes who came out to be baptized by
John, and there were not two divisions of those who were baptized, as we
found in Matthew.  But Matthew, as the careful observer will see, does
not speak of the multitudes in the way of praise, and he probably means
the Baptist’s address, Offspring of vipers, etc., to be understood as
addressed to them also.  Another point is, that to the Pharisees and
Sadducees he says, “Bring forth a fruit,” in the singular, “worthy of
repentance,” but to the multitudes he uses the plural, “Bring forth
fruits worthy of repentance.”  Perhaps the Pharisees are required to
yield the special fruit of repentance, which is no other than the Son
and faith in Him, while the multitudes, who have not even a beginning of
good things, are asked for all the fruits of repentance, and so the
plural is used to them.  Further, it is said to the Pharisees, “Think
not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham for our father.”  For the
multitudes now have a beginning, appearing as they do to be introduced
into the divine Word, and to approach the truth; and thus they begin to
say within themselves, “We have Abraham for our father.”  The Pharisees,
on the contrary, are not beginning to this, but have long held it to be
so.  But both classes see John point to the stones aforesaid and declare
that even from these children can be raised up to Abraham, rising up out
of unconsciousness and deadness.  And observe how it is said to the
Pharisees, <span id="fr_4899"></span>[4900](#fn_4899.md) according to the
word of the prophet, <span id="fr_4900"></span>[4901](#fn_4900.md) “Ye have
eaten false fruit,” and they have false fruit,—“Every tree which
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire,”
while to the multitudes which do not bear fruit at all, <span
id="fr_4901"></span>[4902](#fn_4901.md) “Every tree which bringeth not
forth fruit is hewn down.”  For that which has no fruit at all has not
good fruit, and, therefore, it is worthy to be hewn down.  But that
which bears fruit has by no means good fruit, whence it also calls for
the axe to lay it low.  But, if we look more closely into this about the
fruit, we shall find that it is impossible that that which has just
begun to be cultivated, even should it not prove fruitless, should bear
the first good fruits.  The husbandman is content that the tree just
coming into cultivation should bear him at first such fruits as it may;
afterwards, when he has pruned and trained it according to his art, he
will receive, not the fruits it chanced to bear at first, but good
fruits.  The law itself favours this interpretation, for it says <span
id="fr_4902"></span>[4903](#fn_4902.md) that the planter is to wait for
three years, having the trees pruned and not eating the fruit of them. 
“Three years,” it says, “the fruit shall be unpurified to you, and shall
not be eaten, but in the fourth year all the fruit shall be holy, for
giving praise unto the Lord.”  This explains how the word “good” is
omitted from the address to the multitudes, “Every tree, therefore,
which bears not fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.”  The tree
<span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-Page_365"></span>which goes on bearing such fruit as it
did at first, is a tree which does not bear good fruit, and is,
therefore, cut down, and cast into the fire, since, when the three years
have passed and the fourth comes round, it does not bear good fruit, for
praise unto the Lord.  In thus adducing the passages from the other
Gospels I may appear to be digressing, but I cannot think it useless, or
without bearing on our present subject.  For the Pharisees send to John,
after the priests and levites who came from Jerusalem, men who came to
ask him who he was, and enquire, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not
the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?  After making this enquiry they
straightway come for baptism, as Matthew records, and then they hear
words suited to their quackery and hypocrisy.  But the words addressed
to them were very similar to those spoken to the multitudes, and hence
the necessity to look carefully at both speeches, and to compare them
together.  It was while we were so engaged that various points arose in
the sequence of the matter, which we had to consider.  To what has been
said we must add the following.  We find mention made in John of two
orders of persons sending:  the one, that of the Jews from Jerusalem
sending priests and levites; the other, that of the Pharisees who want
to know why he baptizes.  And we found that, after the enquiry, the
Pharisees present themselves for baptism.  May it not be that the Jews,
who had sent the earlier mission from Jerusalem, received John’s words
before those who sent the second mission, namely, the Pharisees, and
hence arrived before them?  For Jerusalem and all Judæa, and, in
consequence, the whole region round about Jordan, were being baptized by
him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins; or, as Mark says, “There
went out to him the whole land of Judæa, and all they of Jerusalem, and
were baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.”  Now,
neither does Matthew introduce the Pharisees and Sadducees, to whom the
words, “Offspring of vipers,” etc., are addressed; nor does Luke
introduce the multitudes who meet with the same rebuke, as confessing
their sins.  And the question may be raised how, if the whole city of
Jerusalem, and the whole of Judæa, and the whole region round about
Jordan, were baptized of John in Jordan, the Saviour could say, <span
id="fr_4903"></span>[4904](#fn_4903.md) “John the Baptist came neither
eating nor drinking, and ye say he hath a devil;” and how could He say
to those who asked Him, <span id="fr_4904"></span>[4905](#fn_4904.md) “By
what authority doest thou these things?  I also will ask you one word,
which if ye tell me, I also will tell you by what authority I do these
things.  The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven or of men?  And
they reason, and say, If we shall say, From heaven, He will say, Why did
ye not believe him?”  The solution of the difficulty is this.  The
Pharisees, addressed by John, as we saw before, with his “Offspring of
vipers,” etc., came to the baptism, without believing in him, probably
because they feared the multitudes, and, with their accustomed hypocrisy
towards them, deemed it right to undergo the washing, so as not to
appear hostile to those who did so.  Their belief was, then, that he
derived his baptism from men, and not from heaven, but, on account of
the multitude, lest they should be stoned, they are afraid to say what
they think.  Thus there is no contradiction between the Saviour’s speech
to the Pharisees and the narratives in the Gospels about the multitudes
who frequented John’s baptism.  It was part of the effrontery of the
Pharisees that they declared John to have a devil, as, also, that they
declared Jesus to have performed His wonderful works by Beelzebub, the
prince of the devils.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4894"></span>[363:4895](0090290.htm#fr_4894.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p3"></span> [Isa. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md)<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4895"></span>[363:4896](0090290.htm#fr_4895.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p4"></span> [Mal.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4896"></span>[363:4897](0090290.htm#fr_4896.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p5"></span> [John i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4897"></span>[363:4898](0090290.htm#fr_4897.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p6"></span> [Matt. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md)<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4898"></span>[364:4899](0090290.htm#fr_4898.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p7"></span> [Luke iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002.md)<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4899"></span>[364:4900](0090290.htm#fr_4899.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p8"></span> [Matt. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4900"></span>[364:4901](0090290.htm#fr_4900.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p9"></span> [Hos. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#013.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4901"></span>[364:4902](0090290.htm#fr_4901.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p10"></span> [Luke iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4902"></span>[364:4903](0090290.htm#fr_4902.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p11"></span> [Deut. xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#023.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4903"></span>[365:4904](0090290.htm#fr_4903.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p12"></span> [Matt. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4904"></span>[365:4905](0090290.htm#fr_4904.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p13"></span> [Matt. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](0090291.md)
