[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090478)  [Next](0090480.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>6.  Concerning the King Who Made a
Reckoning with His Own Servants, to Whom Was Brought a Man Who Owed Ten
Thousand Talents.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p2"></span>“*Therefore I say unto you the
kingdom of heaven is likened unto a certain king, who wished to make a
reckoning with his own servants.*” <span
id="fr_6073"></span>[6074](#fn_6073.md)   The general conception of the
parable is to teach us that we should be inclined to forgive the sins
committed against us by those who have wronged us, and especially if
after the wrongdoing he who has done it supplicates him who has been
wronged, asking forgiveness for the sins which he has committed against
him.  And this the parable wishes to teach us by representing that even
when forgiveness has been granted by God to us of the sins in respect of
which we have received remission, exaction will be demanded even after
the remission, unless we forgive the sins of those who have wronged us,
so that there is no longer left in us the least remembrance of the wrong
that was done, but the whole heart, assisted by the spirit of
forgetfulness of wrongs, which is no common virtue, forgives him who has
wronged us those things which have been wickedly done against any of us
by him, even treacherously.  But next to the general conception of the
parable, it is right to examine the whole of it more simply according to
the letter, so that he who advances with care to the right investigation
of each detail of the things previously written may derive profit from
the examination of what is said.  Now there is, as is probable, an
interpretation, transcendental and hard to trace, as it is somewhat
mystical, according to which, after the analogy of the parables which
are interpreted by the Evangelists, one would investigate each of the
details in this; as, for example, who the king was, and who the servants
were, and what was the beginning of his making a reckoning, and who was
the one debtor who owed many talents, and who was his wife and who his
children, and what were the “all things” spoken of besides those which
the king ordered to be sold in order that the debt might be paid out of
his belongings, and what was meant by the going out of the man who had
been forgiven the many talents, and who was the one of the servants who
was found and was a debtor not to the householder, but to the man who
had been forgiven, and what is meant by the number of the hundred pence,
and what by the word, “He took him by the throat saying, Pay what thou
owest,” and what is the prison into which he who had been forgiven all
the talents went out and cast his fellow-servant, and who were the
fellow-servants who were grieved and told the lord all that had been
done, and who were the tormentors to whom he who had cast his
fellow-servant into prison was delivered, and how he who was delivered
to the tormentors paid all that was due, so <span id="page_498">p.
498</span> <span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-Page_498"></span>that he no longer
owed anything. <span id="fr_6074"></span>[6075](#fn_6074.md)   But it is
probable also that some other things could be added to the number by a
more competent investigator, the exposition and interpretation of which
I think to be beyond the power of man, and requiring the Spirit of
Christ who spoke them in order that Christ may be understood as He
spoke; for as “no one among men knows the things of the man, save the
spirit which is in him,” and “no one knows the things of God, save the
Spirit of God,” <span id="fr_6075"></span>[6076](#fn_6075.md) so no one
knows after God the things spoken by Christ in proverbs and parables
save the Spirit of Christ, in which he who participates in Christ not
only so far as He is Spirit, but in Christ as He is Wisdom, as He is
Word, would behold the things which were revealed to him in this
passage.  But with regard to the interpretation of the loftiest type, we
make no profession; nor on the other hand with the assistance of Christ
who is the Wisdom of God do we despair of apprehending the things
signified in the parable; but whether it shall be the case that such
things shall be dictated to us in connection with this Scripture or not,
may God in Christ suggest the doing of that which is pleasing to Him, if
only there be granted to us also concerning these things, the word of
wisdom which is given from God through the Spirit, and the word of
knowledge which is supplied according to the Spirit. <span
id="fr_6076"></span>[6077](#fn_6076.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6073"></span>[497:6074](0090479.htm#fr_6073.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p3"></span> [Matt. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6074"></span>[498:6075](0090479.htm#fr_6074.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p4"></span> [Matt.
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023.md),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#034.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6075"></span>[498:6076](0090479.htm#fr_6075.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p5"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6076"></span>[498:6077](0090479.htm#fr_6076.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0090480.md)
