[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090329)  [Next](0090331.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>15.  Discrepancy of the Gospel Narratives
Connected with the Cleansing of the Temple.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p2"></span>“And Jesus went up to Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_5048"></span>[5049](#fn_5048.md)   And He found in the temple those
that sold oxen and sheep and doves and the changers of money sitting;
and He made a scourge of cords, and cast out of the temple the sheep and
the oxen, and poured out the small coin of the changers, and overturned
their tables, and to those who sold the doves He said, Take these things
hence; make not My Father’s house a house of merchandise.  Then His
disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thy house shall
eat me up.”  It is to be noted that John makes this transaction of Jesus
with those He found selling oxen and sheep and doves in the temple His
second work; while the other Evangelists narrate a similar incident
almost at the end and in connection with the story of the passion. 
Matthew has it thus: <span id="fr_5049"></span>[5050](#fn_5049.md)   “At
Jesus’ entry into Jerusalem the whole city was stirred, saying, Who is
this?  And the multitudes said, This is Jesus the prophet, from Nazareth
of Galilee.  And Jesus went into the temple <span id="page_392">p.
392</span> <span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-Page_392"></span>and cast out all them
that sold and bought in the temple, and He overturned the tables of the
money-changers and the seats of them that sold doves.  And He says to
them, It is written, My house shall be called a house of prayer, but you
make it a den of robbers.”  Mark has the following:  “And they came to
Jerusalem.  And having entered into the temple He began to cast out
those that sold and bought in the temple, and the tables of the
money-changers He overthrew and the seats of them that sold doves.  And
He suffered not that any should carry a vessel through the temple; and
He taught and said unto them, Is it not written that My house shall be
called a house of prayer for all the nations?  But you have made it a
den of robbers.”  And Luke: <span id="fr_5050"></span>[5051](#fn_5050.md)  
“And when he came near, He beheld the city and wept over it, saying
that, if thou hadst known in this day, even thou, the things that belong
to peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes.  For the days shall come
upon thee, when they shall surround thee and shut thee in on every side,
and shall dash thee to the ground and thy children, and they shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knewest not the time
of thy visitation.  And He entered into the temple and began to cast out
those that sold, saying to them, It is written, My house shall be a
house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of robbers.”  It is further
to be observed that what is recorded by the three as having taken place
in connection with the Lord’s going up to Jerusalem, when He did these
things in the temple, is narrated in a very similar manner by John as
taking place long after this, after another visit to Jerusalem different
from this one.  We must consider the statements, and in the first place
that of Matthew, where we read: <span
id="fr_5051"></span>[5052](#fn_5051.md)   “When He drew nigh to Jerusalem
and came to Bethphage over against the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent
two disciples, saying unto them, Go ye into the village over against
you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied and a colt with her;
loose them and bring them to Me.  And if any man say unto you, What are
you doing? you shall say, The Lord hath need of them, and straightway he
will send them.  But this was done that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophet, saying, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold,
thy king cometh, meek and seated upon an ass and upon the colt of an
ass.  And the disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them; they
brought the ass and the foal, and they placed on them their garments,
and He sat thereon.  And the most part of the multitude spread their
garments on the road, but the multitudes that went before Him, and they
that followed, cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord.  Hosanna in the highest.”  After this
comes, “And when He had entered into Jerusalem the whole city was
stirred,” which we cited above.  Then we have Mark’s account: <span
id="fr_5052"></span>[5053](#fn_5052.md)   “And when they drew nigh unto
Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany, to the Mount of Olives, He sends
two of His disciples and says to them, Go ye into the village over
against you.  And straightway as ye enter into it ye shall find a colt
tied, on which no man hath ever sat, loose it and bring it.  And if any
one say to you, Why do ye this? say, Because the Lord hath need of him,
and straightway he will send him back hither.  And they went and found
the colt tied at the door outside on the road, and they loose him.  And
some of them that stood there said to them, What do ye, loosing the
colt?  And they said to them as Jesus told them, and they let them go. 
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast on it their garments.  But
others cut down branches from the field and spread them in the way.  And
they that went before and they that followed cried, Hosanna, blessed is
He that cometh in the name of the Lord; blessed be the kingdom that
cometh, of our father David!  Hosanna in the highest!  And He went into
Jerusalem to the temple, and looked round about on all things, and as it
was already evening, He went out to Bethany with the twelve.  And on the
morrow when they were come forth from Bethany He was hungry.”  Then,
after the affair of the withered fig tree, “They came to Jerusalem.  And
He went into the temple and began to cast out them that sold.”  Luke
narrates as follows: <span id="fr_5053"></span>[5054](#fn_5053.md)    “And
it came to pass, when He drew near to Bethphage and Bethany at the mount
that is called the Mount of Olives, He sent two of his disciples,
saying, Go ye into the village over against you, in which when ye enter,
ye shall find a colt tied, on which no man ever hath sate; loose him and
bring him.  And if any man asks you, Why do ye loose him? Ye shall say
thus, The Lord hath need of him.  And the disciples went and found as He
said to them.  And when they were loosing the colt its owners said to
them, Why loose ye the colt? <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-Page_393"></span>and they said, Because the Lord hath
need of him.  And they brought him to Jesus, and they threw their
garments on the colt, and set Jesus thereon.  And as He went, they
strewed their garments in the way.  And when He was drawing near, being
now at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the
disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the
mighty works which they had seen, saying, Blessed is the King in the
name of the Lord; peace in heaven and glory in the highest.  And some of
the Pharisees from the multitude said unto Him, Master, rebuke Thy
disciples.  And He answered and said, I say unto you, If these shall
hold their peace, the stones will cry out.  And when He drew near He
beheld the city and wept over it,” and so on, as we cited above.  John,
on the contrary, after giving an account nearly identical with this, as
far as, “And Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and He found in the temple
those who were selling oxen and sheep,” gives a second account of an
ascent of the Lord to Jerusalem, and then goes on to tell of the supper
in Bethany six days before the passover, at which Martha served and
Lazarus was at table.  “On the morrow, <span
id="fr_5054"></span>[5055](#fn_5054.md) a great multitude that had come to
the feast, having heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took
branches of palm trees and went forth to meet Him; and they cried,
Hosanna, blessed be the King of Israel in the name of the Lord.  And
Jesus, having found a young ass, sat thereon, as it is written, Fear
not, daughter of Zion; behold thy King cometh, sitting on the foal of an
ass.”  I have written out long sections from the Gospels, but I have
thought it necessary to do so, in order to exhibit the discrepancy at
this part of our Gospel.  Three of the Gospels place these incidents,
which we supposed to be the same as those narrated by John, in
connection with one visit of the Lord to Jerusalem.  While John, on the
other hand, places them in connection with two visits which are widely
separated from each other and between which were various journeys of the
Lord to other places.  I conceive it to be impossible for those who
admit nothing more than the history in their interpretation to show that
these discrepant statements are in harmony with each other.  If any one
considers that we have not given a sound exposition, let him write a
reasoned rejoinder to this declaration of ours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5048"></span>[391:5049](0090330.htm#fr_5048.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p3"></span> [John ii.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5049"></span>[391:5050](0090330.htm#fr_5049.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p4"></span> [Matt. xxi.
10-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5050"></span>[392:5051](0090330.htm#fr_5050.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p5"></span> [Luke
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5051"></span>[392:5052](0090330.htm#fr_5051.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p6"></span> [Matt. xxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5052"></span>[392:5053](0090330.htm#fr_5052.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p7"></span> [Mark xi.
1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5053"></span>[392:5054](0090330.htm#fr_5053.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p8"></span> [Luke xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5054"></span>[393:5055](0090330.htm#fr_5054.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p9"></span> [John xii.
12-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xv-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](0090331.md)
