[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090332)  [Next](0090334.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>18.  The Ass and the Colt are the Old
and the New Testament.  Spiritual Meaning of the Various Features of the
Story.  Differences Between John’s Narrative and that of the Other
Evangelists.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p2"></span>Now to see into the real truth of
these matters is the part of that true intelligence which is given to
those who can say, <span id="fr_5066"></span>[5067](#fn_5066.md) “But we
have the mind of Christ that we may see those things which are freely
given to us of God;” and doubtless it is beyond our powers.  For neither
is the ruling principle in our soul free from agitation, nor are our
eyes such as those of the fair bride of Christ should be, of which the
bridegroom says, <span id="fr_5067"></span>[5068](#fn_5067.md) “Thy eyes
are doves,” signifying, perhaps, in a riddle, the observant power which
dwells in the spiritual, because the Holy Spirit came like a dove to our
Lord and to the lord in every one.  Such as we are, however, we will not
delay, but will feel about the words of life which have been spoken to
us and strive to lay hold of that power in them which flows to him who
touches them in faith.  Now Jesus is the word of God which goes into the
soul that is called Jerusalem, riding on the ass freed by the disciples
from its bonds.  That is to <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-Page_397"></span>say, on the simple language of the
Old Testament, interpreted by the two disciples who loose it:  in the
first place him who applies what is written to the service of the soul
and shows the allegorical sense of it with reference to her, and in the
second place him who brings to light by the things which lie in shadow
the good and true things of the future.  But He also rides on the young
colt, the New Testament; for in both alike we find the word of truth
which purifies us and drives away all those thoughts in us which incline
to selling and buying.  But He does not come alone to Jerusalem, the
soul, nor only with a few companions; for many things have to enter into
us before the word of God which makes us perfect, and as many things
have to come after Him, all, however, hymning and glorifying Him and
placing under Him their ornaments and vestures, so that the beasts He
rides on may not touch the ground, when He who descended out of heaven
is seated on them.  But that His bearers, the old and the new words of
Scripture, may be raised yet higher above the ground, branches have to
be cut down from the trees that they may tread on reasonable
expositions.  But the multitudes which go before and follow Him may also
signify the angelic ministrations, some of which prepare the way for Him
in our souls, and help in their adorning, while some come after His
presence in us, of which we have often spoken, so that we need not now
adduce testimonies about it.  And perhaps it is not without reason that
I have likened to an ass the surrounding voices which conduct the Word
Himself to the soul; for it is a beast of burden, and many are the
burdens, heavy the loads, which are brought into view from the text,
especially of the Old Testament, as he can clearly see who observes what
is done in this connection on the part of the Jews.  But the foal is not
a beast of burden in the same way as the ass.  For though every lead of
the latter be heavy to those who have not in themselves the upbearing
and most lightening power of the Spirit, yet the new word is less heavy
than the old.  I know some who interpret the tied-up ass as being
believers from the circumcision, who are freed from many bonds by those
who are truly and spiritually instructed in the word; and the foal they
take to be those from the Gentiles, who before they receive the word of
Jesus are free from any control and subject to no yoke in their
unbridled and pleasure-loving existence.  The writers I am speaking of
do not say who those are that go before and who those follow after; but
there would be no absurdity in saying that those who went before were
like Moses and the prophets, and those who followed after the holy
Apostles.  To what Jerusalem all these go in it is now our business to
enquire, and what is the house which has many sellers and buyers to be
driven out by the Son of God.  And perhaps the Jerusalem above to which
the Lord is to ascend driving like a charioteer those of the
circumcision and the believers of the Gentiles, while prophets and
Apostles go before Him and follow after Him (or is it the angels who
minister to Him, for they too may be meant by those who go before and
those who follow), perhaps it is that city which before He ascended to
it contained the so-called <span id="fr_5068"></span>[5069](#fn_5068.md)
“spiritual hosts of wickedness in heavenly places,” or the Canaanites
and Hittites and Amorites and the other enemies of the people of God,
and in a word, the foreigners.  For in that region, too, it was possible
for the prophecy to be fulfilled which says, <span
id="fr_5069"></span>[5070](#fn_5069.md) “Your country is desolate, your
cities are burned with fire, your land, strangers devour it in your
presence.”  For these are they who defile and turn into a den of
robbers, that is, of themselves the heavenly house of the Father, the
holy Jerusalem, the house of prayer; having spurious money, and giving
pence and small change, cheap worthless coinage, to all who come to
them.  These are they who, contending with the souls, take from them
what is most precious, robbing them of their better part to return to
them what is worth nothing.  But the disciples go and find the ass tied
and loose it, for it cannot have Jesus on account of the covering that
is laid upon it by the law. <span id="fr_5070"></span>[5071](#fn_5070.md)  
And the colt is found with it, both having been lost till Jesus came; I
mean, namely, those of the circumcision and those of the Gentiles who
afterwards believed.  But how these are sent back again after Jesus has
ascended to Jerusalem seated upon them, it is somewhat dangerous to say;
for there is something mystical about it, in connection with the change
of saints into angels.  After that change they will be sent back, in the
age succeeding this one, like the ministering spirits, <span
id="fr_5071"></span>[5072](#fn_5071.md) who are sent to do service for the
sake of them who will thereby inherit salvation.  But if the ass and the
foal are the old and the new Scriptures, on which the Word of God rides,
it is easy to see how, after the Word has appeared in them, they are
<span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-Page_398"></span>sent back and do not wait after the
Word has entered Jerusalem among those who have cast out all the
thoughts of selling and buying.  I consider, too, that it is not without
significance that the place where the ass was found tied, and the foal,
was a village, and a village without a name.  For in comparison with the
great world in heaven, the whole earth is a village where the ass is
found tied and the colt, and it is simply called “the village” without
any other designation being added to it.  From Bethphage Matthew says
the disciples are sent out who are to fetch the ass and the colt; and
Bethphage is a priestly place, the name of which means “House of
Jaw-bones.”  So much we have said, as our power allowed, on the text of
Matthew, reserving for a further opportunity, when we may be permitted
to take up the Gospel of Matthew by itself, a more complete and accurate
discussion of his statements.  Mark and Luke say that the two disciples,
acting on their Master’s instructions, found a foal tied, on which no
one had ever sat, and that they loosed it and brought it to the Lord. 
Mark adds that they found the foal tied at the door, outside on the
road.  But who is outside?  Those of the Gentiles who were
strangers <span id="fr_5072"></span>[5073](#fn_5072.md) from the covenants,
and aliens to the promise of God; they are on the road, not resting
under a roof or a house, bound by their own sins, and to be loosed by
the twofold knowledge spoken of above, of the friends of Jesus.  And the
bonds with which the foal was tied, and the sins committed against the
wholesome law and reproved by it,—for it is the gate of life,—in respect
of it, I say, they were not inside but outside the door, for perhaps
inside the door there cannot be any such bond of wickedness.  But there
were some persons standing beside the tied-up foal, as Mark says; those,
I suppose, who had tied it; as Luke records, it was the masters of the
foal who said to the disciples, Why loose ye the foal?  For those lords
who subjected and bound the sinner are illegal masters and cannot look
the true master in the face when he frees the foal from its bonds.  Thus
when the disciples say, “The Lord hath need of him,” these wicked
masters have nothing to say in reply.  The disciples then bring the foal
to Jesus naked, and put their own dress on it, so that the Lord may sit
on the disciples’ garments which are on it, at His ease.  What is said
further will not, in the light of Matthew’s statements, present any
difficulty; how <span id="fr_5073"></span>[5074](#fn_5073.md) “They come to
Jerusalem, and entering into the temple He began to cast out them that
sold and bought in the temple,” or how <span
id="fr_5074"></span>[5075](#fn_5074.md) “When He drew nigh and beheld the
city He wept over it; and entering into the temple He began to cast out
them that sold.”  For in some of those who have the temple in themselves
He casts out all that sell and buy in the temple; but in others who do
not quite obey the word of God, He only makes a beginning of casting out
the sellers and buyers.  There is a third class also besides these, in
which He began to cast out the sellers only, and not also the buyers. 
With John, on the contrary, they are all cast out by the scourge woven
of small cords, along with the sheep and the oxen.  It should be
carefully considered whether it is possible that the changes of the
things described and the discrepancies found in them can be
satisfactorily solved by the anagogic method.  Each of the Evangelists
ascribes to the Word different modes of action, which produce in souls
of different tempers not the same effects but yet similar ones.  The
discrepancy we noticed in respect of Jesus’ journeys to Jerusalem, which
the Gospel now in hand reports quite differently from the other three,
as we have expounded their words, cannot be made good in any other way. 
John gives statements which are similar to those of the other three but
not the same; instead of branches cut from the trees or stubble brought
from the fields and strewed on the road he says they took branches of
palm trees.  He says that much people had come to the feast, and that
these went out to meet Him, crying, “Blessed is He that cometh in the
name of the Lord,” and “Blessed is the King of Israel.”  He also says
that it was Jesus Himself who found the young ass on which Christ sat,
and the phrase, young ass, doubtless conveys some additional meaning, as
the small animal afforded a benefit not of men, nor through men, but
through Jesus Christ.  John moreover does not, any more than the others,
reproduce the prophetic words exactly; instead of them he gives us “Fear
not, O daughter of Zion; behold thy King cometh sitting” (instead of
“mounted”) “on the foal of an ass” (for “on an ass and a young foal”). 
The words “Fear not, daughter of Zion,” are not in the prophet at all. 
But as the prophetic utterance has been applied by all in this way, let
us see if there was not a necessity that the daughter of Zion should
rejoice greatly and that the <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-Page_399"></span>greater than she, the daughter of
Jerusalem, should not only rejoice greatly but should also proclaim it
when her king was coming to her, just and bringing salvation, and meek,
having mounted an ass and a young colt.  Whoever, then, receives Him
will no longer be afraid of those who are armed with the specious
discourses of the heterodox, those chariots of Ephraim said to be
destroyed by the Lord, <span id="fr_5075"></span>[5076](#fn_5075.md) nor
the horse, the vain thing for safety, <span
id="fr_5076"></span>[5077](#fn_5076.md) that is the mad desire which has
accustomed itself to the things of sense and which is injurious to many
of those who desire to dwell in Jerusalem and to attend to the sound
word.  It is also fitting to rejoice at the destruction by Him who rides
on the ass and the young foal of every hostile dart, since the fiery
darts of the enemy are no longer to prevail over him who has received
Jesus to his own temple.  And there will also be a multitude from the
Gentiles with peace <span id="fr_5077"></span>[5078](#fn_5077.md) at the
Saviour’s coming to Jerusalem, when He rules over the waters that He may
bruise the head of the dragon on the water, <span
id="fr_5078"></span>[5079](#fn_5078.md) and we shall tread upon the waves
of the sea and to the mouths of all the rivers on the earth.  Mark,
however, writing about the foal, <span
id="fr_5079"></span>[5080](#fn_5079.md) reports the Lord to have said, “On
which never man sat;” and he seems to me to hint at the circumstance
that those who afterwards believed had never submitted to the Word
before Jesus’ coming to them.  For of men, perhaps, no one had ever sate
on the foal, but of hearts or of powers alien to the Word some had sate
on it, since in the prophet Isaiah the wealth of opposing powers is said
to be borne on asses and camels. <span
id="fr_5080"></span>[5081](#fn_5080.md)   “In the distress and the
affliction,” he writes, “the lion and the lion’s whelp, whence also the
offspring of flying asps, who carried their riches on asses and
camels.”  The question occurs again, for those who have no mind but for
the bare words, if according to their view the words, “on which never
man sat,” are not quite meaningless.  For who but a man ever sits on a
foal?  So much of our views.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5066"></span>[396:5067](0090333.htm#fr_5066.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5067"></span>[396:5068](0090333.htm#fr_5067.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p4"></span> [Song of Sol. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5068"></span>[397:5069](0090333.htm#fr_5068.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p5"></span> [Ephes. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5069"></span>[397:5070](0090333.htm#fr_5069.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p6"></span> [Isa. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5070"></span>[397:5071](0090333.htm#fr_5070.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p7"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5071"></span>[397:5072](0090333.htm#fr_5071.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p8"></span> [Heb. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#011.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5072"></span>[398:5073](0090333.htm#fr_5072.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p9"></span> [Ephes. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5073"></span>[398:5074](0090333.htm#fr_5073.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p10"></span> [Mark xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5074"></span>[398:5075](0090333.htm#fr_5074.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p11"></span> [Luke xix.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5075"></span>[399:5076](0090333.htm#fr_5075.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p12"></span> [Zech. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5076"></span>[399:5077](0090333.htm#fr_5076.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p13"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5077"></span>[399:5078](0090333.htm#fr_5077.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p14"></span> [Zech.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5078"></span>[399:5079](0090333.htm#fr_5078.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p15"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5079"></span>[399:5080](0090333.htm#fr_5079.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p16"></span> [Mark
11.2](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#002.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5080"></span>[399:5081](0090333.htm#fr_5080.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p17"></span> [Isa. xxx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0090334.md)
