[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090184)  [Next](0090186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii"></span> <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="xiii.ii-Page_259"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>The Apology of Aristides.</span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>The</span> Church Histories, hitherto in
dealing with early Christian literature, have given Aristides along with
Quadratus the first place in the list of lost apologists.  It was known
that there had been such early defenders of the faith, and that
Quadratus had seen persons who had been miraculously healed by Christ;
but beyond this little more could be said.  To Justin Martyr, who
flourished about <span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.ii-p5.2"></span>a.d.</span> 150, belonged the honour of heading
the series of apologists whose works are extant, viz., Tatian, Melito,
Athenagoras, Theophilus, the author of the Epistle to Diognetus, who all
belonged to the second century and wrote in Greek; and Tertullian,
Minucius Felix, Arnobius, and Lactantius, who wrote in Latin, and
Clement and Origen who wrote in Greek, during the third century.  While
Christianity was winning its way to recognition in the Roman empire,
these writers tried to disprove the gross calumnies current about
Christians, to enlighten rulers and magistrates as to the real character
and conduct of the adherents of the new religion, and to remove the
prejudice which led to the violent persecutions of the populace.  They
also endeavoured to commend Christianity to “the cultured among its
despisers,” by showing that it is philosophy as well as revelation, that
it can supply the answers sought by philosophy, and is unlike human
wisdom in being certain because divinely revealed.  At the same time
they demonstrated the folly of polytheism and pointed out its disastrous
effects on morality.  This faithful company of the defenders of the
faith has now regained Aristides as their leader in place of Justin
Martyr.  It will be well to recount briefly what was previously known
about Aristides, and to tell how the lost Apology has been found.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>Eusebius, in his History of the Church,
written during the reign of Constantine, <span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.ii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 306–337, has a chapter (bk. iv., c.
3) headed “The authors that wrote in defence of the faith in the reign
of Hadrian, <span class="sc"><span id="xiii.ii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span>
117–138.”  After describing and quoting the Apology of Quadratus, he
adds:

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>“Aristides also, a man faithfully devoted
to the religion we profess, like Quadratus, has left to posterity a
defence of the faith, addressed to Hadrian.  This work is also preserved
by a great number, even to the present day.”

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>The same Eusebius in his *Chronicon* states
that the Emperor Hadrian visited Athens in the eighth year of his reign
(i.e., <span class="sc"><span id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 125 )
and took part in the Eleusinian mysteries.  In the same connection the
historian mentions the presentation of Apologies to the Emperor by
Quadratus and Aristides, “an Athenian philosopher;” and implies that
Hadrian was induced by these appeals, coupled with a letter from
Serenius Granianus, proconsul of Asia, to issue an Imperial rescript
forbidding the punishment of Christians without careful investigation
and trial.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>About a century later Jerome (died <span
class="sc"><span id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 420) tells us that
Aristides was a philosopher of Athens, that he retained his
philosopher’s garb after his conversion to Christianity, and that he
presented a defence of the faith to Hadrian at the same time as
Quadratus.  This Apology, he says, was extant in his day, and was
largely composed of the opinions of philosophers (“contextum
philosophorum sententiis”), and was afterwards imitated by Justin
Martyr.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>After this date Aristides passes out of
view.  In the mediæval martyrologies there is a faint reflection of the
earlier testimony, as, e.g., the 31st of August is given as the saint’s
<span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span id="xiii.ii-Page_260"></span>day
“of the blessed Aristides, most renowned for faith and wisdom, who
presented books on the Christian religion to the prince Hadrian, and
most brilliantly proclaimed in the presence of the Emperor himself how
that Christ Jesus is the only God.”

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>In the seventeenth century there were
rumours that the missing Apology of Aristides was to be found in various
monastic libraries in Greece; and Spon, a French traveller, made a
fruitless search for it.  The book had apparently disappeared for ever.

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>But in recent times Aristides has again
“swum into our ken.”  Armenian literature, which has done service to
Christendom by preserving so many of its early documents, supplied also
the first news of the recovery of Aristides.  In the Mechitarite convent
of S. Lazarus at Venice there is a body of Armenian monks who study
Armenian and other literature.  In 1878 these Armenians surprised the
learned world by publishing a Latin translation of an Armenian fragment
(the first two chapters) of the lost Apology of Aristides.  Renan at
once set it down as spurious because it contained theological terms of a
later age, e.g., “bearer of God” applied to the Virgin Mary.  These
terms were afterwards seen to be due to the translator.  At what time
the translation from Greek into Armenian was made is not apparent; but
it may reasonably be connected with the work begun by the famous
Armenian patriarch Mesrobes.  This noble Christian invented an alphabet
for his country, established schools, and sent a band of young Armenians
to Edessa, Athens, and elsewhere with instructions to translate into
Armenian the best sacred and classical books.  And in spite of
Mohammedans and Turks Armenia has remained Christian, and now restores
to the world the treasures committed to its keeping in the early
centuries.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>Opinions as to the Armenian fragment of
Aristides remained undecided till 1889.  In the spring of that year
Professor J. Rendel Harris, of Cambridge, had the honour of discovering
a Syriac version of the whole Apology in the library of the Convent of
St. Catharine, on Mount Sinai.  He found the Apology of Aristides among
a collection of Syriac treatises of an ethical character; and he refers
the <span class="sc"><span id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>ms.</span> to the
seventh century.  Professor Harris has translated the Syriac into
English, and has carefully edited the Syriac text with minute
discussions of every point of interest. <span
id="fr_4412"></span>[4413](#fn_4412)

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span>The recovery of the Syriac version by
Professor Harris placed the genuineness of the Armenian fragment beyond
question.  It also led to the strange reappearance of the greater part
of the original Greek.  Professor J. A. Robinson, the general editor of
the Cambridge *Texts and Studies*, having read the translation of the
Syriac version, discovered that the Apology of Aristides is incorporated
in the early Christian Romance entitled, *The Life of Barlaam and
Josaphat.*

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>Some account must be given of this
remarkable book in order to show its connection with the Apology of
Aristides.  Its author is said to be John of Damascus, who died about
<span class="sc"><span id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span> 760. 
Whoever wrote it, the book soon became very popular.  In the East it was
translated into Arabic, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Hebrew; in the West
there are versions of it in nearly a dozen languages, including an
English metrical rendering.  As early as 1204 a king of Norway had it
translated into Icelandic.  It is now known to be the story of Buddha in
a Christian setting, furnished with fables and parables which have
migrated from the far East and can be traced back to an extreme
antiquity.

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span>The outline of the story is as follows:  A
king in India, Abenner by name, who is an enemy of the Christians, has
an only son Josaphat (or Joasaph).  At his birth the astrologers predict
that he will become great, but will embrace the new doctrine.  To
prevent this, his father surrounds the prince with young and beautiful
attendants, and takes care that Josaphat shall see nothing of illness,
old age, or death.  At length Josaphat desires his freedom, and then
follow the excursions as in the case of Buddha.  Josaphat seeing so much
misery possible in life is sunk in despair.  In this state he is visited
by a Christian hermit—Barlaam by name.  Josaphat is converted to
Christianity, and Barlaam withdraws again to the desert.

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span>To undo his son’s conversion the king
arranges that a public disputation shall be held; one of the king’s
sages, Nachor by name, is to personate Barlaam and to make a very weak
statement of the Christian case, and so be easily refuted by the court
orators.  When the day comes, the prince Josaphat charges Nachor, the
fictitious monk, to do his best on pain of torture.  Thus stimulated,
Nachor begins, and “like Balaam’s ass he spake that which <span
id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span id="xiii.ii-Page_261"></span>he had
not purposed to speak; and he said, ‘I, O king, in the providence of
God,’ etc.”  He then recites the Apology of Aristides to such purpose
that he converts himself, the king, and all his people.  Josaphat
finally relinquishes his kingdom, and retires into the desert with the
genuine Barlaam for prayer and meditation.  Not only so, but the
churches of the Middle Ages, forgetting the fabulous character of the
story, raised Barlaam and Josaphat to the rank of saints, with a holy
day in the Christian calendar.  Thus the author of *Barlaam and
Josaphat* caused Christianity unwittingly to do honour to the founder of
Buddhism under the name of St. Josaphat; and also to read the Apology of
Aristides in nearly twenty languages without suspecting what it was.

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>The speech of Nachor in Greek, that is to
say, the greater part of the original Greek of the Apology of Aristides,
has been extracted from this source by Professor Robinson and is
published in *Texts and Studies*, Vol. I., so that there is now abundant
material for making an estimate of Aristides.

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span>It may be asked whether we have in any of
our three sources the actual words of Aristides.  The circumstances
under which the Apology was incorporated in *The Life of Barlaam and
Josaphat* are such as to render it unlikely that the author of the
Romance should copy with the faithfulness of a scribe; but examination
proves that very few modifications hare been made.  The Greek divides
men into three races (the Syriac and Armenian into four); the
introductory accounts of these races are in the Greek blended with the
general discussion; and at the close the description of early Christian
customs is shortened.  These few differences from the Syriac are all
explained by the fact that the Apology had to be adapted to the
circumstances of an Indian court in a later age.  On the other hand,
when the Syriac is compared. with the Greek and Armenian in passages
where these two agree, it is found that explanatory clauses are added;
and there is throughout a cumbrous redundancy of pronouns in the
Syriac.  In short, the actual words of Aristides may be restored with
tolerable certainty—a task which has been already accomplished by a
German scholar, Lic. Edgar Hennecke. <span
id="fr_4413"></span>[4414](#fn_4413)   In any case we have the substance
of the Apology of Aristides with almost verbal precision.

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span>In regard to the date of Aristides,
Eusebius says expressly that the Apology was presented to Hadrian while
he was in Athens about the year <span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.ii-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 125.  The only ground for
questioning this statement is the second superscription given in the
Syriac version, which implies that the Apology was presented to
Antoninus Pius, <span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.ii-p22.2"></span>a.d.</span> 138–161.  This heading is accepted
by Professor Harris as the true one; and he assigns the Apology to “the
early years of the reign of Antoninus Pius; and it is at least
conceivable,” he adds, “that it may have been presented to the Emperor
along with other Christian writings during an unrecorded visit of his to
his ancient seat of government at Smyrna.”  But this requires us to
suppose that Eusebius was wrong; that Jerome copied his error; that the
Armenian version curiously fell into the same mistake; and that the
Syriac translator is at this point exceptionally faithful.  So perhaps
it is better with Billius, “not to trust more in one’s own suspicions,
than in Christian charity which believeth all things,” and to rest in
the comfortable hypothesis that Eusebius spoke the truth.

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span>Writing in <span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.ii-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span> 125, or even twenty years later,
Aristides becomes an important witness as to the nature of early
Christianity.  His Apology contains no express quotation from Scripture;
but the Emperor is referred for information to a gospel which is
written.  Various echoes of New Testament expressions will at once be
recognized; and “the language moulding power of Christianity” is
discernible in the new meaning given to various classical words.  Some
topics are conspicuous by their absence.  Aristides has no trace of
ill-feeling to the Jews; no reference to the Logos doctrine, nor to the
distinctive ideas of the Apostle Paul; he has no gnosticism or heresy to
denounce, and he makes no appeal to miracle and prophecy.  Christianity,
in his view, is worthy of a philosophic emperor because it is eminently
reasonable, and gives an impulse and power to live a good life.  On the
whole, Aristides represents that type of Christian practice which is
found in the *Teaching of the Twelve Apostles*; and to this he adds a
simple Christian philosophy which may be compared with that of St. Paul
at Athens.  Although the details about the elements and the heathen gods
are discussed with tedious minuteness, still his closing section
describing the lives of the early Christians should always be good
reading.

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span>The translation of the Syriac given here
is independently made from the Syriac text, edited by Professor
Harris <span id="fr_4414"></span>[4415](#fn_4414) .  Full advantage has
been taken of his notes and *apparatus criti*<span id="page_262">p.
262</span> <span id="xiii.ii-Page_262"></span>*cus*, but no use has been
made of his translation.  In obscure passages the German translation of
Dr. Richard Raabe <span id="fr_4415"></span>[4416](#fn_4415) has been
compared; and the *Text-Rekonstruktion* of Hennecke has been consulted
on textual points in both translations.  The Greek translation is made
from the text edited by Professor Robinson. <span
id="fr_4416"></span>[4417](#fn_4416)   The translations from the Greek
and from the Syriac are arranged side by side, so that their relation to
one another is apparent at a glance.  No attempt has been made to force
the same English words from passages which are evidently meant to be
identical in the two languages; but the literal tenour of each has been
allowed to assert itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4412"></span>[260:4413](0090185.htm#fr_4412) <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span> *Texts and Studies*.  Contributions to
Biblical and Patristic Literature.  Edited by J. A. Robinson, B.D.  Vol.
i., No. 1, the *Apology* of Aristides, edited and translated by J.
Rendel Harris, M.A., with an Appendix by J. A. Robinson, B.D. 
(Cambridge University Press.)

<span id="fn_4413"></span>[261:4414](0090185.htm#fr_4413) <span
id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span> *Die* *<span
id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>Apologie des Aristides*.  <span
id="xiii.ii-p21.2"></span>Recension und Rekonstruktion des Textes, von
Lic. Edgar Hennecke.  (*Die Griechischen Apologeten*:  Heft 3.)

<span id="fn_4414"></span>[261:4415](0090185.htm#fr_4414) <span
id="xiii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span> The Cambridge *Texts and Studies*, vol.
i., No. 1.

<span id="fn_4415"></span>[262:4416](0090185.htm#fr_4415) <span
id="xiii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p26"></span> *<span id="xiii.ii-p26.1"></span>Texte
und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der Altchristlichen Litteratur,*
Gebhardt und Harnack, IX. Band, Heft 1.

<span id="fn_4416"></span>[262:4417](0090185.htm#fr_4416) <span
id="xiii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p27"></span> The Cambridge *Texts and Studies*, vol.
i., No. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Apology of Aristides as it is preserved in the history of
Barlaam and Josaphat.  Translated from the Greek.](0090186)
