[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090287)  [Next](0090289) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p1.1"></span>12.  Heracleon’s View of the Voice, and of
John the Baptist.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p2"></span>The words, however, “I am the voice of
one crying in the wilderness,” etc., may be taken as equivalent to “I am
He of whom the ‘voice in the wilderness’ is written.”  Then John would
be the person crying, and his voice would be that crying in the
wilderness, “Make straight the way of the Lord.”  Heracleon, discussing
John and the prophets, says, somewhat slanderously, that “the Word is
the Saviour; the voice, that in the wilderness which John interpreted;
the sound is the whole prophetic order.”  To this we may reply by
reminding him of the text, <span id="fr_4880"></span>[4881](#fn_4880)
“If the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for
the battle,” and that which says that though a man have knowledge of
mysteries, or have prophecy but wants love, he is a sounding or a
tinkling cymbal. <span id="fr_4881"></span>[4882](#fn_4881)   If the
prophetic voice be nothing but sound, how does our Lord come to refer us
to it as where He says, <span id="fr_4882"></span>[4883](#fn_4882)
“Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life, and
these are they which bear witness,” and <span
id="fr_4883"></span>[4884](#fn_4883) “If ye believed Moses, ye would
believe Me,” and <span id="fr_4884"></span>[4885](#fn_4884) “Well did
Isaiah prophesy concerning you, saying, This people honours me with
their lips”?  I do not know if any one can reasonably admit that the
Saviour thus spoke in praise of an uncertain sound, or that there is any
preparation to be had from the Scriptures to which we are referred as
from the voice of a trumpet, for our war against opposing powers, should
their sound give an uncertain voice.  If the prophets had not love, and
if that is why they were sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal, then how
does the Lord send us to their sound, as these writers will have it, as
if we could get help from that?  He asserts, indeed, that a voice, when
well fitted to speech, becomes speech, as if one should say that a woman
is turned into a man; and the assertion is not supported by argument. 
And, as if he were in a position to put forth a dogma on the subject and
to get on in this way, he declares that sound can be changed in a
similar way <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-Page_361"></span>into voice, and the voice, which is
changed into speech, he says, is in the position of a disciple, while
sound passing into voice is in that of a slave.  If he had taken any
kind of trouble to establish these points we should have had to devote
some attention to refuting them; but as it is, the bare denial is
sufficient refutation.  There was a point some way back which we
deferred taking up, that, namely, of the motive of John’s speeches.  We
may now take it up.  The Saviour, according to Heracleon, calls him both
a prophet and Elijah, but he himself denies that he is either of these. 
When the Saviour, Heracleon says, calls him a prophet and Elijah, He is
speaking not of John himself, but of his surroundings; but when He calls
him greater than the prophets and than those who are born of women, then
He is describing the character of John himself.  When John, on the other
hand, is asked about himself, his answers relate to himself, not to his
surroundings.  This we have examined as carefully as possible, comparing
each of the terms in question with the statements of Heracleon, lest he
should not have expressed himself quite accurately.  For how it comes
that the statements that he is Elijah and that he is a prophet apply to
those about him, but the statement that he is the voice of one crying in
the wilderness, to himself, no attempt whatever is made to show. 
Heracleon only gives an illustration, namely, this:  His surroundings
were, so to speak, his clothes, and other than himself, and when he was
asked about his clothes, if he were his clothes, he could not answer
“Yes.”  Now that his being Elijah, who was to come, was his clothes, is
scarcely consistent, so far as I can see, with Heracleon’s views; it
might consist, perhaps, with the exposition we ourselves gave of the
words, “In the spirit and power of Elijah;” it might, in a sense, be
said that this spirit of Elijah is equivalent to the soul of John.  He
then goes on to try to determine why those who were sent by the Jews to
question John were priests and levites, and he answers by no means
badly, that it was incumbent on such persons, being devoted to the
service of God, to busy themselves and to make enquiries about such
matters.  When he goes on, however, to say that it was “because John was
of the levitical tribe,” this is less well considered.  We raised the
question ourselves above, and saw that if the Jews who were sent knew
John’s birth, it was not open to them to ask if he was Elijah.  Then,
again, in dealing with the question, “Art thou the prophet?” Heracleon
does not regard the addition of the article as having any special force,
and says, “They asked him if he were a prophet, wishing to know this
more general fact.”  Again, not Heracleon alone, but, so far as I am
informed, all those who diverge from our views, as if they had not been
able to deal with a trifling ambiguity and to draw the proper
distinction, suppose John to be greater than Elijah and than all the
prophets.  The words are, “Of those born of women there is none greater
than John;” but this admits of two meanings, that John is greater than
they all, or again, that some of them are equal to him.  For though many
of the prophets were equal to him, still it might be true in respect of
the grace bestowed on him, that none of them was greater than he.  He
regards it as confirming the view that John was greater, that “he is
predicted by Isaiah;” for no other of all those who uttered prophecies
was held worthy by God of this distinction.  This, however, is a
venturesome statement and implies some disrespect of what is called the
Old Testament, and total disregard of the fact that Elijah himself was
the subject of prophecy.  For Elijah is prophesied by Malachi, who
says, <span id="fr_4885"></span>[4886](#fn_4885) “Behold, I send unto
you Elijah, the Tishbite, who shall restore the heart of the father to
the son.”  Josiah, too, as we read in third Kings, <span
id="fr_4886"></span>[4887](#fn_4886) was predicted by name by the
prophet who came out of Judah; for he said, Jeroboam also being present
at the altar, “Thus saith the Lord, Behold a son is born to David, his
name is Josiah.”  There are some also who say that Samson was predicted
by Jacob, when he said, <span id="fr_4887"></span>[4888](#fn_4887) “Dan
shall judge his own people, he is as one tribe in Israel,” for Samson
who judged Israel was of the tribe of Dan.  So much by way of evidence
of the rashness of the statement that John alone was the subject of
prophecy, made by Heracleon in his attempted explanation of the words,
“I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4880"></span>[360:4881](0090288.htm#fr_4880) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#008)<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4881"></span>[360:4882](0090288.htm#fr_4881) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4882"></span>[360:4883](0090288.htm#fr_4882) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p5"></span> [John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4883"></span>[360:4884](0090288.htm#fr_4883) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p6"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4884"></span>[360:4885](0090288.htm#fr_4884) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p7"></span> [Matt.
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#007), [Isa.
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4885"></span>[361:4886](0090288.htm#fr_4885) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p8"></span> [Mal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4886"></span>[361:4887](0090288.htm#fr_4886) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p9"></span> [1 Kings xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4887"></span>[361:4888](0090288.htm#fr_4887) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xii-p10"></span> [Gen. xlix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#016)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xii-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](0090289)
