[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090250)  [Next](0090252.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>12.  Is the Saviour All that He Is, to
All?</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xii-p2"></span>We have thus enquired as to the life
of God, and the life which is Christ, and the living who are in a place
by themselves, and have seen how the living are not justified before
God, and we have noticed the cognate statement, “Who alone hath im<span
id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xii-Page_334"></span>mortality.”  We may now take up the
assumption which may appear to be involved in this, namely, that
whatever being is gifted with reason does not possess blessedness as a
part of its essence, or as an inseparable part of its nature.  For if
blessedness and the highest life were an inseparable characteristic of
reasonable being, how could it be truly said of God that He only has
immortality?  We should therefore remark, that the Saviour is some
things, not to Himself but to others, and some things both to Himself
and others, and we must enquire if there are some things which He is to
Himself and to no other.  Clearly it is to others that He is a Shepherd,
not a shepherd like those among men who make gain out of their
occupation; unless the benefit conferred on the sheep might be regarded,
on account of His love to men, as a benefit to Himself also.  Similarly
it is to others that He is the Way and the Door, and, as all will admit,
the Rod.  To Himself and to others He is Wisdom and perhaps also Reason
(Logos).  It may be asked whether, as He has in Himself a system of
speculations, inasmuch as He is wisdom, there are some of those
speculations which cannot be received by any nature that is begotten,
but His own, and which He knows for Himself only.  Nor should the
reverence we owe to the Holy Spirit keep us from seeking to answer this
question.  For the Holy Spirit Himself receives instruction, as is clear
from what is said about the Paraclete and the Holy Spirit, <span
id="fr_4709"></span>[4710](#fn_4709.md) “He shall take of mine and shall
declare it to you.”  Does He, then, from these instructions, take in
everything that the Son, gazing at the Father from the first, Himself
knows?  That would require further consideration.  And if the Saviour is
some things to others, and some things it may be to Himself, and to no
other, or to one only, or to few, then we ask, in so far as He is the
life which came in the Logos, whether he is life to Himself and to
others, or to others, and if to others, to what others.  And are life
and the light of men the same thing, for the text says, “That which was
made was life in Him and the life was the light of men.”  But the light
of men is the light only of some, not of all, rational creatures; the
word “men” which is added shows this.  But He is the light of men, and
so He is the life of those whose light he is also.  And inasmuch as He
is life He may be called the Saviour, not for Himself but to be life to
others, whose light also He is.  And this life comes to the Logos and is
inseparable from Him, once it has come to Him.  But the Logos, who
cleanses the soul, must have been in the soul first; it is after Him and
the cleansing that proceeds from Him, when all that is dead or weak in
her has been taken away, that pure life comes to every one who has made
himself a fit dwelling for the Logos, considered as God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4709"></span>[334:4710](0090251.htm#fr_4709.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xii-p3"></span> [John
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](0090252.md)
