[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090070)  [Next](0090072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="vi.i-Page_149"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>The Vision of Paul.</span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vi.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="vi.i-p5.1"></span>The</span> present translation of the Vision of
Paul is made from the text of a Latin version, edited by Mr. M. R. James
in the *Cambridge Texts and Studies*, ii., 3, p. 11 *ff*.—from a <span
class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p5.2"></span>ms.</span> of the eighth century
now in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>Tischendorf’s Greek text was based on two
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p6.1"></span>mss.</span>, the earliest
of which is at Munich and is of the thirteenth century.  This version
has already been translated in the Ante-Nicene Library, vol. xvi.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>A translation into English from a Syriac
version (date unknown) was published by the Rev. J. Perkins, D.D., in
the *Journal of Sacred Literature*, N. S., vol. vi., 1865, and
republished by Tischendorf alongside of the Greek version in his
*Apocalypses Apocryphæ*.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>The Revelation of Paul was known to S.
Augustine, who thus refers to it in his *Tractate* 98 on the Gospel of
John, § 8:  “…There have been some vain individuals, who, with a
presumption that betrays the grossest folly, have forged a Revelation of
Paul, crammed with all manner of fables, which has been rejected by the
Orthodox Church; affirming it to be that whereof he had said that he was
caught up into the third heavens, and there heard unspeakable words
‘which it is not lawful for a man to utter.’  Nevertheless, the audacity
of such might be tolerable, had he said that he heard words which it is
not as yet lawful for a man to utter; but when he said ‘which it is not
lawful for a man to utter,’ who are they that dare to utter them with
such impudence and non-success?”

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>Sozomen, *H. E.*, vii., 19, after speaking of
the Apocalypse of Peter, continues:  “So the work entitled ‘The
Apocalypse of the Apostle Paul,’ though rejected by the ancients, is
still esteemed by most of the monks.  Some persons affirm that the book
was found during this reign (*i.e*., of Theodosius) by divine
revelation, in a marble box, buried beneath the soil, in the house of
Paul, at Tarsus, in Cilicia.  I have been informed that this report is
false, by a presbyter of Tarsus, a man of very advanced age, as is
indicated by his grey hairs.”

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>The book was probably composed, or rather
compiled, for it is largely indebted to previous Apocalyptic writings,
about the time when it purports to have been discovered at Tarsus,
*i.e*., 388 <span class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span>,
the year of the consulship of Theodosius the Less and Cynegius.  The
alleged sending of a copy of the original to Jerusalem probably
indicates the place where it was composed, or, at least, first found
currency.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>The *Vision of Paul* seems to have enjoyed
great popularity during the Middle Ages.  Brandes (Halle, 1885), in his
edition of two shorter Latin versions, enumerates twenty-two different
<span class="sc"><span id="vi.i-p11.1"></span>mss.</span> of the Latin
and “gives particulars of French, English, Danish, and Slavonic forms of
the legend.”

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>Of the three main versions, the Latin and
Syriac are longer and fuller than the Greek, which in its present form
has been abbreviated.  Taking advantage of the excellent comparative
table presented by Mr. M. R. James in his edition of the text, the
translator has endeavoured to point out to the reader, by notes in the
margin, the passages where the Latin varies from the Greek, and, to a
less extent, from the Syriac.  Parallel passages in other and earlier
Apocalyptic writings are also indicated in the notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Vision of Paul.](0090072)
