[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090281)  [Next](0090283) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>6.  Messianic Discussion with John the
Baptist.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.vi-p2"></span>Then the Jews sent priests and levites
from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?  And he confessed and denied
not; and he confessed, I am not the Christ. <span
id="fr_4836"></span>[4837](#fn_4836)   What legates should have been
sent from the Jews to John, and where should they have been sent from? 
Should they not have been men held to stand by the election of God above
their fellows, and should they not have come from that place which was
chosen out of the whole of the earth, though it is all called good, from
Jerusalem where was the temple of God?  With such honour, then, do they
enquire of John.  In the case of Christ nothing of this sort is reported
to have been done by the Jews; but what the Jews do to John, John does
to Christ, sending his own disciples to ask him, <span
id="fr_4837"></span>[4838](#fn_4837) “Art thou He that should come, or
do we look for another?”  John confesses to those sent to him, and
denies not, and he afterwards declares, “I am the voice of one crying in
the wilderness;” but Christ, as having a greater testimony than John the
Baptist, makes His answer by words and deeds, saying, “Go and tell John
those things which ye do <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-Page_355"></span>hear and see; the blind receive their
sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear, and
the poor have the Gospel preached to them.”  On this passage I shall, if
God permit, enlarge in its proper place.  Here, however, it might be
asked reasonably enough why John gives such an answer to the question
put to him.  The priests and levites do not ask him, “Art thou the
Christ?” but “Who art thou?” and the Baptist’s reply to this question
should have been, “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness.”  The
proper reply to the question, “Art thou the Christ?” is, “I am not the
Christ;” and to the question, “Who art thou?”—“The voice of one crying
in the wilderness.”  To this we may say that he probably discerned in
the question of the priests and levites a cautious reverence, which led
them to hint the idea in their minds that he who was baptizing might be
the Christ, but withheld them from openly saying so, which might have
been presumptuous.  He quite naturally, therefore, proceeds in the first
place to remove any false impressions they might have taken up about
him, and declares publicly the true state of the matter, “I am not the
Christ.”  Their second question, and also their third, show that they
had conceived some such surmise about him.  They supposed that he might
be that second in honour to whom their hopes pointed, namely, Elijah,
who held with them the next position after Christ; and so when John had
answered, “I am not the Christ,” they asked, “What then?  Art thou
Elijah?”  And he said, “I am not.”  They wish to know, in the third
place, if he is the prophet, and on his answer, “No,” they have no
longer any name to give the personage whose advent they expected, and
they say, “Who art thou, then, that we may give an answer to them that
sent us.  What sayest thou of thyself?”  Their meaning is:  “You are
not, you say, any of those personages whose advent Israel hopes and
expects, and who you are, to baptize as you do, we do not know; tell us,
therefore, so that we may report to those who sent us to get light upon
this point.”  We add, as it has some bearing on the context, that the
people were moved by the thought that the period of Christ’s advent was
near.  It was in a manner imminent in the years from the birth of Jesus
and a little before, down to the publication of the preaching.  Hence it
was, in all likelihood, that as the scribes and lawyers had deduced the
time from Holy Scripture and were expecting the Coming One, the idea was
taken up by Theudas, who came forward as the Messiah and brought
together a considerable multitude, and after him by the famous Judas of
Galilee in the days of the taxing. <span
id="fr_4838"></span>[4839](#fn_4838)   Thus the coming of the Messiah
was more warmly expected and discussed, and it was natural enough for
the Jews to send priests and levites from Jerusalem to John, to ask him,
“Who art thou?” and learn if he professed to be the Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4836"></span>[354:4837](0090282.htm#fr_4836) <span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.vi-p3"></span> [John
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020)<span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4837"></span>[354:4838](0090282.htm#fr_4837) <span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.vi-p4"></span> [Matt. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)<span id="xv.iii.v.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4838"></span>[355:4839](0090282.htm#fr_4838) <span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.vi-p5"></span> [Acts
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037)<span
id="xv.iii.v.vi-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](0090283)
