[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090185)  [Next](0090187) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_263"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>The Apology of Aristides</span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.iii-p2.1"></span>as it is preserved in the history of</span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.iii-p3.1"></span>Barlaam and Josaphat.</span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="xiii.iii-p4.1"></span>Translated from the Greek.</span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>I.  I, O King in the providence of God
came into the world; and when I had considered the heaven and the earth,
the sun and the moon and the rest, I marvelled at their orderly
arrangement.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>And when I saw that the universe and all
that is therein is moved by necessity, I perceived that the mover and
controller is God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>For everything which causes motion is
stronger than that which is moved, and that which controls is stronger
than that which is controlled.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>The self-same being, then, who first
established and now controls the universe—him do I affirm to be God who
is without beginning and without end, <span id="page_264">p. 264</span>
<span id="xiii.iii-Page_264"></span>immortal and self-sufficing, above
all passions and infirmities, above anger and forgetfulness and
ignorance and the rest.

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>Through Him too all things consist.  He
requires not sacrifice and libation nor anyone of the things that appear
to sense; but all men stand in need of Him.

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>II.  Having thus spoken concerning God,
so far as it was possible for me to speak of Him, <span
id="fr_4417"></span>[4418](#fn_4417) let us next proceed to the human
race, that we may see which of them participate in the truth and which
of them in error.

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>For it is clear to us, O King, <span
id="fr_4418"></span>[4419](#fn_4418) that there are three <span
id="fr_4419"></span>[4420](#fn_4419) classes of men in this world; these
being the worshippers of the gods acknowledged among you, and Jews, and
Christians.  Further they who pay homage to many gods are themselves
divided into three classes, Chaldæans namely, and Greeks, and Egyptians;
for these have been guides and preceptors to the rest of the nations in
the service and worship of these many-titled deities.

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span><span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_265"></span>III.  Let us see then which of them
participate in truth and which of them in error.

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>The Chaldæans, then, not knowing God went
astray after the elements and began to worship the creation more than
their Creator.

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>And of these they formed certain shapes
and styled them a representation of the heaven and the earth and the
sea, of the sun too and the moon and the other primal bodies or
luminaries.  And they shut them up together in shrines, and worship
them, calling them gods, even though they have to guard them securely
for fear they should be stolen by robbers.  And they did not perceive
that anything which acts as guard is greater than that which is guarded,
and that he who makes is greater than that which is made.  For if their
gods are unfit to look after their own safety, how shall they bestow
protection upon others? Great <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_266"></span>then is the error into which the Chaldæans
wandered in adoring lifeless and good-for-nothing images.

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>And it occurs to me as surprising, O
King, how it is that their so-called philosophers have quite failed to
observe that the elements themselves are perishable.  And if the
elements are perishable and subject to necessity, how are they gods? 
And if the elements are not gods, how do the images made in their honour
come to be gods?

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span>IV.  Let us proceed then, O King, to the
elements themselves that we may show in regard to them that they are not
gods, but perishable and mutable, produced out of that which did not
exist at the command of the true God, who is indestructible and
immutable and invisible; yet He sees all things and as He wills,
modifies and changes things.  What then shall I say concerning the
elements?

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span>They err who believe that the sky is a
god.  For we see that it revolves and moves by necessity and is
compacted of many parts, being thence called the ordered universe
(Kosmos).  Now the universe is the construction of some designer; and
that which has been constructed has a beginning and an end.  And the sky
with its luminaries moves by necessity.  For the stars are carried along
in array at fixed intervals from sign to sign, and, some setting, others
rising, they traverse their courses in due season so as to mark off
summers and winters, as it has been appointed for them by God; and
obeying the inevitable necessity of their nature they transgress not
their proper limits, keeping company with the heavenly order.  Whence it
is plain that the sky is not a god but rather a work of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span>They erred also who believed the earth to
be a goddess.  For we see that it is despitefully used and tyrannized
over by men, and is furrowed and kneaded and becomes of no account. 
For, if it be burned with fire, it becomes devoid of life; for nothing
will grow from the ashes.  Besides if there fall upon it an excess of
rain it dissolves away, <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_267"></span>both it and its fruits.  Moreover it is
trodden under foot of men and the other creatures; it is dyed with the
blood of the murdered; it is dug open and filled with dead bodies and
becomes a tomb for corpses.  In face of all this, it is inadmissible
that the earth is a goddess but rather it is a work of God for the use
of men.

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>V.  They also erred who believed the
water to be a god.  For it, too, has been made for the use of men, and
is controlled by them; it is defiled and destroyed and suffers change on
being boiled and dyed with colours; and it is congealed by the frost,
and polluted with blood, and is introduced for the washing of all
unclean things.  Wherefore it is impossible that water should be a god,
but it is a work of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span>They also err who believe that fire is a
god.  For fire was made for the use of men, and it is controlled by
them, being carried about from place to place for boiling and roasting
all kinds of meat, and even for (the burning of) dead bodies.  Moreover
it is extinguished in many ways, being quenched through man’s agency. 
So it cannot be allowed that fire is a god, but it is a work of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>They also err who think the blowing of
the winds is a goddess.  For it is clear that it is under the dominion
of another; and for the sake of man it has been designed by God for the
transport of ships and the conveyance of grain and for man’s other
wants.  It rises too and falls at the bidding of God, whence it is
concluded that the blowing of the winds is not a goddess but only a work
of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span>VI.  They also err who believe the <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="xiii.iii-Page_268"></span>sun to
be a god.  For we see that it moves by necessity and revolves and passes
from sign to sign, setting and rising so as to give warmth to plants and
tender shoots for the use of man.

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span>Besides it has its part in common with
the rest of the stars, and is much smaller than the sky; it suffers
eclipse of its light and is not the subject of its own laws.  Wherefore
it is concluded that the sun is not a god, but only a work of God.  They
also err who believe that the moon is a goddess.  For we see that it
moves by necessity and revolves and passes from sign to sign, setting
and rising for the benefit of men; and it is less than the sun and waxes
and wanes and has eclipses.  Wherefore it is concluded that the moon is
not a goddess but a work of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span>VII.  They also err who believe that
man <span id="fr_4420"></span>[4421](#fn_4420) is a god.  For we see
that he is moved by necessity, and is made to grow up, and becomes old
even though he would not.  And at one time he is joyous, at another he
is grieved when he lacks food and drink and clothing.  And we see that
he is subject to anger and jealousy and desire and change of purpose and
has many infirmities.  He is destroyed too in many ways by means of the
elements and animals, and by ever-assailing death.  It cannot be
admitted, then, that man is a god, but only a work of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span>Great therefore is the error into which
the Chaldæans wandered, following after their own desires.

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span>For they reverence the perishable
elements and lifeless images, and do not perceive that they themselves
make these things to be gods.

<span id="xiii.iii-p32"></span>VIII.  Let us proceed then to the Greeks,
that we may see whether they have any discernment concerning God.  The
Greeks, indeed, though they call themselves wise proved more deluded
than the Chaldæans in alleging that many gods have come into being, some
of them <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_269"></span>male, some female, practised masters in
every passion and every variety of folly.  \[And the Greeks themselves
represented them to be adulterers and murderers, wrathful and envious
and passionate, slayers of fathers and brothers, thieves and robbers,
crippled and limping, workers in magic, and victims of frenzy.  Some of
them died (as their account goes), and some were struck by thunderbolts,
and became slaves to men, and were fugitives, and they mourned and
lamented, and changed themselves into animals for wicked and shameful
ends.\] <span id="fr_4421"></span>[4422](#fn_4421)

<span id="xiii.iii-p34"></span>Wherefore, O King, they are ridiculous
and absurd and impious tales that the Greeks have introduced, giving the
name of gods to those who are not gods, to suit their unholy desires, in
order that, having them as patrons of vice, they might commit adultery
and robbery and do murder and other shocking deeds.  For if their gods
did such deeds why should not they also do them?

<span id="xiii.iii-p35"></span>So that from these misguided practices it
has been the lot of mankind to have frequent wars and slaughters and
bitter captivities.

<span id="xiii.iii-p36"></span>IX.  But, further, if we be minded to
discuss their gods individually, you will see how great is the
absurdity; for instance, how Kronos is brought forward by them as a god
above all, and they sacrifice their own children to him.  And he had
many sons by Rhea, and in his madness devoured his own offspring.  And
they say that Zeus cut off his members and cast them into the sea,
whence Aphrodite is said in fable to be engendered.  Zeus, then, having
bound his own father, cast him <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_270"></span>into Tartaros.  You see the error and
brutality which they advance against their god?  Is it possible, then,
that a god should be manacled and mutilated?  What absurdity!  Who with
any wit would ever say so?

<span id="xiii.iii-p37"></span>Next Zeus is introduced, and they say
that he was king of their gods, and that he changed himself into animals
that he might debauch mortal women.

<span id="xiii.iii-p38"></span>For they allege that he transformed
himself into a bull for Europe, and into gold for Danae, and into a swan
for Leda, and into a satyr for Antiope, and into a thunderbolt for
Semele.  Then by these there were many children, Dionysos and Zethus and
Amphion and Herakles and Apollo and Artemis and Perseus, Kastor and
Helenes and Polydeukes and Minos and Rhadamanthys and Sarpedon, and the
nine daughters whom they called the Muses.  Then too they bring forward
statements about the matter of Ganymedes.

<span id="xiii.iii-p39"></span>Hence it happened, O King, to mankind to
imitate all these things and to become adulterous men and lascivious
women, and to be workers of other terrible iniquities, through the
imitation of their god.  Now how is it possible that a god should be an
adulterer or an obscene person or a parricide?

<span id="xiii.iii-p40"></span>X.  Along with him, too, they bring
forward one Hephaistos as a god, and they say that he is lame and wields
a hammer and tongs, working as a smith for his living.

<span id="xiii.iii-p41"></span>Is he then badly off?  But it cannot be
admitted that a god should be a cripple, and besides be dependent on
mankind.

<span id="xiii.iii-p42"></span>Then they bring forward Hermes as a god,
representing him to be lust<span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_271"></span>ful, and a thief, and covetous, and a
magician (and maimed) and an interpreter of language.  But it cannot be
admitted that such an one is a god.

<span id="xiii.iii-p43"></span>They also bring forward Asklepios as a
god who is a doctor and prepares drugs and compounds plasters for the
sake of a living.  For he was badly off.  And afterwards he was struck,
they say, with a thunderbolt by Zeus on account of Tyndareos, son of
Lacedaimon; and so was killed.  Now if Asklepios in spite of his
divinity could not help himself when struck by lightning, how will he
come to the rescue of others?

<span id="xiii.iii-p44"></span>Again Ares is represented as a god, fond
of strife and given to jealousy, and a lover of animals and other such
things.  And at last while corrupting Aphrodite, he was bound by the
youthful Eros and by Hephaistos.  How then was he a god who was subject
to desire, and a warrior, and a prisoner and an adulterer?

<span id="xiii.iii-p45"></span>They allege that Dionysos also is a god
who holds nightly revels and teaches drunkenness, and carries off the
neighbours’ wives, and goes mad and takes to flight.  And at last he was
put to death by the Titans.  If then Dionysos could not save himself
when he was being killed, and besides used to be mad, and drunk with
wine, and a fugitive, how should he be a god?

<span id="xiii.iii-p46"></span>They allege also that Herakles got drunk
and went mad and cut the throats of his own children, then he was
consumed by fire and so died.  Now how should he be a god, who was drunk
and a slayer of children and burned to death? or how will he come to the
help of others, when he was unable to help himself?

<span id="xiii.iii-p47"></span>XI.  They represent Apollo also as a
jealous god, and besides as the master of the bow and quiver, and
sometimes of the lyre and flute, and as divining to men for pay?  Can he
then be very badly off?  But it cannot be admitted that a god should be
in want, and jealous, and a harping minstrel.

<span id="xiii.iii-p48"></span><span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_272"></span>They represent Artemis also as his sister,
who is a huntress and has a bow with a quiver; and she roams alone upon
the hills with the dogs to hunt the stag or the wild boar.  How then
should such a woman, who hunts and roams with her dogs, be a divine
being?

<span id="xiii.iii-p49"></span>Even Aphrodite herself they affirm to be
a goddess who is adulterous.  For at one time she had Ares as a
paramour, and at another time Anchises and again Adonis, whose death she
also laments, feeling the want of her lover.  And they say that she even
went down to Hades to purchase back Adonis from Persephone.  Did you
ever see, O King, greater folly than this, to bring forward as a goddess
one who is adulterous and given to weeping and wailing?

<span id="xiii.iii-p50"></span>And they represent that Adonis is a
hunter god, who came to a violent end, being wounded by a wild boar and
having no power to help himself in his distress.  How then will one who
is adulterous and a hunter and mortal give himself any concern for
mankind?

<span id="xiii.iii-p51"></span>All this and much more of a like nature,
and even far more disgraceful and offensive details, have the Greeks
narrated, O King, concerning their gods;—details which it is not proper
either to state or for a moment to remember.  And hence mankind, taking
an impulse from their gods, practised all lawlessness and brutality and
impiety, polluting both earth and air by their awful deeds.

<span id="xiii.iii-p52"></span>XII.  The Egyptians, again, being <span
id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span id="xiii.iii-Page_273"></span>more
stupid and witless than these have gone further astray than all the
nations.  For they were not content with the objects of worship of the
Chaldæans and the Greeks, but in addition to these brought forward also
brute creatures as gods, both land and water animals, and plants and
herbs; and they were defiled with all madness and brutality more deeply
than all the nations on the earth.

<span id="xiii.iii-p53"></span>For originally they worshipped Isis, who
had Osiris as brother and husband.  He was slain by his own brother
Typhon; and therefore Isis with Horos her son fled for refuge to Byblus
in Syria, mourning for Osiris with bitter lamentation, until Horos grew
up and slew Typhon.  So that neither had Isis power to help her own
brother and husband; nor could Osiris defend himself when he was being
slain by Typhon; nor did Typhon, the slayer of his brother, when he was
perishing at the hands of Horos and Isis, find means to rescue himself
from death.  And though they were revealed in their true character by
such mishaps, they were believed to be very gods by the simple
Egyptians, who were not satisfied even with these or the other deities
of the nations, but brought forward also brute creatures as gods.  For
some of them worshipped the sheep, and some the goat; another tribe
(worshipped) the bull and the pig; others again, the raven and the hawk,
and the vulture and the eagle; and others the crocodile; and some the
cat and the dog, and the wolf and the ape, and the dragon and the asp;
and others the onion and the garlic and thorns and other created
things.  And the poor creatures do not perceive about all these that
they are utterly helpless.  For though they see their gods eaten by men
of other tribes, and burnt as offerings and <span id="page_274">p.
274</span> <span id="xiii.iii-Page_274"></span>slain as victims and
mouldering in decay, they have not perceived that they are not gods.

<span id="xiii.iii-p54"></span>XIII.  So the Egyptians and the Chaldæans
and the Greeks made a great error in bringing forward such beings as
gods, and in making images of them, and in deifying dumb and senseless
idols.

<span id="xiii.iii-p55"></span>And I wonder how they saw their gods sawn
out and hacked and docked by the workmen, and besides aging with time
and falling to pieces, and being cast from metal, and yet did not
discern concerning them that they were not gods.

<span id="xiii.iii-p56"></span>For when they have no power to see to
their own safety, how will they take forethought for men?

<span id="xiii.iii-p57"></span>But further, the poets and philosophers,
alike of the Chaldæans and the Greeks and the Egyptians, while they
desired by their poems and writings to magnify the gods of their
countries, rather revealed their shame, and laid it bare before all
men.  For if the body of man while consisting of many parts does not
cast off any of its own members, but preserving an unbroken unity in all
its members, is harmonious with itself, how shall variance and discord
be so great in the nature of God?

<span id="xiii.iii-p58"></span>For if there had been a unity of nature
among the gods, then one god ought not to have pursued or slain or
injured another.  And if the gods were pursued by gods, and slain, and
kidnapped and struck with lightning by them, then there is no longer any
unity of nature, but <span id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_275"></span>divided counsels, all mischievous.  So
that not one of them is a god.  It is clear then, O King, that all their
discourse on the nature of the gods is an error.

<span id="xiii.iii-p59"></span>But how did the wise and erudite men of
the Greeks not observe that inasmuch as they make laws for themselves
they are judged by their own laws?  For if the laws are righteous, their
gods are altogether unrighteous, as they have committed transgressions
of laws, in slaying one another, and practising sorceries, and adultery
and thefts and intercourse with males.  If they were right in doing
these things, then the laws are unrighteous, being framed contrary to
the gods.  Whereas in fact, the laws are good and just, commending what
is good and forbidding what is bad.  But the deeds of their gods are
contrary to law.  Their gods, therefore, are lawbreakers, and all liable
to the punishment of death; and they are impious men who introduce such
gods.  For if the stories about them be mythical, the gods are nothing
more than mere names; and if the stories be founded on nature, still
they who did and suffered these things are no longer gods; and if the
stories be allegorical, they are myths and nothing more.

<span id="xiii.iii-p60"></span>It has been shown then, O King, that all
these polytheistic objects of worship are the works of error and
perdition.  For it is not right to give the name of gods to beings which
may be seen but cannot see; but one ought to reverence the invisible and
all-seeing and all-creating God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p61"></span>XIV.  Let us proceed then, O King, to the
Jews also, that we may see what truth there is in their view of God. 
For they were descendants of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and migrated
to Egypt.  And thence God brought them forth with a mighty hand and an
uplifted arm through Moses, their lawgiver; and by many wonders and
signs He made known His power to them.  But even they <span
id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span id="xiii.iii-Page_276"></span>proved
stubborn and ungrateful, and often served the idols of the nations, and
put to death the prophets and just men who were sent to them.  Then when
the Son of God was pleased to come upon the earth, they received him
with wanton violence and betrayed him into the hands of Pilate the Roman
governor; and paying no respect to his good deeds and the countless
miracles he wrought among them, they demanded a sentence of death by the
cross.

<span id="xiii.iii-p62"></span>And they perished by their own
transgression; for to this day they worship the one God Almighty, but
not according to knowledge.  For they deny that Christ is the Son of
God; and they are much like to the heathen, even although they may seem
to make some approach to the truth from which they have removed
themselves.  So much for the Jews.

<span id="xiii.iii-p63"></span>XV.  Now the Christians <span
id="fr_4422"></span>[4423](#fn_4422) trace their origin from the Lord
Jesus Christ.  And He is acknowledged by the Holy Spirit to be the son
of the most high God, who came down from heaven for the salvation of
men.  And being born of a pure virgin, unbegotten and immaculate, He
assumed flesh and revealed himself among men that He might recall them
to Himself from their wandering after many gods.  And having
accomplished His wonderful dispensation, by a voluntary choice He tasted
death on the cross, fulfilling an august dispensation.  And after three
days He came to life again and ascended into heaven.  And if you would
read, O King, you may judge the glory of His presence from the holy
gospel writing, as it is called among themselves.  He had twelve
disciples, who after His ascension to heaven went forth into the
provinces of the whole world, and declared His greatness.  As for
instance, one of them traversed the countries about us, proclaiming the
doctrine of the truth.  From this it is, that they who still observe the
righteousness enjoined by their preaching are called Christians.

<span id="xiii.iii-p65"></span>And these are they who more than <span
id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span id="xiii.iii-Page_277"></span>all the
nations on the earth have found the truth.  For they know God, the
Creator and Fashioner of all things through the only-begotten Son and
the Holy Spirit <span id="fr_4423"></span>[4424](#fn_4423) ; and beside
Him they worship no other God.  They have the commands of the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself graven upon their hearts; and they observe them, looking
forward to the resurrection of the dead and life in the world to come. 
They do not commit adultery nor fornication, nor bear false witness, nor
covet the things of others; they honour father and mother, and love
their neighbours; they judge justly, and they never do to others what
they would not wish to happen to themselves; they appeal to those who
injure them, and try to win them as friends; they are eager to do good
to their enemies; they are gentle and easy to be entreated; they abstain
from all unlawful conversation and from all impurity; they despise not
the widow, nor oppress the orphan; and he that has, gives ungrudgingly
for the maintenance of him who has not.

<span id="xiii.iii-p67"></span>If they see a stranger, they take him
under their roof, and rejoice over him as over a very brother; for they
call themselves brethren not after the flesh but after the spirit.

<span id="xiii.iii-p68"></span>And they are ready to sacrifice their
lives for the sake of Christ; for they observe His commands without
swerving, and live holy and just lives, as the Lord God enjoined upon
them.

<span id="xiii.iii-p69"></span>And they give thanks unto Him every hour,
for all meat and drink and other blessings.

<span id="xiii.iii-p70"></span><span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="xiii.iii-Page_278"></span>XVI.  Verily then, this is the way of the
truth which leads those who travel therein to the everlasting kingdom
promised through Christ in the life to come.  And that you may know, O
King, that in saying these things I do not speak at my own instance, if
you deign to look into the writings of the Christians, you will find
that I state nothing beyond the truth.  Rightly then, did thy son <span
id="fr_4424"></span>[4425](#fn_4424) apprehend, and justly was he taught
to serve the living God and to be saved for the age that is destined to
come upon us.  For great and wonderful are the sayings and deeds of the
Christians; for they speak not the words of men but those of God.  But
the rest of the nations go astray and <span id="page_279">p. 279</span>
<span id="xiii.iii-Page_279"></span>deceive themselves; for they walk in
darkness and bruise themselves like drunken men.

<span id="xiii.iii-p72"></span>XVII.  Thus far, O King, extends my
discourse to you, which has been dictated in my mind by the Truth. <span
id="fr_4425"></span>[4426](#fn_4425)   Wherefore let thy foolish sages
cease their idle talk against the Lord; for it is profitable for you to
worship God the Creator, and to give ear to His incorruptible words,
that ye may escape from condemnation and punishment, and be found to be
heirs of life everlasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4417"></span>[264:4418](0090186.htm#fr_4417) <span
id="xiii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span> The Greek might be rendered, “so far as
there was room for me to speak of Him,” i.e., the attributes of the
Deity are not further relevant to the discussion—as the translator into
Syriac takes it.  The Armenian adopts the other meaning, viz., the theme
is beyond man’s power to discuss.  As translated by F. C. Conybeare, the
Armenian is in these words:  “Now by the grace of God it was given me to
speak wisely concerning Him.  So far as I have received the faculty I
will speak, yet not according to the measure of the inscrutability of
His greatness shall I be able to do so, but by faith alone do I glorify
and adore Him.”

<span id="fn_4418"></span>[264:4419](0090186.htm#fr_4418) <span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span> The “King” in the Greek is Abenner, the
father of Josaphat; in the Syriac, as in the Greek originally, he is the
Roman Emperor, Hadrian.

<span id="fn_4419"></span>[264:4420](0090186.htm#fr_4419) <span
id="xiii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span> The Armenian and Syriac agree in giving
four races, which was probably the original division.  To a Greek, men
were either Greeks or Barbarians; to a Greek Christian it would seem
necessary to add two new peoples, Jews and Christians.  The Greek calls
the Barbarians “Chaldæans.”  This change of classification is probably
the cause of the omission in the Greek of the preliminary accounts of
the four classes.  The Greek blends the summaries with the fuller
accounts.

<span id="fn_4420"></span>[268:4421](0090186.htm#fr_4420) <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span> “I do not think it out of place here to
mention Antinous of our day \[a slave of the Emperor Hadrian\], whom
all, not withstanding they knew who and whence he was, yet affected to
worship as a god.”—Justin Martyr quoted in Eusebius Hist. Bk. IV., c. 8.

<span id="fn_4421"></span>[269:4422](0090186.htm#fr_4421) <span
id="xiii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p33"></span> The passage in brackets occurs earlier
in “Barlaam and Josaphat,” and is restored to its place by J. A.
Robinson.

<span id="fn_4422"></span>[276:4423](0090186.htm#fr_4422) <span
id="xiii.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p64"></span> This, the “Christological” passage,
occurs earlier in the Syriac.  Chap. II.

<span id="fn_4423"></span>[277:4424](0090186.htm#fr_4423) <span
id="xiii.iii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p66"></span> The Armenian agrees with the Greek
against the Syriac.  “Uná cum Spiritu Sancto” Arm.

<span id="fn_4424"></span>[278:4425](0090186.htm#fr_4424) <span
id="xiii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p71"></span> The reference is to Josaphat, son of
Abenner, who was taught to be a Christian by the monk Barlaam.

<span id="fn_4425"></span>[279:4426](0090186.htm#fr_4425) <span
id="xiii.iii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p73"></span> Nachor, the fictitious monk who
represented Barlaam, intended to make a weak defence of Christianity,
but, according to the story, he was constrained to speak what he had not
intended.  It is evidently the author’s intention to make it an instance
of “suggestio verborum” or plenary inspiration, in the case of the
fictitious monk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Apology of Aristides the Philosopher.  Translated from the
Syriac.](0090187)
