[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090290)  [Next](0090292.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>15.  How the Baptist Answers the Question
of the Pharisees and Exalts the Nature of Christ.  Of the Shoe-Latchet
Which He is Unable to Untie.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xv-p2"></span>John <span
id="fr_4905"></span>[4906](#fn_4905.md) answered them, saying, “I baptize
with water, but in the midst of you standeth one whom ye know not, even
He who cometh after me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to
unloose.”  Heracleon considers that John’s answers to those sent by the
Pharisees refer not to what they asked, but to what he wished, not
observing that he accuses the prophet of a want of manners, by making
him, when asked about one thing, answer about another; for this is a
fault to be guarded against in conversation.  We assert, on the
contrary, that the reply accurately takes up the question.  It is asked,
“Why baptizest thou then, if thou art not the Christ?”  And what other
answer could be given to this than to show that his baptism was in its
nature a bodily thing?  I, he says, “baptize with water;” this is his
answer to, “Why baptizest thou.”  And to the second part of their
question, “If thou art not the Christ,” he answers by exalting the <span
id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.xv-Page_366"></span>superior nature of Christ, that He has
such virtue as to be invisible in His deity, though present to every man
and extending over the whole universe.  This is what is indicated in the
words, “There standeth one among you.”  The Pharisees, moreover, though
expecting the advent of Christ, saw nothing in Him of such a nature as
John speaks of; they believed Him to be simply a perfect and holy man. 
John, therefore, rebukes their ignorance of His superiority, and adds to
the words, “There standeth one among you,” the clause, “whom ye know
not.”  And, lest any one should suppose the invisible One who extends to
every man, or, indeed, to the whole world, to be a different person from
Him who became man, and appeared upon the earth and conversed with men,
he adds to the words, “There standeth one among you whom you know not,”
the further words, “Who cometh after me,” that is, He who is to be
manifested after me.  By whose surpassing excellence he well understood
that his own nature was far surpassed, though some doubted whether he
might be the Christ; and, therefore, desiring to show how far he is from
attaining to the greatness of the Christ, that no one should think of
him beyond what he sees or hears of him, he goes on:  “The latchet of
whose shoe I am not worthy to unloose.”  By which he conveys, as in a
riddle, that he is not fit to solve and to explain the argument about
Christ’s assuming a human body, an argument tied up and hidden (like a
shoe-tie) to those who do not understand it,—so as to say anything
worthy of such an advent, compressed, as it was, into so short a space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4905"></span>[365:4906](0090291.htm#fr_4905.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xv-p3"></span> [John i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#026.md)<span id="xv.iii.v.xv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](0090292.md)
