[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090266)  [Next](0090268.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>28.  The Prophets Bore Witness to
Christ and Foretold Many Things Concerning Him.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p2"></span>“He came for a witness that He
might bear witness of the light, that all through Him might
believe.” <span id="fr_4759"></span>[4760](#fn_4759.md)   Some of the
dissenters from the Church’s doctrine, men who profess to believe in
Christ, have desired another being, as indeed their system requires,
besides the Creator, and hence cannot allow His coming to the world to
have been foretold by the prophets. <span
id="fr_4760"></span>[4761](#fn_4760.md)   They therefore endeavour to get
rid of the testimonies of the prophets about Christ, and say that the
Son of God has no need of witnesses, but that He brings with Him His own
evidence, partly in the sound words full of power which He proclaimed
and partly in the wonderful works He did, which were sufficient at once
to convince any one whatever.  Then they say:  If Moses is believed on
account of his word and his works, and has no need of any witnesses to
announce him beforehand, and if the prophets were received, every one of
them, by these people, as messengers from God, how should not one who is
much greater than Moses and the prophets accomplish His mission and
benefit the human race, without prophets to bear witness about Him? 
They regard it as superfluous that He should have been foretold by the
prophets, since the prophets were concerned, as these opponents would
say, that those who believed in Christ should not receive Him as a new
God, and therefore did what they could to bring them to that same God
whom Moses and the prophets taught before Jesus.  To this we must say
that as there are many causes which may lead men to believe, since men
who are not moved by one argument may be by another, so God is able to
provide for men a number of occasions, any of which may cause their
minds to open to the truth that God, who is over all, has taken on
Himself human nature.  It is manifest to all, how some are brought by
the prophetic writings to the admiration of Christ.  They are astounded
at the voices of so many prophets before Him, which establish the place
of His birth, the country of His upbringing, the power of His teaching,
His working of wonderful works, and His human passion brought to a close
by His resurrection.  We must notice, too, that Christ’s stupendous acts
of power were able to bring to the faith those of Christ’s own time, but
that they lost their demonstrative force with the lapse of years and
began to be regarded as mythical.  Greater evidential value than that of
the miracles then performed attaches to the comparison which we now make
between these miracles and the prophecy of them; this makes it
impossible for the student to cast any doubt on the former.  The
prophetic testimonies do not declare merely the advent of the Messiah;
it is by no means the case that they teach this and nothing else.  They
teach a great deal of theology.  The relation of the Father to the Son
and of the Son to the Father may be learned not less from what the
prophets announce about Christ, than from the Apostles narrating the
splendours of the Son of God.  A parallel case, which we may venture to
adduce, is that of the martyrs, who were honoured by the witness they
bore Him, and by no means conferred any favour on Him by their
witnessing for the Son of God.  And how is it if, as many of Christ’s
true disciples were honoured by having thus to witness for Him, so the
<span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-Page_343"></span>prophets received from God as
their special gift that of understanding about Christ and announcing Him
before, and that they taught not only those living after Christ’s advent
how they should regard the Son of God, but those also who lived in the
generations before Him?  As he who in these times does not know the Son
has not the Father either, <span id="fr_4761"></span>[4762](#fn_4761.md) so
also we are to understand it was in these earlier times.  Hence “Abraham
rejoiced to see the day of Christ, and he saw it and was glad.” <span
id="fr_4762"></span>[4763](#fn_4762.md)   He, therefore, who declares that
they are not to testify about Christ is seeking to deprive the chorus of
the prophets of the greatest gift they have; for what office of equal
importance would be left to prophecy, inspired as it is by the Holy
Spirit, if all connection with the economy of our Lord and Master were
taken away from it?  For as these have their faith well ordered who
approach the God of the universe through Mediator and High-Priest and
Paraclete, and as his religion is a halting one who does not go in
through the door to the Father, so also in the case of men of old time. 
Their religion was sanctified and made acceptable to God by their
knowledge and faith and expectation of Christ.  For we have observed
that God declares Himself to be a witness and exhorts them all to
declare the same about Christ, and to be imitators of Him, bearing
witness of Him to all who require it.  For he says, <span
id="fr_4763"></span>[4764](#fn_4763.md) “Be witnesses for Me, and I am
witness, saith the Lord God, and My servant whom I have chosen.”  Now
every one who bears witness to the truth, whether he support it by words
or deeds, or in whatever way, may properly be called a witness (martyr);
but it has come to be the custom of the brotherhood, since they are
struck with admiration of those who have contended to the death for
truth and valour, to keep the name of martyr more properly for those who
have borne witness to the mystery of godliness by shedding their blood
for it.  The Saviour gives the name of martyr to every one who bears
witness to the truth He declares; thus at the Ascension He says to His
disciples: <span id="fr_4764"></span>[4765](#fn_4764.md)   “You shall be my
witnesses in Jerusalem and in Judæa and in Samaria and unto the
uttermost parts of the earth.”  The leper who was cleansed <span
id="fr_4765"></span>[4766](#fn_4765.md) had still to bring the gift which
Moses commanded for a testimony to those who did not believe in the
Christ.  In the same way the martyrs bear witness for a testimony to the
unbelieving, and so do all the saints whose deeds shine before men. 
They spend their life rejoicing in the cross of Christ and bearing
witness to the true light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4759"></span>[342:4760](0090267.htm#fr_4759.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p3"></span> [John i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4760"></span>[342:4761](0090267.htm#fr_4760.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p4"></span> The Old Testament belongs to the
Creator, the Demiurge.

<span id="fn_4761"></span>[343:4762](0090267.htm#fr_4761.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p5"></span> [1 John ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4762"></span>[343:4763](0090267.htm#fr_4762.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p6"></span> [John viii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4763"></span>[343:4764](0090267.htm#fr_4763.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p7"></span> [Isa. xliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4764"></span>[343:4765](0090267.htm#fr_4764.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p8"></span> [Acts i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4765"></span>[343:4766](0090267.htm#fr_4765.md) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p9"></span> [Matt. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004.md)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](0090268.md)
