[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090242)  [Next](0090244) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>4.  That the Logos is One, Not Many.  Of
the Word, Faithful and True, and of His White Horse.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p2"></span>“*He was in the beginning with God.*” 
By his three foregoing propositions the Evangelist has made us
acquainted with three orders, and he now sums up the three in one,
saying, “This (Logos) was in the beginning with God.”  In the first
premiss we learned where the Logos was:  He was in the beginning; then
we learned with whom He was, with God; and then who He was, that He was
God.  He now points out by this word “He,” the Word who is God, and
gathers up into a fourth proposition the three which went before, “In
the beginning was the Word,” “The Word was with God,” and “The Word was
God.”  Now he says, He, this (Word) was in the beginning with God.  The
term beginning may be taken of the beginning of the world, so that we
may learn from what is said that the Word was older than the things
which were made from the beginning.  For if “in the beginning God
created heaven and earth,” but “He” was in the beginning, then the Logos
is manifestly older than those things which were made at the beginning,
older not only than the firmament and the dry land, but than the heavens
and earth.  Now some one might ask, and not unreasonably, why it is not
said, “In the beginning was the Word of God, and the Word of God was
with God, and the Word of God was God.”  But he who asked such a
question could be shown to be taking for granted that there are a
plurality of logoi, differing perhaps from each other in kind, one being
the word of God, another perhaps the word of angels, a third of men, and
so on with the other logoi.  Now, if this were so with the Logos, the
case would be the same with wisdom and with righteousness.  But it would
be absurd that there should be a number of things equally to be called
“The Word;” and the same would apply to wisdom and to righteousness.  We
shall be driven to confess that we ought not to look for a plurality of
logoi, or of wisdom, or of righteousness, if we look at the case of
truth.  Any one will confess that there is only one truth; it could
never be said in this case that there is one truth of God, and another
of the angels, and another of man,—it lies in the nature of things that
the truth about anything is one.  Now, if truth be one, it is clear that
the preparation of it and its demonstration, which is wisdom, must in
reason be conceived as one, since what is regarded as wisdom cannot
justly claim that title where truth, which is one, is absent from its
grasp.  But if truth is one and wisdom one, then Reason (Logos) also,
which announces truth and makes truth simple and manifest to those who
are fitted to receive it, will be one.  This we say, by no means denying
that truth and wisdom and reason are of God, but we wish to indicate the
purpose of the omission in this passage of the words “of God,” and of
the form of the statement, “In the beginning the Logos was with God.” 
The same John in the Apocalypse gives Him His name with the addition “of
God,” where he says: <span id="fr_4667"></span>[4668](#fn_4667)   “And I
saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and He that sat thereon
called Faithful and True; and in righteousness doth He judge and make
war.  And His eyes are as a flame of fire, and on His head are many
diadems, and He hath a name written which no one knoweth but He
Himself.  And He is arrayed in a garment sprinkled with blood, and His
name is called <span id="fr_4668"></span>[4669](#fn_4668) Word of God. 
And His armies in heaven followed Him on white horses, clothed in pure
fine linen.  And out of His mouth proceedeth a sharp sword, that with it
He should smite the nations, and He shall rule them with a rod of iron,
and He treadeth the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty
God.  And He hath on His garment and on His thigh a name written:  King
of kings, and Lord of lords.”  In this passage Logos is necessarily
spoken of absolutely without the article, and also with the addition
Logos of God; had the first not been the case (i.e., had the article
been given) we might have been led to take up the meaning wrongly, <span
id="fr_4669"></span>[4670](#fn_4669) and so to depart from the truth
about the Logos.  For if it had been called simply Logos, and had not
been said to be the Logos of God, then we would not be clearly informed
that the Logos is the Logos of God.  And, again, had it been called
Logos of God but not said to be Logos absolutely, then we might imagine
many logoi, according to the constitution <span id="page_326">p.
326</span> <span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-Page_326"></span>of each of the
rational beings which exist; then we might assume a number of logoi
properly so called.  Again, in his description in the Apocalypse of the
Logos of God, the Apostle and Evangelist (and the Apocalypse entitles
him to be styled a prophet, too) says he saw the Word of God in the
opened heaven, and that He was riding on a white horse.  Now we must
consider what he means to convey when he speaks of heaven being opened
and of the white horse, and of the Word of God riding on the white
horse, and also what is meant by saying that the Word of God is Faithful
and True, and that in righteousness He judges and makes war.  All this
will greatly advance our study on the subject of the Word of God.  Now I
conceive heaven to have been shut against the ungodly, and those who
bear the image of the earthly, and to have been opened to the righteous
and those adorned with the image of the heavenly.  For to the former,
being below and still dwelling in the flesh, the better things are
closed, since they cannot understand them and have neither power nor
will to see their beauty, looking down as they do and not striving to
look up.  But to the excellent, or those who have their commonwealth in
heaven, <span id="fr_4670"></span>[4671](#fn_4670) he opens, with the
key of David, the things in heavenly places and discloses them to their
view, and makes all clear to them by riding on his horse.  These words
also have their meaning; the horse is white because it is the nature of
higher knowledge (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>γνῶσις</span>) to be clear and white and
full of light.  And on the white horse sits He who is called Faithful,
seated more firmly, and so to speak more royally, on words which cannot
be set aside, words which run sharply and more swiftly than any horse,
and overhear in their rushing course every so-called word that simulates
the Word, and every so-called truth that simulates the Truth.  He who
sits on the white horse is called Faithful, not because of the faith He
cherishes, but of that which He inspires, because He is worthy of
faith.  Now the Lord Jehovah, according to Moses, <span
id="fr_4671"></span>[4672](#fn_4671) is Faithful and True.  He is true
also in respect of His relation to shadow, type, and image; for such is
the Word who is in the opened heaven, for He is not on earth as He is in
heaven; on earth He is made flesh and speaks through shadow, type, and
image.  The multitude, therefore, of those who are reputed to believe
are disciples of the shadow of the Word, not of the true Word of God
which is in the opened heaven.  Hence Jeremiah says, <span
id="fr_4672"></span>[4673](#fn_4672) “The Spirit of our face is Christ
the Lord, of whom we said, In His shadow shall we live among the
nations.”  Thus the Word of God who is called Faithful is also called
True, and in righteousness He judges and makes war; since He has
received from God the faculty of judging in very righteousness and very
judgment, and of apportioning its due to every existing creature.  For
none of those who have some portion of righteousness and of the faculty
of judgment can receive on his soul such copies and impressions of
righteousness and judgment as to come short in no point of absolute
righteousness and absolute justice, just as no painter of a picture can
communicate to the representation all the qualities of the original. 
This, I conceive, is the reason why David says, <span
id="fr_4673"></span>[4674](#fn_4673) “Before Thee shall no living being
be justified.”  He does not say, no man, or no angel, but no living
being, since even if any being partakes of life and has altogether put
off mortality, not even then can it be justified in comparison of Thee,
who art, as it were, Life itself.  Nor is it possible that one who
partakes of life and is therefore called living, should become life
itself, or that one who partakes of righteousness and, therefore, is
called righteous should become equal to righteousness itself.  Now it is
the function of the Word of God, not only to judge in righteousness, but
also to make war in righteousness, that by making war on His enemies by
reason and righteousness, so that what is irrational and wicked is
destroyed, <span id="fr_4674"></span>[4675](#fn_4674) He may dwell in
the soul of him who, for his salvation, so to speak, has become captive
to Christ, and may justify that soul and cast out from her all
adversaries.  We shall, however, obtain a better view of this war which
the Word carries on if we remember that He is an ambassador for the
truth, while there is another who pretends to be the Word and is not,
and one who calls herself the truth and is not, but a lie.  Then the
Word, arming Himself against the lie, slays it with the breath of His
mouth and brings it to naught by the manifestation of His coming. <span
id="fr_4675"></span>[4676](#fn_4675)   And consider whether these words
of the Apostle to the Thessalonians may be understood in an intellectual
sense.  For what is that which is destroyed by the breath of the mouth
of Christ, Christ being the Word and Truth and Wisdom, but the lie?  And
what is that which is brought <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-Page_327"></span>to naught by the manifestation of
Christ’s coming, Christ being conceived as wisdom and reason, what but
that which announces itself as wisdom, when in reality it is one of
those things with which God deals as the Apostle describes, <span
id="fr_4676"></span>[4677](#fn_4676) “He taketh the wise, those who are
not wise with the true wisdom, in their own craftiness”?  To what he
says of the rider on the white horse, John adds the wonderful
statement:  “His eyes are like a flame of fire.”  For as the flame of
fire is bright and illuminating, but at the same time fiery and
destructive of material things, so, if I may so say, are the eyes of the
Logos with which He sees, and every one who has part in Him; they have
not only the inherent quality of laying hold of the things of the mind,
but also that of consuming and putting away those conceptions which are
more material and gross, since whatever is in any way false flees from
the directness and lightness of truth.  It is in a very natural order
that after speaking of Him who judges in righteousness and makes war in
accordance with His righteous judgments, and then after His warring of
His giving light, the writer goes on to say, “On His head are many
diadems.”  For had the lie been one, and of one form only, against which
the True and Faithful Word contended, and for conquering which, He was
crowned, then one crown alone would naturally have been given Him for
the victory.  As it is, however, as the lies are many which profess the
truth and for warring against which the Word is crowned, the diadems are
many which surround the head of the conqueror of them all.  As He has
overcome every revolting power many diadems mark His victory.  Then
after the diadems He is said to have a name written which no one knows
but He Himself.  For there are some things which are known to the Word
alone; for the beings which come into existence after Him have a poorer
nature than His, and none of them is able to behold all that He
apprehends.  And perhaps it is the case that only those who have part in
that Word know the things which are kept from the knowledge of those who
do not partake of Him.  Now, in John’s vision, the Word of God as He
rides on the white horse is not naked:  He is clothed with a garment
sprinkled with blood, for the Word who was made flesh and therefore died
is surrounded with marks of the fact that His blood was poured out upon
the earth, when the soldier pierced His side.  For of that passion, even
should it be our lot some day to come to that highest and supreme
contemplation of the Logos, we shall not lose all memory, nor shall we
forget the truth that our admission was brought about by His sojourning
in our body.  This Word of God is followed by the heavenly armies one
and all; they follow the Word as their leader, and imitate Him in all
things, and chiefly in having mounted, they also, white horses.  To him
that understands, this secret is open.  And as sorrow and grief and
wailing fled away at the end of things, so also, I suppose, did
obscurity and doubt, all the mysteries of God’s wisdom being precisely
and clearly opened.  Look also at the white horses of the followers of
the Word and at the white and pure linen with which they were clothed. 
As linen comes out of the earth, may not those linen garments stand for
the dialects on the earth in which those voices are clothed which make
clear announcements of things?  We have dealt at some length with the
statements found in the Apocalypse about the Word of God; it is
important for us to know clearly about Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4667"></span>[325:4668](0090243.htm#fr_4667) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p3"></span> [Rev.
19.11-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4668"></span>[325:4669](0090243.htm#fr_4668) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p4"></span> In the Greek the article is here
omitted.

<span id="fn_4669"></span>[325:4670](0090243.htm#fr_4669) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p5"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>παρεκδέξασθαι</span>, with Huet.

<span id="fn_4670"></span>[326:4671](0090243.htm#fr_4670) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p6"></span> [Philipp. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4671"></span>[326:4672](0090243.htm#fr_4671) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p7"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4672"></span>[326:4673](0090243.htm#fr_4672) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p8"></span> [Lam. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4673"></span>[326:4674](0090243.htm#fr_4673) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p9"></span> [Ps. cxliii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4674"></span>[326:4675](0090243.htm#fr_4674) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p10"></span> Omitting <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>λεγεσθαι</span>, with Jacobi.

<span id="fn_4675"></span>[326:4676](0090243.htm#fr_4675) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p11"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4676"></span>[327:4677](0090243.htm#fr_4676) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p12"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0090244)
