[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090442)  [Next](0090444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>2.  “The Spirit and Power of Elijah”—Not
the Soul—Were in the Baptist.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p2"></span>I have thought it necessary to dwell
some time on the examination of the doctrine of transmigration, because
of the suspicion of some who suppose that the soul under consideration
was the same in Elijah and in John, being called in the former case
Elijah, and in the second case John; and that, not apart from God, had
he been called John, as is plain from the saying of the angel who
appeared to Zacharias, “Fear not, Zacharias, for thy supplication is
heard, and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call
his name John;” <span id="fr_5833"></span>[5834](#fn_5833) and from the
fact that Zacharias regained his speech after he had written in the
tablet, that he who had been born should be called John. <span
id="fr_5834"></span>[5835](#fn_5834)   But if it were the soul of
Elijah, then, when he was begotten a second time, he should have been
called Elijah; or for the change of name some reason should have been
assigned, as in the case of Abram and Abraham, Sarah and Sarrah, Jacob
and Israel, Simon and Peter.  And yet not even thus would their argument
in the case be tenable; for, in the case of the aforesaid, the changes
of name took place in one and the same life.  But some one might ask, if
the soul of Elijah was not first in the Tishbite and secondly in John,
what might that be in both which the Saviour called Elijah?  And I say
that Gabriel in his words to Zacharias suggested what the substance was
in Elijah and John that was the same; for he says, “Many of the children
of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God; and he shall go before
his face in the spirit and power of Elijah.” <span
id="fr_5835"></span>[5836](#fn_5835)   For, observe, he did not say in
the “soul” of Elijah, in which case the doctrine of transmigration might
have some ground, but “in the spirit and power of Elijah.”  For the
Scripture well knows the distinction between spirit and soul, as, “May
God sanctify you wholly, and may your spirit and soul and body be
preserved entire, without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ;” <span id="fr_5836"></span>[5837](#fn_5836) and the passage,
“Bless the Lord, ye spirits and souls of the righteous” <span
id="fr_5837"></span>[5838](#fn_5837) as it stands in the book of Daniel,
according to the Septuagint, represents the difference between spirit
and soul.  Elijah, therefore, was not called John because of the soul,
but because of the spirit and the power, which in no way conflicts with
the teaching of the church, though they were formerly in Elijah, and
afterwards in John; and “the spirits of the prophets are subject to the
prophets,” <span id="fr_5838"></span>[5839](#fn_5838) but the souls of
the prophets are not subject to the prophets, and “the spirit of Elijah
rested on Elisha.” <span id="fr_5839"></span>[5840](#fn_5839)   But we
ought to inquire whether the spirit of Elijah is the same as the spirit
of God in Elijah, or whether they are different from each other, and
whether the spirit of Elijah which was in him was something
supernatural, different from the spirit of each man which is in him; for
the Apostle clearly indicates that the Spirit of God, though it be in
us, is different from the spirit of each man which is in Him, when he
says somewhere, “The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that
we are the children of God;” <span id="fr_5840"></span>[5841](#fn_5840)
and elsewhere, <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-Page_476"></span>“No one of men knoweth the things of a
man save the spirit of the man which is in him; even so the things of
God none knoweth save the Spirit of God.” <span
id="fr_5841"></span>[5842](#fn_5841)   But do not marvel in regard to
what is said about Elijah, if, just as something strange happened to him
different from all the saints who are recorded, in respect of his having
been caught up by a whirlwind into heaven, <span
id="fr_5842"></span>[5843](#fn_5842) so his spirit had something of
choice excellence, so that not only did it rest on Elisha, but also
descended along with John at his birth; and that John, separately, “was
filled with the Holy Ghost even from his mother’s womb,” and separately,
“came before Christ in the spirit and power of Elijah.” <span
id="fr_5843"></span>[5844](#fn_5843)   For it is possible for several
spirits not only worse, but also better, to be in the same man.  David
accordingly asks to be established by a free spirit, <span
id="fr_5844"></span>[5845](#fn_5844) and that a right spirit be renewed
in his inward parts. <span id="fr_5845"></span>[5846](#fn_5845)   But
if, in order that the Saviour may impart to us of “the spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and reverence,” <span id="fr_5846"></span>[5847](#fn_5846) he
was filled also with the spirit of the fear of the Lord; it is possible
also that these several good spirits may be conceived as being in the
same person.  And this also we have brought forward, because of John
having come before Christ “in the spirit and power of Elijah,” <span
id="fr_5847"></span>[5848](#fn_5847) in order that the saying, “Elijah
has already come,” <span id="fr_5848"></span>[5849](#fn_5848) may be
referred to the spirit of Elijah that was in John; as also the three
disciples who had gone up with Him understood that He spake to them
about John the Baptist. <span id="fr_5849"></span>[5850](#fn_5849)  
Upon Elisha, then, only the spirit of Elijah rested, but John came
before, <span id="fr_5850"></span>[5851](#fn_5850) not only in the
spirit, but also in the power of Elijah.  Wherefore, also, Elisha could
not have been called Elijah, but John was Elijah himself.  But if it be
necessary to adduce the Scripture from which the scribes said that
Elijah must first come, listen to Malachi who says, “And behold I will
send to you Elijah the Tishbite,” etc., down to the words, “Lest I come
and smite the earth utterly.” <span id="fr_5851"></span>[5852](#fn_5851)
  And it seems to be indicated by these words, that Elijah was to
prepare for the glorious coming of Christ by certain holy words and
dispositions in their souls, those who had been made fittest for this,
which those upon earth could not have endured, because of the excellency
of the glory, unless they had been prepared before hand by Elijah.  And
likewise, by Elijah, in this place, I do not understand the soul of that
prophet but his spirit and his power; for these it is by which all
things shall be restored, <span id="fr_5852"></span>[5853](#fn_5852) so
that when they have been restored, and, as a result of that restoration,
become capable of receiving the glory of Christ, the Son of God who
shall appear in glory may sojourn with them.  But if also Elijah be in
some sort a word inferior to “the Word who was in the beginning with
God, God the Word,” <span id="fr_5853"></span>[5854](#fn_5853) this word
also might come as a preparatory discipline to the people prepared by
it, that they might be trained for the reception of the perfect Word. 
But some one may raise the question whether the spirit and power of
Elijah, suffered what was suffered in John, according to the words,
“They did in him whatsoever they listed.” <span
id="fr_5854"></span>[5855](#fn_5854)   And to this it will be said on
the one hand, in simpler fashion that there is nothing strange in the
thought, that the things which assist do, because of love, suffer along
with those that are assisted; and Jesus indeed says. “Because of the
weak I was weak, and I hungered because of the hungry, and I thirsted
because of the thirsty,” <span id="fr_5855"></span>[5856](#fn_5855) and,
on the other hand, in a deeper sense that the words are not, “But they
did unto him whatsoever they listed in him,” for the things which
suffered leaned upon the spirit and the power of Elijah, the soul of
John being in no wise Elijah; and probably also the body (leaned upon
them).  For in one fashion is the soul in the body, and the spirit, and
the power; and in another fashion is the body of the righteous man in
these better parts, as leaning upon them, and clinging to them; but
“they who are in the flesh cannot please God; but ye are not in the
flesh, but in the spirit, if the Spirit of God dwell in you;” <span
id="fr_5856"></span>[5857](#fn_5856) for the soul of the sinner is in
the flesh, but of the righteous man in spirit.  And likewise, further,
this might be inquired into, to whom refer the words, “But they did in
him whatsoever they listed.” <span id="fr_5857"></span>[5858](#fn_5857)
  Was it to the scribes in regard to whom the disciples inquired and
said, “Why then do the scribes say that Elijah must first come?” <span
id="fr_5858"></span>[5859](#fn_5858)   But it is not at all evident that
John suffered anything at the hands of the scribes, except, indeed, that
they did not believe him; or, as we said also before, that they were
accomplices in the wrongs which Herod dared to inflict on him.  But
another might say that the words, “But they did in him whatsoever <span
id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-Page_477"></span>they
listed,” refer not to the scribes but to Herodias and her daughter, and
Herod, who did in him whatsoever they listed.  And that which follows,
“So shall the Son of man suffer from them,” <span
id="fr_5859"></span>[5860](#fn_5859) might be referred to the scribes,
if the former were referred to them; but, if the former refers to Herod
and Herodias and her daughter, the second passage will also refer to
them; <span id="fr_5860"></span>[5861](#fn_5860) for Herod also seems to
have joined in the vote that Jesus should die, perhaps his wife also
taking part with him in the plot against Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5833"></span>[475:5834](0090443.htm#fr_5833) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p3"></span> [Luke i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#013)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5834"></span>[475:5835](0090443.htm#fr_5834) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p4"></span> [Luke i.
63](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#063)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5835"></span>[475:5836](0090443.htm#fr_5835) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p5"></span> [Luke
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5836"></span>[475:5837](0090443.htm#fr_5836) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p6"></span> [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5837"></span>[475:5838](0090443.htm#fr_5837) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p7"></span> [Dan. iii.
86](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#086)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p7.1"></span>.  (<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p7.2"></span>Song of the Three Children 64.)

<span id="fn_5838"></span>[475:5839](0090443.htm#fr_5838) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p8"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5839"></span>[475:5840](0090443.htm#fr_5839) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p9"></span> [2 Kings ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5840"></span>[475:5841](0090443.htm#fr_5840) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p10"></span> [Rom. viii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5841"></span>[476:5842](0090443.htm#fr_5841) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p11"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5842"></span>[476:5843](0090443.htm#fr_5842) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p12"></span> [2 Kings ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5843"></span>[476:5844](0090443.htm#fr_5843) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p13"></span> [Luke
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5844"></span>[476:5845](0090443.htm#fr_5844) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p14"></span> [Ps. li.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5845"></span>[476:5846](0090443.htm#fr_5845) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p15"></span> [Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5846"></span>[476:5847](0090443.htm#fr_5846) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p16"></span> [Isa. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5847"></span>[476:5848](0090443.htm#fr_5847) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p17"></span> [Luke i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5848"></span>[476:5849](0090443.htm#fr_5848) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p18"></span> [Matt. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5849"></span>[476:5850](0090443.htm#fr_5849) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p19"></span> [Matt. xvii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#013)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5850"></span>[476:5851](0090443.htm#fr_5850) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p20"></span> *Cf.* [Luke i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5851"></span>[476:5852](0090443.htm#fr_5851) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p21"></span> [Mal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5852"></span>[476:5853](0090443.htm#fr_5852) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p22"></span> [Matt. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5853"></span>[476:5854](0090443.htm#fr_5853) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p23"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5854"></span>[476:5855](0090443.htm#fr_5854) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p24"></span> [Matt. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5855"></span>[476:5856](0090443.htm#fr_5855) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p25"></span> *Cf.* [Matt. xxv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5856"></span>[476:5857](0090443.htm#fr_5856) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p26"></span> [Rom.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5857"></span>[476:5858](0090443.htm#fr_5857) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p27"></span> [Matt. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5858"></span>[476:5859](0090443.htm#fr_5858) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p28"></span> [Matt. xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5859"></span>[477:5860](0090443.htm#fr_5859) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p29"></span> [Matt. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5860"></span>[477:5861](0090443.htm#fr_5860) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.ii-p30"></span> The text is uncertain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0090444)
