[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090082)  [Next](0090084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.i"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_185"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="ix.iii.i-p1.1"></span>The Testament of Abraham.</span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c37"><span
id="ix.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Version I.</span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p4"></span>I.  Abraham lived the measure of his life,
nine hundred and ninety-five years, and having lived all the years of
his life in quietness, gentleness, and righteousness, the righteous one
was exceeding hospitable; for, pitching his tent in the cross-ways at
the oak of Mamre, he received every one, both rich and poor, kings and
rulers, the maimed and the helpless, friends and strangers, neighbors
and travelers, all alike did the devout, all-holy, righteous, and
hospitable Abraham entertain.  Even upon him, however, there came the
common, inexorable, bitter lot of death, and the uncertain end of life. 
Therefore the Lord God, summoning his archangel Michael, said to him: 
Go down, chief-captain <span id="fr_3990"></span>[3991](#fn_3990.md)
Michael, to Abraham and speak to him concerning his death, that he may
set his affairs in order, for I have blessed him as the stars of heaven,
and as the sand by the sea-shore, and he is in abundance of long life
and many possessions, and is becoming exceeding rich.  Beyond all men,
moreover, he is righteous in every goodness, hospitable and loving to
the end of his life; but do thou, archangel Michael, go to Abraham, my
beloved friend, and announce to him his death and assure him thus:  Thou
shalt at this time depart from this vain world, and shalt quit the body,
and go to thine own Lord among the good.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p6"></span>II.  And the chief-captain departed from
before the face of God, and went down to Abraham to the oak of Mamre,
and found the righteous Abraham in the field close by, sitting beside
yokes of oxen for ploughing, together with the sons of Masek and other
servants, to the number of twelve.  And behold the chief-captain came to
him, and Abraham, seeing the chief-captain Michael coming from afar,
like to a very comely warrior, arose and met him as was his custom,
meeting and entertaining all strangers.  And the chief-captain saluted
him and said:  Hail, most honored father, righteous soul chosen <span
id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_186"></span>of God,
true son of the heavenly one.  Abraham said to the chief-captain:  Hail,
most honored warrior, bright as the sun and most beautiful above all the
sons of men; thou art welcome; therefore I beseech thy presence, tell me
whence the youth of thy age has come; teach me, thy suppliant, whence
and from what army and from what journey thy beauty has come hither. 
The chief-captain said:  I, O righteous Abraham, come from the great
city.  I have been sent by the great king to take the place of a good
friend of his, for the king has summoned him.  And Abraham said, Come,
my Lord, go with me as far as my field.  The chief-captain said:  I
come; and going into the field of the ploughing, they sat down beside
the company.  And Abraham said to his servants, the sons of Masek:  Go
ye to the herd of horses, and bring two horses, quiet, and gentle and
tame, so that I and this stranger may sit thereon.  But the
chief-captain said, Nay, my Lord, Abraham, let them not bring horses,
for I abstain from ever sitting upon any four-footed beast.  Is not my
king rich in much merchandise, having power both over men and all kinds
of cattle? but I abstain from ever sitting upon any four-footed beast. 
Let us go, then, O righteous soul, walking lightly until we reach thy
house.  And Abraham said, Amen, be it so.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p7"></span>III.  And as they went on from the field
toward his house, beside that way there stood a cypress tree, and by the
command of the Lord the tree cried out with a human voice, saying, Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord God that calls himself to those that love him;
but Abraham hid the mystery, thinking that the chief-captain had not
heard the voice of the tree.  And coming nigh to the house they sat down
in the court, and Isaac seeing the face of the angel said to Sarah his
mother, My lady mother, behold, the man sitting with my father Abraham
is not a son of the race of those that dwell on the earth.  And Isaac
ran, and saluted him, and fell at the feet of the Incorporeal, and the
Incorporeal blessed him and said, The Lord God will grant thee his
promise that he made to thy father Abraham and to his seed, and will
also grant thee the precious prayer of thy father and thy mother. 
Abraham said to Isaac his son, My son Isaac, draw water from the well,
and bring it me in the vessel, that we may wash the feet of this
stranger, for he is tired, having come to us from off a long journey. 
And Isaac ran to the well and drew water in the vessel and brought it to
them, and Abraham went up and washed <span id="page_187">p. 187</span>
<span id="ix.iii.i-Page_187"></span>the feet of the chief captain
Michael, and the heart of Abraham was moved, and he wept over the
stranger.  And Isaac, seeing his father weeping, wept also, and the
chief captain, seeing them weeping, also wept with them, and the tears
of the chief captain fell upon the vessel into the water of the basin
and became precious stones.  And Abraham seeing the marvel, and being
astonished, took the stones secretly, and hid the mystery, keeping it by
himself in his heart.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p8"></span>IV.  And Abraham said to Isaac his son: 
Go, my beloved son, into the inner chamber of the house and beautify
it.  Spread for us there two couches, one for me and one for this man
that is guest with us this day.  Prepare for us there a seat and a
candlestick and a table with abundance of every good thing.  Beautify
the chamber, my son, and spread under us linen and purple and fine
linen.  Burn there every precious and excellent incense, and bring
sweet-smelling plants from the garden and fill our house with them. 
Kindle seven lamps full of oil, so that we may rejoice, for this man
that is our guest this day is more glorious than kings or rulers, and
his appearance surpasses all the sons of men.  And Isaac prepared all
things well, and Abraham taking the archangel Michael went into the
chamber, and they both sat down upon the couches, and between them he
placed a table with abundance of every good thing.  Then the chief
captain arose and went out, as if by constraint of his belly to make
issue of water, and ascended to heaven in the twinkling of an eye, and
stood before the Lord, and said to him:  Lord and Master, let thy power
know that I am unable to remind that righteous man of his death, for I
have not seen upon the earth a man like him, pitiful, hospitable,
righteous, truthful, devout, refraining from every evil deed.  And now
know, Lord, that I cannot remind him of his death.  And the Lord said: 
Go down, chief-captain Michael, to my friend Abraham, and whatever he
say to thee, that do thou also, and whatever he eat, eat thou also with
him.  And I will send my Holy Spirit upon his son Isaac, and will put
the remembrance of his death into the heart of Isaac, so that even he in
a dream may see the death of his father, and Isaac will relate the
dream, and thou shalt interpret it, and he himself will know his end. 
And the chief-captain said, Lord, all the heavenly spirits are
incorporeal, and neither eat nor drink, and this man has set before me a
table with abundance of all good things earthly and corruptible.  Now,
Lord, what shall I do?  How shall I escape him, <span id="page_188">p.
188</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_188"></span>sitting at one table with
him?  The Lord said:  Go down to him, and take no thought for this, for
when thou sittest down with him, I will send upon thee a devouring
spirit, and it will consume out of thy hands and through thy mouth all
that is on the table.  Rejoice together with him in everything, only
thou shalt interpret well the things of the vision, that Abraham may
know the sickle of death and the uncertain end of life, and may make
disposal of all his possessions, for I have blessed him above the sand
of the sea and as the stars of heaven.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p9"></span>V.  Then the chief captain went down to
the house of Abraham, and sat down with him at the table, and Isaac
served them.  And when the supper was ended, Abraham prayed after his
custom, and the chief-captain prayed together with him, and each lay
down to sleep upon his couch.  And Isaac said to his father, Father, I
too would fain sleep with you in this chamber, that I also may hear your
discourse, for I love to hear the excellence of the conversation of this
virtuous man.  Abraham said, Nay, my son, but go to thy own chamber and
sleep on thy own couch, lest we be troublesome to this man.  Then Isaac,
having received the prayer from them, and having blessed them, went to
his own chamber and lay down upon his couch.  But the Lord cast the
thought of death into the heart of Isaac as in a dream, and about the
third hour of the night Isaac awoke and rose up from his couch, and came
running to the chamber where his father was sleeping together with the
archangel.  Isaac, therefore, on reaching the door cried out, saying, My
father Abraham, arise and open to me quickly, that I may enter and hang
upon thy neck, and embrace thee before they take thee away from me. 
Abraham therefore arose and opened to him, and Isaac entered and hung
upon his neck, and began to weep with a loud voice.  Abraham therefore
being moved at heart, also wept with a loud voice, and the
chief-captain, seeing them weeping, wept also.  Sarah being in her room,
heard their weeping, and came running to them, and found them embracing
and weeping.  And Sarah said with weeping, My Lord Abraham, what is this
that ye weep?  Tell me, my Lord, has this brother that has been
entertained by us this day brought thee tidings of Lot, thy brother’s
son, that he is dead? is it for this that ye grieve thus?  The
chief-captain answered and said to her, Nay, my sister Sarah, it is not
as thou sayest, but thy son Isaac, methinks, beheld a dream, and came to
us weeping, and we seeing him were moved in our hearts and wept.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p10"></span><span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_189"></span>VI.  Then Sarah, hearing the excellence of
the conversation of the chief-captain, straightway knew that it was an
angel of the Lord that spoke.  Sarah therefore signified to Abraham to
come out towards the door, and said to him, My Lord Abraham, knowest
thou who this man is?  Abraham said, I know not.  Sarah said, Thou
knowest, my Lord, the three men from heaven that were entertained by us
in our tent beside the oak of Mamre, when thou didst kill the kid
without blemish, and set a table before them.  After the flesh had been
eaten, the kid rose again, and sucked its mother with great joy. 
Knowest thou not, my Lord Abraham, that by promise they gave to us Isaac
as the fruit of the womb?  Of these three holy men this is one.  Abraham
said, O Sarah, in this thou speakest the truth.  Glory and praise from
our God and the Father.  For late in the evening when I washed his feet
in the basin I said in my heart, These are the feet of one of the three
men that I washed then; and his tears that fell into the basin then
became precious stones.  And shaking them out from his lap he gave them
to Sarah, saying, If thou believest me not, look now at these.  And
Sarah receiving them bowed down and saluted and said, Glory be to God
that showeth us wonderful things.  And now know, my Lord Abraham, that
there is among us the revelation of some thing, whether it be evil or
good!

<span id="ix.iii.i-p11"></span>VII.  And Abraham left Sarah, and went
into the chamber, and said to Isaac, Come hither, my beloved son, tell
me the truth, what it was thou sawest and what befell thee that thou
camest so hastily to us.  And Isaac answering began to say, I saw, my
Lord, in this night the sun and the moon above my head, surrounding me
with its rays and giving me light.  As I gazed at this and rejoiced, I
saw the heaven opened, and a man bearing light descend from it, shining
more than seven suns.  And this man like the sun came and took away the
sun from my head, and went up into the heavens from whence he came, but
I was greatly grieved that he took away the sun from me.  After a
little, as I was still sorrowing and sore troubled, I saw this man come
forth from heaven a second time, and he took away from me the moon also
from off my head, and I wept greatly and called upon that man of light,
and said, Do not, my Lord, take away my glory from me; pity me and hear
me, and if thou takest away the sun from me, then leave the moon to me. 
He said, Suffer them to be taken up to the king above, for he wishes
them there.  And he took them away from me, but he left the <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_190"></span>rays
upon me.  The chief-captain said, Hear, O righteous Abraham; the sun
which thy son saw is thou his father, and the moon likewise is Sarah his
mother.  The man bearing light who descended from heaven, this is the
one sent from God who is to take thy righteous soul from thee.  And now
know, O most honored Abraham, that at this time thou shalt leave this
worldly life, and remove to God.  Abraham said to the chief captain O
strangest of marvels! and now art thou he that shall take my soul from
me?  The chief-captain said to him, I am the chief-captain Michael, that
stands before the Lord, and I was sent to thee to remind thee of thy
death, and then I shall depart to him as I was commanded.  Abraham said,
Now I know that thou art an angel of the Lord, and wast sent to take my
soul, but I will not go with thee; but do thou whatever thou art
commanded.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p12"></span>VIII.  The chief-captain hearing these
words immediately vanished, and ascending into heaven stood before God,
and told all that he had seen in the house of Abraham; and the
chief-captain said this also to his Lord, Thus says thy friend Abraham,
I will not go with thee, but do thou whatever thou art commanded; and
now, O Lord Almighty, doth thy glory and immortal kingdom order aught? 
God said to the chief-captain Michael, Go to my friend Abraham yet once
again, and speak to him thus, Thus saith the Lord thy God, he that
brought thee into the land of promise, that blessed thee above the sand
of the sea and above the stars of heaven, that opened the womb of
barrenness of Sarah, and granted thee Isaac as the fruit of the womb in
old age, Verily I say unto thee that blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thy seed, and I will give thee all that thou
shalt ask from me, for I am the Lord thy God, and besides me there is no
other.  Tell me why thou hast rebelled against me, and why there is
grief in thee, and why thou rebelled against my archangel Michael? 
Knowest thou not that all who have come from Adam and Eve have died, and
that none of the prophets has escaped death?  None of those that rule as
kings is immortal; none of thy forefathers has escaped the mystery of
death.  They have all died, they have all departed into Hades, they are
all gathered by the sickle of death.  But upon thee I have not sent
death, I have not suffered any deadly disease to come upon thee, I have
not permitted the sickle of death to meet thee, I have not allowed the
nets of Hades to enfold thee, I have never wished thee to meet with any
evil.  But for good comfort I have sent my <span id="page_191">p.
191</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_191"></span>chief-captain Michael to
thee, that thou mayst know thy departure from the world, and set thy
house in order, and all that belongs to thee, and bless Isaac thy
beloved son.  And now know that I have done this not wishing to grieve
thee.  Wherefore then hast thou said to my chief-captain, I will not go
with thee?  Wherefore hast thou spoken thus?  Knowest thou not that if I
give leave to death and he comes upon thee, then I should see whether
thou wouldst come or not?

<span id="ix.iii.i-p13"></span>IX.  And the chief-captain receiving the
exhortations of the Lord went down to Abraham, and seeing him the
righteous one fell upon his face to the ground as one dead, and the
chief-captain told him all that he had heard from the Most High.  Then
the holy and just Abraham rising with many tears fell at the feet of the
Incorporeal, and besought him, saying, I beseech thee, chief-captain of
the hosts above, since thou hast wholly deigned to come thyself to me a
sinner and in all things thy unworthy servant, I beseech thee even now,
O chief-captain, to carry my word yet again to the Most High, and thou
shalt say to him, Thus saith Abraham thy servant, Lord, Lord, in every
work and word which I have asked of thee thou hast heard me, and hast
fulfilled all my counsel.  Now, Lord, I resist not thy power, for I too
know that I am not immortal but mortal.  Since therefore to thy command
all things yield, and fear and tremble at the face of thy power, I also
fear, but I ask one request of thee, and now, Lord and Master, hear my
prayer, for while still in this body I desire to see all the inhabited
earth, and all the creations which thou didst establish by one word, and
when I see these, then if I shall depart from life I shall be without
sorrow.  So the chief-captain went back again, and stood before God, and
told him all, saying, Thus saith thy friend Abraham, I desired to behold
all the earth in my lifetime before I died.  And the Most High hearing
this, again commanded the chief-captain Michael, and said to him, Take a
cloud of light, and the angels that have power over the chariots, and go
down, take the righteous Abraham upon a chariot of the cherubim, and
exalt him into the air of heaven that he may behold all the earth.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p14"></span>X.  And the archangel Michael went down
and took Abraham upon a chariot of the cherubim, and exalted him into
the air of heaven, and led him upon the cloud together with sixty
angels, and Abraham ascended upon the chariot over all the earth.  And
Abraham saw the world as it was in that day, some ploughing, others
driving wains, in one place men herding flocks, and in another <span
id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_192"></span>watching
them by night, and dancing and playing and harping, in another place men
striving and contending at law, elsewhere men weeping and having the
dead in remembrance.  He saw also the newly-wedded received with honor,
and in a word he saw all things that are done in the world, both good
and bad.  Abraham therefore passing over them saw men bearing swords,
wielding in their hands sharpened swords, and Abraham asked the
chief-captain, Who are these?  The chief-captain said, These are
thieves, who intend to commit murder, and to steal and burn and
destroy.  Abraham said, Lord, Lord, hear my voice, and command that wild
beasts may come out of the wood and devour them.  And even as he spoke
there came wild beasts out of the wood and devoured them.  And he saw in
another place a man with a woman committing fornication with each other,
and said, Lord, Lord, command that the earth may open and swallow them,
and straightway the earth was cleft and swallowed them.  And he saw in
another place men digging through a house, and carrying away other men’s
possessions, and he said, Lord, Lord, command that fire may come down
from heaven and consume them.  And even as he spoke, fire came down from
heaven and consumed them.  And straightway there came a voice from
heaven to the chief-captain, saying thus, O chief-captain Michael,
command the chariot to stop, and turn Abraham away that he may not see
all the earth, for if he behold all that live in wickedness, he will
destroy all creation.  For behold, Abraham has not sinned, and has no
pity on sinners, but I have made the world, and desire not to destroy
any one of them, but wait for the death of the sinner, till he be
converted and live.  But take Abraham up to the first gate of heaven,
that he may see there the judgments and recompenses, and repent of the
souls of the sinners that he has destroyed.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p15"></span>XI.  So Michael turned the chariot and
brought Abraham to the east, to the first gate of heaven; and Abraham
saw two ways, the one narrow and contracted, the other broad and
spacious, and there he saw two gates, the one broad on the broad way,
and the other narrow on the narrow way.  And outside the two gates there
he saw a man sitting upon a gilded throne, and the appearance of that
man was terrible, as of the Lord. <span
id="fr_3991"></span>[3992](#fn_3991.md)   And they saw many souls driven by
angels and led in through the broad gate, and other souls, few in
number, that were taken by the angels through the narrow gate.  And when
the <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_193"></span>wonderful one who sat upon the golden
throne saw few entering through the narrow gate, and many entering
through the broad one, straightway that wonderful one tore the hairs of
his head and the sides of his beard, and threw himself on the ground
from his throne, weeping and lamenting.  But when he saw many souls
entering through the narrow gate, then he arose from the ground and sat
upon his throne in great joy, rejoicing and exulting.  And Abraham asked
the chief-captain, My Lord chief-captain, who is this most marvelous
man, adorned with such glory, and sometimes he weeps and laments, and
sometimes he rejoices and exults?  The incorporeal one said:  This is
the first-created Adam who is in such glory, and he looks upon the world
because all are born from him, and when he sees many souls going through
the narrow gate, then he arises and sits upon his throne rejoicing and
exulting in joy, because this narrow gate is that of the just, that
leads to life, and they that enter through it go into Paradise.  For
this, then, the first-created Adam rejoices, because he sees the souls
being saved.  But when he sees many souls entering through the broad
gate, then he pulls out the hairs of his head, and casts himself on the
ground weeping and lamenting bitterly, for the broad gate is that of
sinners, which leads to destruction and eternal punishment.  And for
this the first-formed Adam falls from his throne weeping and lamenting
for the destruction of sinners, for they are many that are lost, and
they are few that are saved, for in seven thousand there is scarcely
found one soul saved, being righteous and undefiled.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p17"></span>XII.  While he was yet saying these
things to me, behold two angels, fiery in aspect, and pitiless in mind,
and severe in look, and they drove on thousands of souls, pitilessly
lashing them with fiery thongs.  The angel laid hold of one soul, and
they drove all the souls in at the broad gate to destruction.  So we
also went along with the angels, and came within that broad gate, and
between the two gates stood a throne terrible of aspect, of terrible
crystal, gleaming as fire, and upon it sat a wondrous man bright as the
sun, like to the Son of God.  Before him stood a table like crystal, all
of gold and fine linen, and upon the table there was lying a book, the
thickness of it six cubits, and the breadth of it ten cubits, and on the
right and left of it stood two angels holding paper and ink and pen. 
Before the table sat an angel of light, holding in his hand a balance,
and on his left sat an angel all fiery, pitiless, and severe, holding in
his hand a trumpet, having within it <span id="page_194">p. 194</span>
<span id="ix.iii.i-Page_194"></span>all-consuming fire with which to try
the sinners.  The wondrous man who sat upon the throne himself judged
and sentenced the souls, and the two angels on the right and on the left
wrote down, the one on the right the righteousness and the one on the
left the wickedness.  The one before the table, who held the balance,
weighed the souls, and the fiery angel, who held the fire, tried the
souls.  And Abraham asked the chief-captain Michael, What is this that
we behold?  And the chief-captain said, These things that thou seest,
holy Abraham, are the judgment and recompense.  And behold the angel
holding the soul in his hand, and he brought it before the judge, and
the judge said to one of the angels that served him, Open me this book,
and find me the sins of this soul.  And opening the book he found its
sins and its righteousness equally balanced, and he neither gave it to
the tormentors, nor to those that were saved, but set it in the midst.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p18"></span>XIII.  And Abraham said, My Lord
chief-captain, who is this most wondrous judge? and who are the angels
that write down? and who is the angel like the sun, holding the balance?
and who is the fiery angel holding the fire?  The chief-captain said,
“Seest thou, most holy Abraham, the terrible man sitting upon the
throne?  This is the son of the first created Adam, who is called Abel,
whom the wicked Cain killed, and he sits thus to judge all creation, and
examines righteous men and sinners.  For God has said, I shall not judge
you, but every man born of man shall be judged.  Therefore he has given
to him judgment, to judge the world until his great and glorious coming,
and then, O righteous Abraham, is the perfect judgment and recompense,
eternal and unchangeable, which no one can alter.  For every man has
come from the first-created, and therefore they are first judged here by
his son, and at the second coming they shall be judged by the twelve
tribes of Israel, <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_195"></span>every breath and every creature.  But the
third time they shall be judged by the Lord God of all, and then,
indeed, the end of that judgment is near, and the sentence terrible, and
there is none to deliver.  And now by three tribunals the judgment of
the world and the recompense is made, and for this reason a matter is
not finally confirmed by one or two witnesses, but by three witnesses
shall everything be established.  The two angels on the right hand and
on the left, these are they that write down the sins and the
righteousness, the one on the right hand writes down the righteousness,
and the one on the left the sins.  The angel like the sun, holding the
balance in his hand, is the archangel, Dokiel the just weigher, and he
weighs the righteousnesses and sins with the righteousness of God.  The
fiery and pitiless angel, holding the fire in his hand, is the archangel
Puruel, who has power over fire, and tries the works of men through
fire, and if the fire consume the work of any man, the angel of judgment
immediately seizes him, and carries him away to the place of sinners, a
most bitter place of punishment.  But if the fire approves the work of
anyone, and does not seize upon it, that man is justified, and the angel
of righteousness takes him and carries him up to be saved in the lot of
the just.  And thus, most righteous Abraham, all things in all men are
tried by fire and the balance.”

<span id="ix.iii.i-p19"></span>XIV.  And Abraham said to the
chief-captain, My Lord the chief-captain, the soul which the angel held
in his hand, why was it adjudged to be set in the midst?  The
chief-captain said, Listen, righteous Abraham.  Because the judge found
its sins. and its righteousnesses equal, he neither committed it to
judgment nor to be saved, until the judge of all shall come.  Abraham
said to the chief-captain, And what yet is wanting for the soul to be
saved?  The chief-captain said, If it obtains one righteousness above
its sins, it enters into salvation.  Abraham said to the chief-captain,
Come hither, chief-captain Michael, let us make prayer for this soul,
and see whether God will hear us.  The chief-captain said, Amen, be it
so; and they made prayer and entreaty for the soul, and God heard them,
and when they rose up from their prayer they did not see the soul
standing there.  And Abraham said to the angel, Where is the soul that
thou didst hold in the midst?  And the angel answered, It has been saved
by thy righteous prayer, and behold an angel of light has taken it and
carried it up into Paradise.  Abraham said, I glorify the name of God,
the Most High, and his immeasurable mercy.  And Abra<span
id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_196"></span>ham said
to the chief-captain, I beseech thee, archangel, hearken to my prayer,
and let us yet call upon the Lord, and supplicate his compassion, and
entreat his mercy for the souls of the sinners whom I formerly, in my
anger, cursed and destroyed, whom the earth devoured, and the wild
beasts tore in pieces, and the fire consumed through my words.  Now I
know that I have sinned before the Lord our God.  Come then, O Michael,
chief-captain of the hosts above, come, let us call upon God with tears
that he may forgive me my sin, and grant them to me.  And the
chief-captain heard him, and they made entreaty before the Lord, and
when they had called upon him for a long space, there came a voice from
heaven saying, Abraham, Abraham, I have hearkened to thy voice and thy
prayer, and forgive thee thy sin, and those whom thou thinkest that I
destroyed I have called up and brought them into life by my exceeding
kindness, because for a season I have requited them in judgment, and
those whom I destroy living upon earth, I will not requite in death.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p20"></span>XV.  And the voice of the Lord said also
to the chief-captain Michael, Michael, my servant, turn back Abraham to
his house, for behold his end has come nigh, and the measure of his life
is fulfilled, that he may set all things in order, and then take him and
bring him to me.  So the chief-captain, turning the chariot and the
cloud, brought Abraham to his house, and going into his chamber he sat
upon his couch.  And Sarah his wife came and embraced the feet of the
Incorporeal, and spoke humbly, saying, I give thee thanks, my Lord, that
thou hast brought my Lord Abraham, for behold we thought he had been
taken up from us.  And his son Isaac also came and fell upon his neck,
and in the same way all his men-slaves and women-slaves surrounded
Abraham and embraced him, glorifying God.  And the Incorporeal one said
to them, Hearken, righteous Abraham.  Behold thy wife Sarah, behold also
thy beloved son Isaac, behold also all thy men-servants and
maid-servants round about thee.  Make disposition of all that thou hast,
for the day has come nigh in which thou shalt depart from the body and
go to the Lord once for all.  Abraham said, Has the Lord said it, or
sayest thou this of thyself?  The chief-captain answered, Hearken,
righteous Abraham.  The Lord has commanded, and I tell it thee.  Abraham
said, I will not go with thee.  The chief-captain, hearing these words,
straightway went forth from the presence of Abraham, and went up into
the heavens, and <span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_197"></span>stood before God the Most High, and said,
Lord Almighty, behold I have hearkened to Thy friend Abraham in all he
has said to Thee, and have fulfilled his requests.  I have shown to him
Thy power, and all the earth and sea that is under heaven.  I have shown
to him judgment and recompense by means of cloud and chariots, and again
he says, I will not go with thee.  And the Most High said to the angel,
Does my friend Abraham say thus again, I will not go with thee?  The
archangel said, Lord Almighty, he says thus, and I refrain from laying
hands on him, because from the beginning he is Thy friend, and has done
all things pleasing in Thy sight.  There is no man like him on earth,
not even Job the wondrous man, and therefore I refrain from laying hands
on him.  Command, therefore, Immortal King, what shall be done.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p21"></span>XVI.  Then the Most High said, Call me
hither Death that is called the shameless countenance and the pitiless
look.  And Michael the Incorporeal went and said to Death, Come hither;
the Lord of creation, the immortal king, calls thee.  And Death, hearing
this, shivered and trembled, being possessed with great terror, and
coming with great fear it stood before the invisible father, shivering,
groaning and trembling, awaiting the command of the Lord.  Therefore the
invisible God said to Death, Come hither, thou bitter and fierce name of
the world, hide thy fierceness, cover thy corruption, and cast away thy
bitterness from thee, and put on thy beauty and all thy glory, and go
down to Abraham my friend, and take him and bring him to me.  But now
also I tell thee not to terrify him, but bring him with fair speech, for
he is my own friend.  Having heard this, Death went out from the
presence of the Most High, and put on a robe of great brightness, and
made his appearance like the sun, and became fair and beautiful above
the sons of men, assuming the form of an archangel, having his cheeks
flaming with fire, and he departed to Abraham.  Now the righteous
Abraham went out of his chamber, and sat under the trees of Mamre,
holding his chin in his hand, and awaiting the coming of the archangel
Michael.  And behold, a smell of sweet odor came to him, and a flashing
of light, and Abraham turned and saw Death coming towards him in great
glory and beauty.  And Abraham arose and went to meet him, thinking that
it was the chief-captain of God, and Death beholding him saluted him,
saying, Rejoice, precious Abraham, righteous soul, true friend of the
Most High God, and companion of the holy angels.  <span id="page_198">p.
198</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_198"></span>Abraham said to Death,
Hail thou of appearance and form like the sun, most glorious helper,
bringer of light, wondrous man, from whence does thy glory come to us,
and who art thou, and whence comest thou?  Then Death said, Most
righteous Abraham, behold I tell thee the truth.  I am the bitter lot of
death.  Abraham said to him, Nay, but thou art the comeliness of the
world, thou art the glory and beauty of angels and men, thou art fairer
in form than every other, and sayest thou, I am the bitter lot of death,
and not rather, I am fairer than every good thing.  Death said, I tell
thee the truth.  What the Lord has named me, that also I tell thee. 
Abraham said, For what art thou come hither?  Death said, For thy holy
soul am I come.  Then Abraham said, I know what thou meanest, but I will
not go with thee; and Death was silent and answered him not a word.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p22"></span>XVII.  Then Abraham arose, and went into
his house, and Death also accompanied him thither.  And Abraham went up
into his chamber, and Death went up with him.  And Abraham lay down upon
his couch, and Death came and sat by his feet.  Then Abraham said,
Depart, depart from me, for I desire to rest upon my couch.  Death said,
I will not depart until I take thy spirit from thee.  Abraham said to
him, By the immortal God I charge thee to tell me the truth.  Art thou
death?  Death said to him, I am Death.  I am the destroyer of the
world.  Abraham said, I beseech thee, since thou art Death, tell me if
thou comest thus to all in such fairness and glory and beauty?  Death
said, Nay, my Lord Abraham, for thy righteousnesses, and the boundless
sea of thy hospitality, and the greatness of thy love towards God has
become a crown upon my head, and in beauty and great peace and
gentleness I approach the righteous, but to sinners I come in great
corruption and fierceness and the greatest bitterness and with fierce
and pitiless look.  Abraham said, I beseech thee, hearken to me, and
show me thy fierceness and all thy corruption and bitterness.  And Death
said, Thou canst not behold my fierceness, most righteous Abraham. 
Abraham said, Yes, I shall be able to behold all thy fierceness by means
of the name of the living God, for the might of my God that is in heaven
is with me.  Then Death put off all his comeliness and beauty, and all
his glory and the form like the sun with which he was clothed, and put
upon himself a tyrant’s robe, and made his appearance gloomy and fiercer
than all kind of wild beasts, and more unclean than all uncleanness. 
And he showed to Abraham seven <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_199"></span>fiery heads of serpents and fourteen
faces, (one) of flaming fire and of great fierceness, and a face of
darkness, and a most gloomy face of a viper, and a face of a most
terrible precipice, and a face fiercer than an asp, and a face of a
terrible lion, and a face of a cerastes and basilisk.  He showed him
also a face of a fiery scimitar, and a sword-bearing face, and a face of
lightning, lightening terribly, and a noise of dreadful thunder.  He
showed him also another face of a fierce stormy sea, and a fierce
rushing river, and a terrible three-headed serpent, and a cup mingled
with poisons, and in short he showed to him great fierceness and
unendurable bitterness, and every mortal disease as of the odor of
Death.  And from the great bitterness and fierceness there died servants
and maid-servants in number about seven thousand, and the righteous
Abraham came into indifference of death so that his spirit failed him.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p23"></span>XVIII.  And the all-holy Abraham, seeing
these things thus, said to Death, I beseech thee, all-destroying Death,
hide thy fierceness, and put on thy beauty and the shape which thou
hadst before.  And straightway Death hid his fierceness, and put on his
beauty which he had before.  And Abraham said to Death, Why hast thou
done this, that thou hast slain all my servants and maidservants?  Has
God sent thee hither for this end this day?  Death said, Nay, my Lord
Abraham, it is not as thou sayest, but on thy account was I sent
hither.  Abraham said to Death, How then have these died?  Has the Lord
not spoken it?  Death said, Believe thou, most righteous Abraham, that
this also is wonderful, that thou also wast not taken away with them. 
Nevertheless I tell thee the truth, for if the right hand of God had not
been with thee at that time, thou also wouldst have had to depart from
this life.  The righteous Abraham said, Now I know that I have come into
indifference of death, so that my spirit fails, but I beseech thee,
all-destroying Death, since my servants have died before their time,
come let us pray to the Lord our God that he may hear us and raise up
those who died by thy fierceness before their time.  And Death said,
Amen, be it so.  Therefore Abraham arose and fell upon the face of the
ground in prayer, and Death together with him, and the Lord sent a
spirit of life upon those that were dead and they were made alive
again.  Then the righteous Abraham gave glory to God.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p24"></span>XIX.  And going up into his chamber he
lay down, and Death came and stood before him.  And Abraham said to him,
Depart from me, for I desire to rest, because my <span id="page_200">p.
200</span> <span id="ix.iii.i-Page_200"></span>spirit is in
indifference.  Death said, I will not depart from thee until I take thy
soul.  And Abraham with an austere countenance and angry look said to
Death, Who has ordered thee to say this?  Thou sayest these words of
thyself boastfully, and I will not go with thee until the chief-captain
Michael come to me, and I shall go with him.  But this also I tell thee,
if thou desirest that I shall accompany thee, explain to me all thy
changes, the seven fiery heads of serpents and what the face of the
precipice is, and what the sharp sword, and what the loud-roaring river,
and what the tempestuous sea that rages so fiercely.  Teach me also the
unendurable thunder, and the terrible lightning, and the evil-smelling
cup mingled with poisons.  Teach me concerning all these.  And Death
answered, Listen, righteous Abraham.  For seven ages I destroy the world
and lead all down to Hades, kings and rulers, rich and poor, slaves and
free men, I convoy to the bottom of Hades, and for this I showed thee
the seven heads of serpents.  The face of fire I showed thee because
many die consumed by fire, and behold death through a face of fire.  The
face of the precipice I showed thee, because many men die descending
from the tops of trees or terrible precipices and losing their life, and
see death in the shape of a terrible precipice.  The face of the sword I
showed thee because many are slain in wars by the sword, and see death
as a sword.  The face of the great rushing river I showed thee because
many are drowned and perish snatched away by the crossing of many waters
and carried off by great rivers, and see death before their time.  The
face of the angry raging sea I showed thee because many in the sea
falling into great surges and becoming shipwrecked are swallowed up and
behold death as the sea.  The unendurable thunder and the terrible
lightning I showed thee because many men in the moment of anger meet
with unendurable thunder and terrible lightning coming to seize upon
men, and see death thus.  I showed thee also the poisonous wild beasts,
asps and basilisks, leopards and lions and lions’ whelps, bears and
vipers, and in short the face of every wild beast I showed thee, most
righteous one, because many men are destroyed by wild beasts, and others
by poisonous snakes, serpents and asps and cerastes and basilisks and
vipers, breathe out their life and die.  I showed thee also the
destroying cups mingled with poison, because many men being given poison
to drink by other men straightway depart unexpectedly.

<span id="ix.iii.i-p25"></span><span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="ix.iii.i-Page_201"></span>XX.  Abraham said, I beseech thee, is
there also an unexpected death?  Tell me.  Death said, Verily, verily, I
tell thee in the truth of God that there are seventy-two deaths.  One is
the just death, buying its fixed time, and many men in one hour enter
into death being given over to the grave.  Behold, I have told thee all
that thou hast asked, now I tell thee, most righteous Abraham, to
dismiss all counsel, and cease from asking anything once for all, and
come, go with me, as the God and judge of all has commanded me.  Abraham
said to Death, Depart from me yet a little, that I may rest on my couch,
for I am very faint at heart, for since I have seen thee with my eyes my
strength has failed me, all the limbs of my flesh seem to me a weight as
of lead, and my spirit is distressed exceedingly.  Depart for a little;
for I have said I cannot bear to see thy shape.  Then Isaac his son came
and fell upon his breast weeping, and his wife Sarah came and embraced
his feet, lamenting bitterly.  There came also his men slaves and women
slaves and surrounded his couch, lamenting greatly.  And Abraham came
into indifference of death, and Death said to Abraham, Come, take my
right hand, and may cheerfulness and life and strength come to thee. 
For Death deceived Abraham, and he took his right hand, and straightway
his soul adhered to the hand of Death.  And immediately the archangel
Michael came with a multitude of angels and took up his precious soul in
his hands in a divinely woven linen cloth, and they tended the body of
the just Abraham with divine ointments and perfumes until the third day
after his death, and buried him in the land of promise, the oak of
Mamre, but the angels received his precious soul, and ascended into
heaven, singing the hymn of “thrice holy” to the Lord the God of all,
and they set it there to worship the God and Father.  And after great
praise and glory had been given to the Lord, and Abraham bowed down to
worship, there came the undefiled voice of the God and Father saying
thus, Take therefore my friend Abraham into Paradise, where are the
tabernacles of my righteous ones, and the abodes of my saints Isaac and
Jacob in his bosom, where there is no trouble, nor grief, nor sighing,
but peace and rejoicing and life unending.  (And let us, too, my beloved
brethren, imitate the hospitality of the patriarch Abraham, and attain
to his virtuous way of life, that we may be thought worthy of the life
eternal, glorifying the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; to whom be glory and
power forever.  Amen.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3990"></span>[185:3991](0090083.htm#fr_3990.md) <span
id="ix.iii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p5"></span> Literally Commander-in-chief, or
Chief-General.

<span id="fn_3991"></span>[192:3992](0090083.htm#fr_3991.md) <span
id="ix.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.i-p16"></span> Two <span class="sc"><span
id="ix.iii.i-p16.1"></span>mss</span>. read, “Of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Version II](0090084.md)
