[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090074)  [Next](0090076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii"></span> <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_169"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>The Apocalypse of the Holy Mother of God
Concerning the Chastisements.</span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>I.  The all-holy mother of God was about to
proceed to the Mount of Olives to pray; and praying to the Lord our God
she said:  In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit;
let the archangel Gabriel descend, that he may tell me concerning the
chastisements and concerning things in heaven and on the earth and under
the earth.  And as she said the word the archangel Michael descended
with the angels of the East and the West and angels of the South and the
North, and they saluted the highly favoured one and said to her:  Hail,
reflection of the Father, hail dwelling of the Son, hail command of the
Holy Spirit, hail firmament of the seven heavens, hail firmament of the
eleven strongholds, hail worship of the angels, hail loftier than the
prophets unto the throne of God.  And the holy mother of God said to the
angel:  Hail Michael, commander-in-chief, the minister of the invisible
Father, hail Michael, commander-in-chief, associate of my Son, hail
Michael, commander-in-chief, most dread of the six-winged, hail Michael,
commander-in-chief, who rules through all things and art worthy to stand
beside the throne of the Lord, hail Michael, commander-in-chief, who art
about to sound the trumpet and awaken those who have been asleep for
ages:  hail Michael, commander-in-chief, first of all unto the throne of
God.

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span>II.  And having greeted all the angels in
like manner, the highly favoured one prayed the commander-in-chief
regarding the chastisements, saying:  Tell to me all things on the
earth.  And the commander-in-chief said to her:  If thou askest me,
highly favoured one, I will tell thee.  And the highly favoured one said
to him:  How many are the chastisements with which the race of man is
chastised?  And the archangel said to her:  The chastisements are
innumerable.  And the highly favoured one said to him:  Tell me the
things in heaven and on the earth.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span>III.  Then the commander-in-chief, Michael,
commanded the Western angels that revelation should be made, and Hades
opened, and she saw those who were chastised <span
id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952) in Hades:  and there lay there a
multitude of men and women, and there was a great lamentation.  And the
highly favoured one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who are these and
what is their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy,
are those who did not worship the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span>IV.  And she saw in another place <span
id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953) a great darkness:  and the all holy
said:  What is this darkness and who are they who are being chastised? 
And the commander-in-chief said:  Many souls are lying in this
darkness.  And the all holy one said:  Let this darkness be taken away
in order that I may see this chastisement also.  And the
commander-in-chief said to the highly favoured one:  It is not possible,
all holy, that thou shouldst see this chastisement also.  And the angels
guarding them answered and said:  We have a command from the invisible
Father that they shall not see the light till thy blessed Son shall
shine forth.  And plunged in grief the all holy lifted up her eyes to
the angels touching the undefiled word of the Father, and said:  In the
name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit let the darkness be
taken away, that I may see this chastisement also.  And straightway that
darkness was lifted up and covered the seven heavens:  and there lay a
great multitude of both men and women, and there arose <span
id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span id="vii.ii-Page_170"></span>a great
lamentation and a great cry began.  And seeing them the all holy wept
and said to them:  What are ye doing, wretched ones?  Who are ye?  And
how are ye found there? and there was no voice or hearkening.  And the
angels guarding them said:  Why do ye not speak to the highly favoured
one?  And those who were under chastisement said to her:  O highly
favoured one, from eternity we see not the light, and we are not able to
keep off that up there.  And splashing pitch flowed down upon them:  and
seeing them the all holy wept.  And again those who were being chastised
said to her:  How dost thou ask concerning us, holy lady, Mother of
God?  Thy blessed Son came to The earth and did not make enquiry
concerning us, neither Abraham the patriarch, nor John the Baptist, nor
Moses the great prophet, nor the Apostle Paul, and unto us their light
shone not:  and now, all holy Mother of God, the armour of the
Christians, the bringer of great comfort on account of the Christians,
how dost thou ask concerning us?  Then the all holy Mother of God said
to Michael, the commander-in-chief:  What is their sin?  And Michael,
the commander-in-chief, said:  These are they who did not believe in the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and did not confess thee <span
id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954) to be the Mother of God, and that
the Lord Jesus Christ was born of thee and took flesh, and for this
cause they are chastised there.  And again weeping, the all holy Mother
of God said to them:  Why did ye so greatly err, wretched ones?  Did ye
not hear that the whole creation names my name?  And having said these
words the darkness fell over them as it was from the beginning.

<span id="vii.ii-p10"></span>V.   And the commander-in-chief said: 
Whither wouldst thou go, highly favoured one? to the West or to the
South?  And the highly favoured answered:  Let us go to the South.  And
immediately there appeared the cherubim and the seraphim and four
hundred angels, and led out the highly favoured one to the South, where
came out the river of fire, <span id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955)
and there there lay a multitude of men and women, some up to the girdle,
others up to the neck, and others up to the crown of the head:  and
seeing them the all holy Mother of God cried out with a loud voice to
the commander-in-chief and said:  Who are these, and what is their sin
who stand in the fire up to the girdle?  And the commander-in-chief
said:  These, all holy one, are they who inherited the curse of father
and mother, and for this cause they are thus chastised here as accursed.

<span id="vii.ii-p12"></span>VI.  And the all holy one said:  And who
are these standing in the fire up to the breasts?  And the
commander-in-chief said:  These are whosoever cast off their wives and
defiled them in adultery, and for this cause they are thus chastised
here.

<span id="vii.ii-p13"></span>VII.  And the all holy one said to the
commander-in-chief:  Who are these standing up to the neck in the flame
of the fire?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are
whosoever ate of the flesh of men.  And the all holy one said:  And how
is it possible for one man to eat of the flesh of another?  And the
commander-in-chief said:  Listen, all holy one, and I will tell thee: 
These are they whosoever brought down their own children out of their
own wombs and cast them out <span id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956)
as food for dogs, and whosoever gave up their brothers in the presence
of kings and governors, these ate the flesh of man, and for this cause
they are thus chastised.

<span id="vii.ii-p15"></span>VIII.  And the all holy one said:  Who are
these set in the fire up to the crown?  And the commander-in-chief
said:  These, all holy one, are whosoever lay hold of the precious cross
and swear to a lie:  by the power of the cross of the Lord.  The angels
tremble and worship with fear, and men lay hold of it and swear to a lie
and do not know what they testify:  and for this cause they are thus
chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p16"></span>IX.  And in another place the all holy one
saw a man hung by the feet, <span id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957)
and worms devoured him.  And she asked the commander-in-chief:  Who is
this and what is his sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  This is he
who took usury <span id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958) for his gold,
and for this cause he is thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p19"></span>X.  And she saw a woman hanging by her two
ears, and all the beasts <span id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959) came
out of her mouth and gnawed her in pieces:  and the highly favoured one
asked the commander-in-chief:  Who is she, and what is her sin?  And the
commander-in-chief said:  She is she who turned aside into strange
houses and those of her neighbours and spoke evil words to make strife,
and for that cause she is thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p21"></span>XI.  And seeing these things the all holy
Mother of God wept and said to the commander-in-chief:  It were well for
man that he <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_171"></span>had not been born.  And the
commander-in-chief said:  Verily, all holy one, thou hast not seen the
great chastisements.  And the all holy one said to the
commander-in-chief:  Come, Michael, great commander-in-chief, and lead
me that I may see all the chastisements.  And the commander-in-chief
said:  Where dost thou wish, all holy one, that we should go?  And the
highly favoured one answered:  To the West:  and straightway the
cherubim appeared and led the highly favoured to the West.

<span id="vii.ii-p22"></span>XII.  And she saw a cloud full of fire and
in it there was a <span id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960) multitude
of men and women.  And the all holy one said:  What was their sin?  And
the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are they who on the
morning of the Lord’s day sleep like the dead, and for that reason they
are thus chastised here.  And the all holy one said:  If anyone cannot
rise, what shall he do?  And the commander-in-chief said:  Listen, all
holy one:  if anyone’s house is fastened on the four (sides?) and
surrounds him and he cannot come out, he has forgiveness.

<span id="vii.ii-p24"></span>XIII.  And she saw in another place burning
benches of fire and on them sat a multitude of men and women and burned
on them.  And the all holy one asked:  Who are these and what is their
sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are they
who do not rise up to the presbyter when they enter into the church of
God, and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p25"></span>XIV.  And the all holy one saw in another
place an iron tree and it had branches of iron, and on it there hung a
multitude of men and women by their tongues. <span
id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961)   And seeing them the all holy one
wept, and asked the commander-in-chief saying:  Who are these and what
was their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These are perjurers,
blasphemers, slanderers, whosoever divided brothers from brothers.  And
the all holy one said:  How is it possible to divide brothers from
brothers?  And the commander-in-chief said:  Listen, all holy one, and I
will tell thee about this:  When some from among the nations desired to
be baptised, he would say to them one word:  Thou foul-feeding,
unbelieving Gentile; because he thus blasphemed, he shall receive
ceaseless retribution.

<span id="vii.ii-p27"></span>XV.  And in another place the all holy one
saw a man hanging from his four extremities, and from his nails blood
gushed vehemently, and his tongue <span
id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962) was tied in a flame of fire, and he
was unable to groan and say the *Kyrie eleïson me*.  And when she had
seen him the all holy one wept and herself said the *Kyrie eleïson*
thrice:  and after the saying of the prayer, came the angel who had
authority over the scourge and loosed the man’s tongue:  and the all
holy one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who is this wretched one who has
this chastisement?  And the commander-in-chief said:  This, all holy
one, is the steward who did not the will of God, but ate the things of
the church and said:  “He who ministers to the altar shall be nourished
from the altar”: <span id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963)   and for
this cause he is thus chastised here.  And the all holy one said:  Let
it be unto him according to his faith.  And again he tied his tongue.

<span id="vii.ii-p30"></span>XVI.  And Michael, the commander-in-chief
said:  Come hither, all holy one, and I will show unto thee where the
priests are chastised.  And the all holy one came out and saw presbyters
hanging by their twenty nails, and fire came out of their heads.  And
seeing them the all holy one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who are
these and what is their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These,
all holy one, are they who stand beside the throne of God, and when they
sang of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, the pearls fell out, and the
awful throne of heaven shook and the footstool of our Lord Jesus Christ
trembled, and they did not perceive it:  and for this cause they are
thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p31"></span>XVII.  And the all holy one saw a man and a
winged beast having three heads like flames of fire:  the two heads were
towards his eyes and the third head towards his mouth.  And seeing him
the all holy one asked the commander-in-chief:  Who is this, that he
cannot save himself from the mouth of the dragon?  And the
commander-in-chief said to her:  This, all holy one, is the reader who
does not practise in his own habits according to what is worthy of the
holy Gospel:  and for this cause he is thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p32"></span>XVIII.  And the commander-in-chief said: 
Come hither, all holy one, and I will show thee where the angelic and
archangelic form is chastised.  She proceeded and saw <span
id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964) them lying in the fire and the
sleepless worm gnawed them:  and the all holy one said:  Who are these,
and what is their sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  These, all
holy one, <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_172"></span>are they who possessed the archangelic and
apostolic form:  hearken, all holy one, concerning this:  on earth they
were called patriarchs and bishops, and they were not worthy of their
name:  on earth they heard ‘Bless (the Lord) ye saints,’ and in heaven
they were not called saints, because they did not act as bearers of the
archangelic form:  and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p34"></span>XIX.  And she saw women hanging by their
nails, and a flame of fire came out of their mouth and burned them:  and
all the beasts <span id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) coming out of
the fire gnawed them to pieces, and groaning they cried out:  Have pity
on us, have pity, for we are chastised worse than all those who are
under chastisement.  And seeing them the all holy one wept, and asked
the commander-in-chief, Michael:  Who are these and what is their sin? 
And the commander-in-chief said:  These are the wives of presbyters who
did not honour the presbyters, but after the death of the presbyter took
husbands, and for this cause they are thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p36"></span>XX.  And the all holy one saw after the
same manner also a deaconess hanging from a crag and a beast with two
heads devoured her breasts.  And the all holy one asked:  What is her
sin?  And the commander-in-chief said:  She, all holy one, is an
archdeaconess who defiled her body in fornication, and for this cause
she is thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p37"></span>XXI.  And she saw other women hanging over
the fire, and all the beasts devoured them.  And the all holy one asked
the commander-in-chief:  Who are these and what is their sin?  And he
said:  These are they who did not do the will of God, lovers of money
and those who took interest <span id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966)
on accounts, and the immodest.

<span id="vii.ii-p39"></span>XXII.  And when she had heard these things
the all holy one wept and said:  Woe unto sinners.  And the
commander-in-chief said:  Why dost thou lament, all holy one?  Now
verily thou hast not seen the great chastisements.  And the highly
favoured one said:  Come, Michael, the great commander-in-chief of the
powers above, tell me how I may see all the chastisements.  And the
commander-in-chief said:  Where dost thou wish that we should go, all
holy one? to the East or towards the left parts of Paradise?  And the
all holy one said:  To the left parts of Paradise.

<span id="vii.ii-p40"></span>XXIII.  And immediately when she had
spoken, the cherubim and seraphim stood beside her and led the highly
favoured one out to the left parts of Paradise.  And behold, there was a
great river, and the appearance of the river was blacker than pitch, and
in it there were a multitude <span id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967)
of men and women:  it boiled like a furnace of forges, and its waves
were like a wild sea over the sinners:  and when the waves rose, they
sank the sinners ten thousand cubits and they were unable to keep it off
and say:  Have mercy on us, thou just judge:  for the sleepless worm
devoured them, and there was no reckoning of the number of those who
devoured them.  And seeing the all holy Mother of God the angels <span
id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) who chastised them cried out with
one voice:  Holy is God who has compassion on account of the Mother of
God:  we give thee thanks, O Son of God, that from eternity we did not
see the light, and to-day through the Mother of God we have seen the
light:  and again they shouted with one voice, saying:  Hail, highly
favoured Mother of God:  Hail, lamp of the inaccessible light:  Hail to
thee also, Michael, the commander-in-chief, thou that art ambassador
from the whole creation:  for we, seeing the chastisement of sinners are
greatly grieved.  And the all holy one, when she saw the angels humbled
on account of the sinners, lamented and said:  Woe to sinners and their
neighbours.  And the all holy one said:  Let us see the sinners.  And
the highly favoured one, coming with the archangel Michael and all the
armies of the angels lifted up one voice saying:  Lord have mercy.  And
after the making of the prayer earnestly, the wave of the river rested
and the fiery waves grew calm, and the sinners appeared as a grain of
mustard-seed:  and seeing them the all holy one lamented and said:  What
is this river, and what are its waves?  And the commander-in-chief
said:  This river is the outer fire, and those who are being tortured
are the Jews who crucified our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, and who
refused holy baptism, and those who commit fornication and sin against
the sweet and passionless perfume of marriage, and he who debauches
mother and daughter, and the poisoners and those who slay with the
sword, and the women who strangle their offspring.  And the all holy one
said:  According to their faith so be it unto them.  And straightway the
waves rose over the sinners and the darkness <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> <span id="vii.ii-Page_173"></span>covered them.  And the
commander-in-chief said:  Hearken, thou highly favoured one:  if anyone
shall be cast into this darkness, <span
id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969) his remembrance shall never be in
the sight of God.  And the all holy Mother of God said:  Woe to sinners,
because the flame of the fire is everlasting.

<span id="vii.ii-p44"></span>XXIV.  And the commander-in-chief said: 
Come hither, all holy one, and I will show unto thee the lake of fire: 
and see thou where the race of the Christians is chastised. <span
id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970)   And the all holy one proceeded
and saw:  and some she heard, but others she did not see:  and she asked
the commander-in-chief:  Who are these, and what is their sin?  And the
commander-in-chief said:  These, all holy one, are those who were
baptised and arrayed under the oracle of Christ, but worked the works of
the devil and wasted the time of their repentance:  and for this cause
they are thus chastised here.

<span id="vii.ii-p46"></span>XXV.  And she said:  I pray, one request
will I make of thee, let me also be chastised with the Christians,
because they are the children of my son.  And the commander-in-chief
said:  Rest thou in Paradise, holy lady, Mother of God.  And the all
holy one said:  I pray thee, move the fourteen firmaments and the seven
heavens, and let us pray for the Christians that the Lord our God may
hearken unto us and have mercy on them. <span
id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971)   And the commander-in-chief said: 
As the Lord God liveth, the great name, seven times a day and seven
times a night, when we lead up the hymn of the Lord, we make remembrance
for the sake of sinners, and the Lord accounts us as naught.

<span id="vii.ii-p48"></span>XXVI.  And the all holy one said:  I pray
thee, commander-in-chief, command the armies of the angels and let them
place me on the height of heaven and let me into the presence of the
invisible Father.  And immediately the commander-in-chief commanded, and
the chariot of the cherubim and seraphim appeared, and they exalted the
highly favoured one to the height of heaven and placed her in the
presence of the invisible Father:  And she stretched forth her hands to
the undefiled throne of the Father and said:  Have mercy, O Lord, on the
Christian sinners, for I saw them being chastised and I cannot bear
their complaint.  Let me go forth and be chastised myself for the
Christians.  I do not pray, O Lord, for the unbelieving Jews, but for
the Christians I entreat thy compassion.  And there came a second voice
from the invisible Father saying:  How can I have mercy on them, when
they did not have mercy on their own brothers? <span
id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972)   And the all holy one said:  Lord,
have mercy on the sinners:  behold the chastisements, for every creature
on the earth calls upon my name:  and when the soul comes forth out of
the body, it cries saying, “Holy Lady, Mother of God.”  Then the Lord
said to her:  Hearken, all holy Mother of God, if anyone names and calls
upon thy name, I will not forsake him, either in heaven or on earth.

<span id="vii.ii-p50"></span>XXVII.  And the all holy one said:  Where
is Moses?  Where are all the prophets and fathers who never sinned? 
Where art thou, holy Paul of God? where is the holy Lord’s Day, the
boast of the Christians? where is the power of the precious and
life-giving cross, which delivered Adam and Eve from the ancient curse? 
Then Michael and all the angels raised one voice saying:  Lord, have
mercy on the sinners.  Then Moses also cried:  Have mercy, Lord, on
those to whom I gave thy law.  Then John also called:  Have mercy, Lord,
on those to whom I gave thy Gospel.  Then Paul cried:  Have mercy, Lord,
on those to whom I brought thy epistles in the Church.  And the Lord God
said:  Hearken, all ye righteous:  if according to the law which Moses
gave, and according to the Gospel which John gave, and according to the
epistles which Paul carried, they thus be judged.  And they had nothing
to say except, Have mercy, O just judge.

<span id="vii.ii-p51"></span>XXVIII.  And the all holy Mother of God
said:  Have mercy, Lord, on the Christians, because they kept thy law
and gave heed to thy gospel, but they were simple ones.  Then the Lord
said to her:  Hearken, all holy one:  if anyone did evil to them and
they did not requite him the evil, thou sayest well that they attended
to both my law and my gospel, but if he did not do them wrong and they
requited him evil, how may I say that these are holy men? now they shall
be rewarded according to their wrongdoing.  Then all hearing the voice
of the Lord had nothing to answer; and the all holy one, when she saw
that the saints were at a loss, and their Lord did not hear, and his
mercy was hidden from them, then the all holy one said:  Where is
Gabriel, who announced unto me the “Hail, thou that from eternity shalt
conceive him who is without beginning like the Father,” and now does not
look upon sinners?  Where <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="vii.ii-Page_174"></span>is the great commander-in-chief? come
hither, all ye saints whom God justified, and let us fall down in the
presence of the invisible Father, in order that the Lord God may hear
us, and have mercy on sinners.  Then Michael, the commander-in-chief,
and all the saints fell on their faces in the presence of the invisible
Father, saying:  Have mercy, Lord, on the Christian sinners.

<span id="vii.ii-p52"></span>XXIX.  Then the Lord, seeing the prayer of
the saints, had compassion and said:  Go down, my beloved son, and
because of the prayer of the saints let thy face shine on earth to
sinners.  Then the Lord came down from his undefiled throne:  and when
they saw Him, those who were under chastisement raised one voice
saying:  Have mercy on us, King of ages.  Then the Lord of all things
said:  Hearken, all ye sinners and righteous men:  I made paradise and
made man after my image:  but he transgressed, and for his own sins was
delivered to death:  but I did not suffer the works of my hands to be
tyrannized over by the serpent:  wherefore I bowed the heavens and came
down and was born of Mary, the holy undefiled Mother of God, that I
might set you free:  I was baptised in Jordan in order that I might save
the creature (nature) which had grown old under sin:  I was nailed to
the cross <span id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973) to free you from
the ancient curse:  I asked for water and ye gave me vinegar mingled
with gall:  I was laid in the grave:  I trampled on the enemy:  I raised
up mine elect, and even thus ye would not hear me.  But now,
because <span id="fr_3974"></span>[3975](#fn_3974) of the prayer of my
mother Mary, because she has wept much for your sake, and because of
Michael my archangel, and because of the multitude of my saints, I grant
you to have rest on the day of Pentecost to glorify the Father and the
Son and the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.ii-p55"></span>XXX.  Then all the angels and archangels,
thrones, lordships, authorities, governments, powers, and the many-eyed
cherubim and the six-winged seraphim and all the apostles and prophets
and martyrs and all the saints raised one voice, saying:  Glory to thee,
O Lord:  glory to thee, lover of men:  glory to thee, King of ages: 
glory be to thy compassion:  glory be to thy long suffering:  glory be
to thy unspeakable justice of judgment, because thou hast been
long-suffering with sinners and impious men:  Thine is it to pity and to
save.  To him be the glory and the power to the Father and to the Son
and to the Holy Spirit for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[169:3953](0090075.htm#fr_3952) <span
id="vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span> *Cf.* Vision of Paul, 31.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[169:3954](0090075.htm#fr_3953) <span
id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p8"></span> Rev. of Peter, 21.  Paul, 37.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[170:3955](0090075.htm#fr_3954) <span
id="vii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p9"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 41.

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[170:3956](0090075.htm#fr_3955) <span
id="vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p11"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 31.

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[170:3957](0090075.htm#fr_3956) <span
id="vii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p14"></span> *Cf.* Peter, Frag.; Paul, 40; Peter, 27.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[170:3958](0090075.htm#fr_3957) <span
id="vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p17"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 24.

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[170:3959](0090075.htm#fr_3958) <span
id="vii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p18"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 31; Paul, 37.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[170:3960](0090075.htm#fr_3959) <span
id="vii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p20"></span> *Cf.* Peter, Frag. 2.

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[171:3961](0090075.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="vii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p23"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 25.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[171:3962](0090075.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="vii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p26"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 22.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[171:3963](0090075.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="vii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p28"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 29.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[171:3964](0090075.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="vii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p29"></span> *Cf.* [Lev.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#012), [Num.
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#007)<span id="vii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[171:3965](0090075.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="vii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p33"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 27.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[172:3966](0090075.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="vii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p35"></span> *Cf.* Peter fr. ap. Clem. Alex.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[172:3967](0090075.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="vii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p38"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 31.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[172:3968](0090075.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="vii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p41"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 31.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[172:3969](0090075.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="vii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p42"></span> *Cf.* Peter, 23.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[173:3970](0090075.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="vii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p43"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 41.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[173:3971](0090075.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="vii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p45"></span> *Cf.* Esdras.  Ante-Nicene Lib., vol.
xvi., p. 473.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[173:3972](0090075.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="vii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p47"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 43.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[173:3973](0090075.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="vii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p49"></span> *Cf.* Esdras, l. c., pp. 469, 470.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[174:3974](0090075.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="vii.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p53"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 44; Esdras, l. c., p. 470.

<span id="fn_3974"></span>[174:3975](0090075.htm#fr_3974) <span
id="vii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p54"></span> *Cf.* Paul, 44.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Apocalypse of Sedrach.](0090076)
