[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090293)  [Next](0090295.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>18.  Of the Testimony in Mark.  What is
Meant by the Saviour’s Shoes and by Untying His Shoe-Latchets.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p2"></span>Now let us consider what is stated
by Mark.  Mark’s account of John’s preaching agrees with the other.  The
words are, “There cometh after me He that is mightier than I,” which
amounts to the same thing as “He that cometh after me is mightier than
I.”  There is a difference, however, in what follows, “The latchets of
His shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.”  For it is one thing
to bear a person’s shoes,—they must, it is evident, have been untied
already from the feet of the wearer,—and it is another thing to stoop
down and untie the latchet of his shoes.  And it follows, since
believers cannot think that either of the Evangelists made any mistake
or misrepresentation, that the Baptist must have made these two
utterances at different times and have meant them to express different
things.  It is not the case, as some suppose. that the reports refer to
the same incident and turned out differently because of a looseness of
memory as to some of the facts or words.  Now it is a great thing to
bear the shoes of Jesus, a great thing to stoop down to the bodily
features of His mission, to that which took place in some lower region,
so as to contemplate His image in the lower sphere, and to untie each
difficulty connected with the mystery of His incarnation, such being as
it were His shoe-latchets.  For the fetter of obscurity is one as the
key of knowledge also is one; not even He who is greatest among those
born of women is sufficient of Himself to loose such things or to open
them, for He who tied and locked at first, He also grants to whom He
will to loose His shoe-latchet and to unlock what He has shut.  If the
passage about the shoes has a mystic meaning we ought not to scorn to
consider it.  Now I consider that the inhumanisation when the Son of God
assumes flesh and bones is one of His shoes, and that the other is the
descent to Hades, whatever that Hades be, and the journey with the
Spirit to the prison.  As <span id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.xviii-Page_368"></span>to the descent into Hades, we read
in the sixteenth Psalm, “Thou wilt not leave my soul in Hades,” and as
for the journey in prison with the Spirit we read in Peter in his
Catholic Epistle, <span id="fr_4910"></span>[4911](#fn_4910.md) “Put to
death,” he says, “in the flesh, but quickened in the Spirit; in which
also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which at one time
were disobedient, when the long-suffering of God once waited in the days
of Noah while the ark was a preparing.”  He, then, who is able worthily
to set forth the meaning of these two journeys is able to untie the
latchet of the shoes of Jesus; he, bending down in his mind and going
with Jesus as He goes down into Hades, and descending from heaven and
the mysteries of Christ’s deity to the advent He of necessity made with
us when He took on man (as His shoes).  Now He who put on man also put
on the dead, for <span id="fr_4911"></span>[4912](#fn_4911.md) “for this
end Jesus both died and revived, that He might be Lord both of dead and
living.”  This is why He put on both living and dead, that is, the
inhabitants of the earth and those of Hades, that He might be the Lord
of both dead and living.  Who, then, is able to stoop down and untie the
latchet of such shoes, and having untied them not to let them drop, but
by the second faculty he has received to take them up and bear them, by
bearing the meaning of them in his memory?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4910"></span>[368:4911](0090294.htm#fr_4910.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p3"></span> [1 Peter iii.
18-20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4911"></span>[368:4912](0090294.htm#fr_4911.md) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p4"></span> [Rom. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](0090295.md)
