[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090361)  [Next](0090363.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>11.  The Parable of the Drag-Net.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p2"></span>“*Again the kingdom of heaven is like
unto a net that was cast into the sea.*” <span
id="fr_5204"></span>[5205](#fn_5204.md)   As in the case of images and
statues, the likenesses are not likenesses in every respect of those
things in relation to which they are made; but, for example, the image
painted with wax on the plane surface of wood has the likeness of the
surface along with the colour, but does not further preserve the hollows
and prominences, but only their outward appearance; and in the moulding
of statues an endeavour is made to preserve the likeness in respect of
the hollows and the prominences, but not in respect of the colour; and,
if the cast be formed of wax, it endeavours to preserve both, I mean
both the colour and also the hollows and the prominences, but is not
indeed an image of the things in the respect of depth; so conceive with
me also that, in the case of the similitudes in the Gospel, when the
kingdom of heaven is likened unto anything, the comparison does not
extend to all the features of that to which the kingdom is compared, but
only to those features which are required by the argument in hand.  And
here, accordingly, the kingdom of heaven is “like unto a net that was
cast into the sea,” not (as supposed by some, <span
id="fr_5205"></span>[5206](#fn_5205.md) who represent that by this word the
different natures of those who have come into the net, to-wit, the evil
and the righteous, are treated of), as if it is to be thought that,
because of the phrase “which gathered of every kind,” there are many
different natures of the righteous and likewise also of the evil; for to
such an interpretation all the Scriptures are opposed, which emphasise
the freedom of the will, and censure those who sin and approve those who
do right; or otherwise blame could not rightly attach to those of the
kinds that were such by nature, nor praise to those of a better kind. 
For the reason why fishes are good or bad lies not in the souls of the
fishes, but is based on that which the Word said with knowledge, “Let
the waters bring forth creeping things with living souls,” <span
id="fr_5206"></span>[5207](#fn_5206.md) when, also, “God made great
sea-monsters and every soul of creeping creatures which the waters
brought forth according to their kinds.” <span
id="fr_5207"></span>[5208](#fn_5207.md)   There, accordingly, “The waters
brought forth every soul of creeping animals according to their kinds,”
the cause not being in it; but here we are responsible for our being
good kinds and worthy of what are called “vessels,” or bad and worthy of
being cast outside.  For it is not the nature in us which is the cause
of the evil, but it is the voluntary choice which worketh evil; and so
our nature is not the cause of righteousness, as if it were incapable of
admitting unrighteousness, but it is the principle which we have
admitted that makes men righteous; for also you never see the kinds of
things in the water changing from the bad kinds of fishes into the good,
or from the better kind to the worse; but you can always behold the
righteous or evil among men either coming from wickedness to virtue, or
returning from progress towards virtue to the flood of wickedness. 
Wherefore also in Ezekiel, concerning the man who turns away from
unrighteousness to the keeping of the divine commandments, it is thus
written:  “But if the wicked man turn away from all his wickednesses
which he hath done,” etc., down to the words, “that he turn from his
wicked way and live;” <span id="fr_5208"></span>[5209](#fn_5208.md) but
concerning the man who returns from the advance towards virtue unto the
flood of wickedness it is said, “But in the case of the righteous man
turning away from his righteousness and committing iniquity,” etc., down
to the words, “in his sins which he hath sinned in them shall he
die.” <span id="fr_5209"></span>[5210](#fn_5209.md)   Let those who, from
the parable of the drag-net, introduce the doctrine of different
natures, tell us in regard to the wicked man who afterwards turned aside
from all the wickednesses which he committed and keeps all the
commandments of God, and does that which is righteous and merciful, of
what nature was he when he was wicked?  Clearly not of a nature to be
praised.  If verily of a nature to be censured, of what kind of nature
can he reasonably be described, when he turns away from all his sins
which he did?  For if he were of the bad class of natures, because of
his former deeds, how did he change to that which was better?  Or if
because of his subsequent deeds you would say that he was of the good
class, how being good by nature did he become wicked?  And you will also
meet with a like dilemma in regard to the righteous man turning away
from his righteousness and committing unrighteousness in all <span
id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-Page_420"></span>manner of sins.  For before he turned
away from righteousness, being occupied with righteous deeds he was not
of a bad nature, for a bad nature could not be in righteousness, since a
bad tree—that is wickedness—cannot produce good fruits,—the fruits that
spring from virtue.  Again, on the other hand, if he had been of a good
and unchangeable nature he would not have turned away from the good
after being called righteous, so as to commit unrighteousness in all his
sins which he committed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5204"></span>[419:5205](0090362.htm#fr_5204.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p3"></span> [Matt. xiii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5205"></span>[419:5206](0090362.htm#fr_5205.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p4"></span> Valentinus and his followers.

<span id="fn_5206"></span>[419:5207](0090362.htm#fr_5206.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p5"></span> [Gen. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5207"></span>[419:5208](0090362.htm#fr_5207.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p6"></span> [Gen. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5208"></span>[419:5209](0090362.htm#fr_5208.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p7"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5209"></span>[419:5210](0090362.htm#fr_5209.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p8"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#024.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.iii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](0090363.md)
