[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090003)  [Next](0090005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_7"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>The Gospel According to Peter. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) </span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span>1  But of the Jews none washed his hands,
neither Herod nor any one of his judges.  And when they had refused to
wash them, Pilate rose up.  And then Herod the king commandeth that the
Lord be taken, <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) saying to them, What
things soever I commanded you to do unto him, do.

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>2  And there was standing there Joseph the
friend of Pilate and of the Lord; and, knowing that they were about to
crucify <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) him, he came to Pilate and
asked the body of the Lord for burial.  And Pilate sent to Herod and
asked his body.  And Herod said, Brother Pilate, even if no one had
asked for him, we purposed to bury him, especially as the sabbath
draweth on: <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)   for it is written in the
law, that the sun set not upon one that hath been put to death.

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>3  And he delivered him to the people on the
day before the unleavened bread, their feast.  And they took the Lord
and pushed him as they ran, and said, Let us drag away the Son of God,
having obtained power over him.  And they clothed him with purple, and
set him on the seat of judgment, saying, Judge righteously, O king of
Israel.  And one of them brought a crown of thorns and put it on the
head of the Lord.  And others stood and spat in his eyes, and others
smote his cheeks:  others pricked him with a reed; and some scourged
him, saying, With this honour let us honour the Son of God.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>4  And they brought two malefactors, and
they crucified the Lord between them.  But he held his peace, as though
having no pain.  And when they had raised the cross, they wrote the
title:  This is the king of Israel.  And having set his garments before
him they parted them among them, and cast lots for them.  And one of
those malefactors reproached them, saying, We for the evils that we have
done have suffered thus, but this man, who hath become the Saviour of
men, what wrong hath he done to you?  And they, being angered at him,
commanded that his legs should not be broken, that he might die in
torment.

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>5  And it was noon, and darkness came over
all Judæa:  and they were troubled and distressed, lest the sun had set,
whilst he was yet alive:  \[for\] it is written for them, that the sun
set not on him that hath been put to death.  And one of them said, Give
him to drink gall with vinegar.  And they mixed and gave him to drink,
and fulfilled all things, and accomplished their sins against their own
head.  And many went about with lamps, supposing that it was night, and
fell down. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md)   And the Lord cried out,
saying, My power, my power, thou hast forsaken me.  And when he had said
it he was taken up.  And in that hour the vail of the temple of
Jerusalem was rent in twain. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>6  And then they drew out the nails from
the hands of the Lord, and laid him upon the earth, and the whole earth
quaked, and great fear arose.  Then the sun shone, and it was found the
ninth hour:  and the Jews rejoiced, and gave his body to Joseph that he
might bury it, since he had seen what good things he had done.  And he
took the Lord, and washed him, and rolled him in a linen cloth, and
brought him into his own tomb, which was called the Garden of Joseph.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>7  Then the Jews and the elders and the
priests, perceiving what evil they had done to themselves, began to
lament and to say, Woe for our sins:  the judgement hath drawn nigh, and
the end of Jerusalem.  And I with my companions was grieved; and being
wounded in mind we hid ourselves:  for we were being sought for by them
as malefactors, and as wishing to set fire to the temple.  And upon all
these things we fasted and sat mourning and weeping night and day until
the sabbath.

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>8  But the scribes and Pharisees and elders
being gathered together one with another, when they heard that all the
people murmured and beat their breasts saying, If by his death these
most mighty signs have come to pass, see how righteous he is,—the elders
were afraid and came <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_8"></span>to Pilate, beseeching him and saying, Give us
soldiers, that we may guard his sepulchre for three days, lest his
disciples come and steal him away, and the people suppose that he is
risen from the dead and do us evil.  And Pilate gave them Petronius the
centurion with soldiers to guard the tomb.  And with them came elders
and scribes to the sepulchre, and having rolled a great stone together
with <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) the centurion and the soldiers,
they all together who were there set it at the door of the sepulchre;
and they affixed seven seals, and they pitched a tent there and guarded
it.  And early in the morning as the sabbath was drawing on, there came
a multitude from Jerusalem and the region round about, that they might
see the sepulchre that was sealed.

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>9  And in the night in which the Lord’s day
was drawing on, as the soldiers kept guard two by two in a watch, there
was a great voice in the heaven; and they saw the heavens opened, and
two men descend from thence with great light and approach the tomb.  And
that stone which was put at the door rolled of itself and made way in
part; and the tomb was opened, and both the young men entered in.

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span>10  When therefore those soldiers saw it,
they awakened the centurion and the elders; for they too were hard by
keeping guard.  And, as they declared what things they had seen, again
they see three men come forth from the tomb, and two of them supporting
one, and a cross following them:  and of the two the head reached unto
the heaven, but the head of him that was led by them overpassed the
heavens.  And they heard a voice from the heavens, saying, Thou hast
preached to them that sleep.  And a response was heard from the cross,
Yea.

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span>11  They therefore considered one with
another whether to go away and shew these things to Pilate.  And while
they yet thought thereon, the heavens again are seen to open, and a
certain man to descend and enter into the sepulchre.  When the centurion
and they that were with him saw these things, they hastened in the night
to Pilate, leaving the tomb which they were watching, and declared all
things which they had seen, being greatly distressed and saying, Truly
he was the Son of God.  Pilate answered and said, I am pure from the
blood of the Son of God:  but it was ye who determined this.  Then they
all drew near and besought him and entreated him to command the
centurion and the soldiers to say nothing of the things which they had
seen:  For it is better, say they, for us to be guilty of the greatest
sin before God, and not to fall into the hands of the people of the Jews
and to be stoned.  Pilate therefore commanded the centurion and the
soldiers to say nothing.

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span>12  And at dawn upon the Lord’s day Mary
Magdalen, a disciple of the Lord, fearing because of the Jews, since
they were burning with wrath, had not done at the Lord’s sepulchre the
things which women are wont to do for those that die and for those that
are beloved by them—she took her friends with her and came to the
sepulchre where he was laid.  And they feared lest the Jews should see
them, and they said, Although on that day on which he was crucified we
could not weep and lament, yet now let us do these things at his
sepulchre.  But who shall roll away for us the stone that was laid at
the door of the sepulchre, that we may enter in and sit by him and do
the things that are due?  For the stone was great, and we fear lest some
one see us.  And if we cannot, yet if we but set at the door the things
which we bring for a memorial of him, we will weep and lament, until we
come unto our home.

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span>13  And they went and found the tomb
opened, and coming near they looked in there; and they see there a
certain young man sitting in the midst of the tomb, beautiful and
clothed in a robe exceeding bright:  who said to them, Wherefore are ye
come?  Whom seek ye?  Him that was crucified? <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md)   He is risen and gone.  But if ye believe
not, look in and see the place where he lay, that he is not \[here\];
for he is risen and gone thither, whence he was sent.  Then the women
feared and fled.

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span>14  Now it was the last day of the
unleavened bread, and many were going forth, returning to their homes,
as the feast was ended.  But we, the twelve disciples of the Lord, wept
and were grieved:  and each one, being grieved for that which was come
to pass, departed to his home.  But I Simon Peter and Andrew my brother
took our nets and went to the sea; and there was with us Levi the son of
Alphæus, whom the Lord…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[7:2](0090004.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span> This translation is based on that which I
published in *The Gospel and Apocalypse of Peter:  Two Lectures*, etc.
(Camb., 1892).  It is now carefully revised in accordance with the
photographic facsimile.  A corrected Greek text will be found in Dr.
Swete’s edition (1893).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[7:3](0090004.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>Παρ\[αλημ\]φθῆναι</span> is perhaps supported by
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p5.2"></span>παραλαβόντες</span>,
[Matt. xxiv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.ii-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:4](0090004.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span> I know no other instance of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>σταυρίσκειν</span>.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:5](0090004.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span> *cf*. [John xix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>,
where Syr. Pesch. reads:  “They say, These bodies shall not remain on
the cross, because the sabbath dawneth.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:6](0090004.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span> The text here is corrupt:  for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>ἐπέσαντο</span> I have
provisionally read <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p12.2"></span>ἔπεσάν τε</span>.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7:7](0090004.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p13.1"></span>αὐτὸς ὥρας</span> we must read <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p13.2"></span>αὐτῆς ὥρας</span> (*cf*.
Clem., *Hom*., xx., 16); <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p13.3"></span>αὐτὴ</span> is the equivalent in later Greek
literature of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p13.4"></span>ἐκείνη</span>, as in the modern tongue (*cf*.
Lc. x. 7, 21, and xii. 12; \|\| <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p13.5"></span>ἐκείνῃ,</span> Mt., Mc.)

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8:8](0090004.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span> I have ventured to substitute <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>μετὰ</span>, “together
with” (*cf*. [Matt. xxvii. 66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066.md)<span
id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>), for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii-p17.3"></span>κατὰ</span>, “down upon.”  Dr. Swete, however,
keeps <span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii-p17.4"></span>κατὰ</span>,
and interprets it as “against,” i.e., to guard the sepulchre against.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8:9](0090004.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span> The form of the question in the Greek
suggests a negative answer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synoptical Table of the Four Canonical Gospels and The Gospel
According to Peter.](0090005.md)
