[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090274)  [Next](0090276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> 4.  I feel myself growing dizzy with
all this, and wonder whether, in obeying you, I have not been obeying
God, nor walking in the footsteps of the saints, unless it be that my
too great love to you, and my unwillingness to cause you any pain, has
led me astray and caused me to think of all these excuses.  We started
from the words of the preacher, where he says:  “My son, beware of
making many books.”  With this I compare a saying from the Proverbs of
the same Solomon, <span id="fr_4790"></span>[4791](#fn_4790) “In the
multitude of words thou shalt not escape sin; but in sparing thy lips
thou shalt be wise.”  Here I ask whether speaking many words of whatever
kind is a multitude of words (in the sense of the preacher), even if the
many words a man speaks are sacred and connected with salvation.  If
this be the case, and if he who makes use of many salutary words is
guilty of “multitude of words,” then Solomon himself did not escape this
sin, for “he spoke <span id="fr_4791"></span>[4792](#fn_4791) three
thousand proverbs, and five thousand songs, and he spoke of trees from
the cedar that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of
the wall, he spoke also of beasts and of fowl, and of creeping things
and of fishes.”  How, I may ask, can any one give any course of
instruction, without a multitude of words, using the phrase in its
simplest sense?  Does not Wisdom herself say to those who are
perishing, <span id="fr_4792"></span>[4793](#fn_4792) “I stretched out
my words, and ye heeded not”?  Do we not find Paul, too, extending his
discourse from morning to midnight, <span
id="fr_4793"></span>[4794](#fn_4793) when Eutychus was borne down with
sleep and fell down, to the dismay of the hearers, who thought he was
killed?  If, then, the words are true, “In much speaking thou wilt not
escape sin,” and if Solomon was yet not guilty of great sin when he
discoursed on the subjects above mentioned, nor Paul when he prolonged
his discourse till midnight, then the question arises, What is that much
speaking which is referred to? and then we may pass on to consider what
are the many books.  Now the entire Word of God, who was in the
beginning with God, is not much speaking, is not *words*; for the Word
is one, being composed of the many speculations (theoremata), each of
which is a part of the Word in its entirety.  Whatever words there be
outside of this one, which promise to give any description and
exposition, even though they be words about truth, none of these, to put
it in a somewhat paradoxical way, is Word or Reason, they are all words
or reasons.  They are not the monad, far from it; they are not that
which agrees and is one in itself, by their inner divisions and
conflicts unity has departed from them, they have become numbers,
perhaps infinite numbers.  We are obliged, therefore, to say that
whoever speaks that which is foreign to religion is using many words,
while he who speaks the words of truth, even should he go over the whole
field and omit nothing, is always speaking the one word.  Nor are the
saints guilty of much speaking, since they always have the aim in view
which is connected with the one word.  It appears, then, that the much
speaking which is condemned is judged to be so rather from the nature of
the views propounded, than from the number of the words pronounced.  Let
us see if we cannot conclude in the same way that all the sacred books
are one book, but that those outside are the “many books” of the
preacher.  The proof of this must be drawn from Holy Scripture, and it
will be most satisfactorily established if I am able to show that it is
not only one book, taking the word now in its commoner meaning, that we
find to be written about Christ.  Christ is written about even in the
Pentateuch; He is spoken of in each of the Prophets, and in the Psalms,
and, in a word, as the Saviour Himself says, in all the Scriptures.  He
refers us to them all, when He says: <span
id="fr_4794"></span>[4795](#fn_4794)   “Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal life, and these are they which testify of
Me.”  And if He refers us to the Scriptures as testifying of Him, it is
not to one that He sends us, to the exclusion of another, but to all
that speak of Him, those which, in the Psalms, He calls the chapter of
the book, saying, <span id="fr_4795"></span>[4796](#fn_4795) “In the
chapter of the book it is written of Me.”  If any one proposes to take
these words, “In the chapter of the book it is written of Me,”
literally, and to apply them to this or that special passage where
Christ is spoken of, let him tell us on what principle he warrants his
preference for one <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-Page_348"></span>book over another.  If any one
supposes that we are doing something of this kind ourselves, and
applying the words in question to the book of Psalms, we deny that we do
so, and we would urge that in that case the words should have been, “In
this book it is written of Me.”  But He speaks of all the books as one
chapter, thus summing up in one all that is spoken of Christ for our
instruction.  In fact the book was seen by John, <span
id="fr_4796"></span>[4797](#fn_4796) “written within and without, and
sealed; and no one could open it to read it, and to loose the seals
thereof, but the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, who has
the key of David, <span id="fr_4797"></span>[4798](#fn_4797) he that
openeth and none shall shut, and that shutteth and none shall open.” 
For the book here spoken of means the whole of Scripture; and it is
written within (lit. in front), on account of the meaning which is
obvious, and on the back, on account of its remoter and spiritual
sense.  Observe, in addition to this, if a proof that the sacred
writings are one book, and those of an opposite character many, may not
be found in the fact that there is one book of the living from which
those who have proved unworthy to be in it are blotted out, as it is
written: <span id="fr_4798"></span>[4799](#fn_4798)   “Let them be
blotted out of the book of the living,” while of those who are to
undergo the judgment, there are books in the plural, as Daniel
says: <span id="fr_4799"></span>[4800](#fn_4799)   “The judgment was
set, and the books were opened.”  But Moses also bears witness to the
unity of the sacred book, when he says: <span
id="fr_4800"></span>[4801](#fn_4800)   “If Thou forgive the people their
sins, forgive, but if not, then wipe me out of the book which Thou hast
written.”  The passage in Isaiah, <span
id="fr_4801"></span>[4802](#fn_4801) too, I read in the same way.  It is
not peculiar to his prophecy that the words of the book should be
sealed, and should neither be read by him who does not know letters,
because he is ignorant of letters, nor by him who is learned, because
the book is sealed.  This is true of every writing, for every written
work needs the reason (Logos) which closed it to open it.  “He shall
shut, and none shall open,” <span id="fr_4802"></span>[4803](#fn_4802)
and when He opens no one can cast doubt on the interpretation He
brings.  Hence it is said that He shall open and no man shall shut.  I
infer a similar lesson from the book spoken of in Ezekiel, <span
id="fr_4803"></span>[4804](#fn_4803) in which was written lamentation,
and a song, and woe.  For the whole book is full of the woe of the lost,
and the song of the saved, and the lamentation of those between these
two.  And John, too, when he speaks of his eating the one roll, <span
id="fr_4804"></span>[4805](#fn_4804) in which both front and back were
written on, means the whole of Scripture, one book which is, at first,
most sweet when one begins, as it were, to chew it, but bitter in the
revelation of himself which it makes to the conscience of each one who
knows it.  I will add to the proof of this an apostolic saying which has
been quite misunderstood by the disciples of Marcion, who, therefore,
set the Gospels at naught.  The Apostle says: <span
id="fr_4805"></span>[4806](#fn_4805)   “According to my Gospel in Christ
Jesus;” he does not speak of Gospels in the plural, and, hence, they
argue that as the Apostle only speaks of one Gospel in the singular,
there was only one in existence.  But they fail to see that, as He is
one of whom all the evangelists write, so the Gospel, though written by
several hands, is, in effect, one.  And, in fact, the Gospel, though
written by four, is one.  From these considerations, then, we learn what
the one book is, and what the many books, and what I am now concerned
about is, not the quantity I may write, but the effect of what I say,
lest, if I fail in this point, and set forth anything against the truth
itself, even in one of my writings, I should prove to have transgressed
the commandment, and to be a writer of “many books.”  Yet I see the
heterodox assailing the holy Church of God in these days, under the
pretence of higher wisdom, and bringing forward works in many volumes in
which they offer expositions of the evangelical and apostolic writings,
and I fear that if I should be silent and should not put before our
members the saving and true doctrines, these teachers might get a hold
of curious souls, which, in the absence of wholesome nourishment, might
go after food that is forbidden, and, in fact, unclean and horrible.  It
appears to me, therefore, to be necessary that one who is able to
represent in a genuine manner the doctrine of the Church, and to refute
those dealers in knowledge, falsely so-called, should take his stand
against historical fictions, and oppose to them the true and lofty
evangelical message in which the agreement of the doctrines, found both
in the so-called Old Testament and in the so-called New, appears so
plainly and fully.  You yourself felt at one time the lack of good
representatives of the better cause, and were impatient of a faith which
was at issue with reason and absurd, and you then, for the love you bore
to the Lord, gave yourself to composition from which, however, in <span
id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-Page_349"></span>the
exercise of the judgment with which you are endowed, you afterwards
desisted.  This is the defence which I think admits of being made for
those who have the faculty of speaking and writing.  But I am also
pleading my own cause, as I now devote myself with what boldness I may
to the work of exposition; for it may be that I am not endowed with that
habit and disposition which he ought to have who is fitted by God to be
a minister of the New Covenant, not of the letter but of the spirit.

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p18"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4790"></span>[347:4791](0090275.htm#fr_4790) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p2"></span> [Prov.
10.19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4791"></span>[347:4792](0090275.htm#fr_4791) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3"></span> [1 Kings iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#032)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4792"></span>[347:4793](0090275.htm#fr_4792) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p4"></span> [Prov. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4793"></span>[347:4794](0090275.htm#fr_4793) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p5"></span> [Acts xx.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4794"></span>[347:4795](0090275.htm#fr_4794) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p6"></span> [John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4795"></span>[347:4796](0090275.htm#fr_4795) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p7"></span> [Psa.
40.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4796"></span>[348:4797](0090275.htm#fr_4796) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p8"></span> [Rev.
5.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4797"></span>[348:4798](0090275.htm#fr_4797) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p9"></span> [Rev.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4798"></span>[348:4799](0090275.htm#fr_4798) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p10"></span> [Ps. lxix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4799"></span>[348:4800](0090275.htm#fr_4799) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p11"></span> [Dan. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4800"></span>[348:4801](0090275.htm#fr_4800) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p12"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4801"></span>[348:4802](0090275.htm#fr_4801) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p13"></span> [Isa.
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#012)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4802"></span>[348:4803](0090275.htm#fr_4802) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p14"></span> [Isa. xxii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4803"></span>[348:4804](0090275.htm#fr_4803) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p15"></span> [Isa.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4804"></span>[348:4805](0090275.htm#fr_4804) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p16"></span> [Rev.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#010)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4805"></span>[348:4806](0090275.htm#fr_4805) <span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p17"></span> [Rom. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016)<span
id="xv.iii.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](0090276)
