[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090002)  [Next](0090004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_3"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>The Gospel of Peter.</span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>The</span> important fragment of which Mr. J.
Armitage Robinson’s translation here follows was discovered by the
French Archæological Mission, Cairo, in a grave (supposed to be a
monk’s) in an ancient cemetery at Akhmîm (Panopolis), in Upper Egypt, in
1886.  It was published in 1892 under the care of M. Bouriant in vol.
ix., fasc. i., of the *Memoirs of the French* *Archæological Mission at
Cairo*.  The same parchment which contained this fragment also contained
a fragment of the Revelation of Peter and a fragment of the Book of
Enoch in Greek.  The parchment codex is assigned to a date between the
eighth and the twelfth century.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>Before this discovery the following is all
that was known of the Gospel of Peter:  1.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>Serapion</span>, Bishop of Antioch 190–203,
writing to the church at Rhossus, says (Eusebius, *H. E*., vi., 12, 2): 
“We, brethren, receive Peter and the other Apostles even as Christ; but
the writings that go falsely by their names we, in our experience,
reject, knowing that such things as these we never received.  When I was
with you I supposed you all to be attached to the right faith; and so
without going through the gospel put forward under Peter’s name, I said,
‘If this is all that makes your petty quarrel, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) why then let it be read.’  But now that I
have learned from information given me that their mind was lurking in
some hole of heresy, I will make a point of coming to you again:  so,
brethren, expect me speedily.  Knowing then, brethren, of what kind of
heresy was Marcion—\[*Here follows a sentence where the text is
faulty*.\]…From others who used this very gospel—I mean from the
successors of those who started it, whom we call *Docetæ*; for most of
its ideas are of their school—from them, I say, I borrowed it, and was
able to go through it, and to find that most of it belonged to the right
teaching of the Saviour, but some things were additions.”  From this we
learn that a Gospel of Peter was in use in the church of Rhossus in the
end of the second century, but that controversy had arisen as to its
character, which, on a careful examination, Serapion condemned.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>2.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>Origen</span> († 253 <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p8.2"></span>a.d.</span>), in commenting on [Matthew x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.i-p8.3"></span>,
says:  “But, proceeding on the tradition that is recorded in the Gospel
according to Peter or in the Book of James, they say that there are
certain brothers of Jesus, the sons of Joseph by a former wife, who
lived with him before Mary.”

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>3.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p9.1"></span>Eusebius</span> (*H. E*., iii., 3, 2) says:  “As
to that work, however, which is ascribed to him, called ‘The Acts,’ and
‘The Gospel according to Peter,’ and that called ‘The Preaching and the
Revelations of Peter,’  we know nothing of their being handed down as
Catholic writings; since neither among the ancient nor the
ecclesiastical writers of our own day has there been one that has
appealed to testimony taken from them.”  And in *H. E*., iii., 25, 6
sq., he includes the Gospel of Peter among the forged heretical
gospels—“those that are adduced by the heretics under the name of the
apostles,…of which no one of those writers in the ecclesiastical
succession has condescended to make any mention in his works; and,
indeed, the character of the style itself is very different from that of
the apostles; and the sentiments, and the purport of those things that
are advanced in them, deviating as far as possible from sound orthodoxy,
evidently proves they are the fictions of heretical men; whence they are
not only to be ranked <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_4"></span>among the spurious writings, but are to be
rejected as altogether absurd and impious.”  It is, however, uncertain
whether Eusebius himself was acquainted with the Gospel of Peter.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>4.  <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>Theodoret</span> († *c.* 455), in his *Religious
History*, ii., 2, says that the Nazarenes used “the gospel called
‘*according to Peter*.’”  Later references in Western literature, e.g.,
Jerome, *De vir. ill*., i., and the *Decretum Gelasianum*, condemning
the book, are based upon the judgement of Eusebius, and not upon direct
knowledge (*cf.* Harnack, *<span id="iii.i-p10.2"></span>Geschichte der
altchristl. Lit.*, I. Th., p. 11).

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>This was all that was known of the Gospel of
Peter till the publication of the Akhmîm fragment.  The latter extends
to about 174 stichi, counting 32 words to the stichus.  It begins in the
middle of the history of the Passion, just after Pilate has washed his
hands of all responsibility, and ends in the middle of a sentence, with
the departure of the disciples into Galilee at the end of the Feast of
Unleavened Bread, exactly a week after the crucifixion, the ostensible
author, Peter, and Andrew, his brother, taking their nets and going to
the sea; “and there was with us Levi the son of Alphæus, whom the Lord…”

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>The accompanying Synoptical Table shows
where the Petrine narrative agrees with and where it varies from those
supplied by the canonical gospels.  Of that part of the Passion history
which it narrates, it gives an account which follows the main lines of
the canonical tradition, but with important variations in detail.  Of
the events between the burial and the resurrection of our Lord, its
account is much more ample and detailed than anything in the canonical
tradition.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>Harnack (*<span
id="iii.i-p13.1"></span>Texte und Untersuchungen*, ix., 2, 2d ed., p.
76) gives the following list of new traits contained in the Petrine
account of the history of the Passion and burial:

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>1.  Herod was the judge who condemned Jesus,
and to him application had to be made for the body.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>2.  The Jews, Herod, and the judges would
not wash their hands, and Pilate then raised the sitting.

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>3.  Joseph was the friend of Pilate (sec.
2).

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>4.  Joseph begged for the body before the
crucifixion, and Pilate sent for permission from Herod.

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>5.  The soldiers “pushed him as they ran,”
and their speech (sec. 3).

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>6.  The mockery of the soldiers.

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>7.  Mocking speech.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span>8.  “As though having no pain” (sec. 4).

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>9.  “Having placed his garments before him.”

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span>10.  One of the malefactors blamed the
multitude, and his speech.

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>11.  The legs of either the malefactor or
Jesus were not broken, *in order that he might die in torment*.

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span>12.  The gall and vinegar (sec. 5).

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>13.  In the darkness many went about with
lamps, and fell down.

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span>14.  The cry, “My power, my power.”

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span>15.  The fact that when he had so cried
Christ was taken up.

<span id="iii.i-p29"></span>16.  Mention of the nails in the hands at
the taking down from the cross (sec. 6).

<span id="iii.i-p30"></span>17.  The earthquake when the body touched
the ground.

<span id="iii.i-p31"></span>18.  The joy of the Jews when the sun shone
again.

<span id="iii.i-p32"></span>19.  Joseph “had seen all the good things”
that the Lord had done.

<span id="iii.i-p33"></span>20.  Joseph washed the body.

<span id="iii.i-p34"></span>21.  The cries of woe of the Jews and their
leaders over their sins, and their expectation of the judgement on
Jerusalem (sec. 7).

<span id="iii.i-p35"></span>22.  The disciples remained in concealment,
full of grief, and fasted and wept till the Sabbath.

<span id="iii.i-p36"></span>23.  They were searched for as malefactors
and as anxious to burn the temple.

<span id="iii.i-p37"></span>24.  The name of the centurion of the
watch—Petronius (sec. 8).

<span id="iii.i-p38"></span>25.  The centurion, the soldiers, and the
elders rolled up the stone.

<span id="iii.i-p39"></span>26.  The elders also watched at the grave.

<span id="iii.i-p40"></span>27.  Seven seals were placed on the stone.

<span id="iii.i-p41"></span>28.  A tent pitched for the watch.

<span id="iii.i-p42"></span>29.  The gathering of the multitude on the
morning of the Sabbath to view the sealed grave (sec. 9).

<span id="iii.i-p43"></span><span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="iii.i-Page_5"></span>The whole narrative of the resurrection is so
different from that of the canonical gospels that it would be useless to
go into details; but it is important to notice the prominence assigned
to Mary Magdalene, and:

<span id="iii.i-p44"></span>1.  That the women fled from the grave and
did not see the Lord (sec. 12).

<span id="iii.i-p45"></span>2.  That there is no account of any
appearance of Christ for the first eight days after his death (sec. 13).

<span id="iii.i-p46"></span>3.  That the disciples, along with the rest
of those who had taken part in the feast, returned home to Galilee on
the seventh day of unleavened bread.

<span id="iii.i-p47"></span>4.  That they were then sad, and wept.

<span id="iii.i-p48"></span>5.  That the first appearance of Jesus must
have taken place on the Lake of Gennesaret, either to Peter alone, or to
Peter, Andrew, and Levi (Matthew), while fishing.

<span id="iii.i-p49"></span>Moreover, according to section 13 (see sec.
5), the author puts the resurrection and ascension on the same day, or,
rather, did not know of the latter as a separate event.  He makes the
angel say, “He is risen and gone away thither whence he was sent.”

<span id="iii.i-p50"></span>Whether the author used any other sources
than the canonical gospels is a matter still in doubt.  He is certainly
influenced by views which are foreign to these gospels, and which are
known from other quarters in early Christian literature.  As between the
Synoptists and the Fourth Gospel, the narrator is generally more closely
akin both in matter and in manner to the Synoptists, but he agrees with
the author of the Fourth Gospel in regard to the chronology of the
crucifixion and several of the events at the cross, and in his general
attitude towards the Jews and Pilate.  With regard to the last two
points, the Petrine Gospel seems to present a later and more exaggerated
form of the tendency perceptible in the Johannine, and fully worked out
in the Acts of Pilate, to blame the Jews and exculpate Pilate.

<span id="iii.i-p51"></span>Of the new features in this fragment some
are at least liable to a Docetic interpretation, e.g., the silence on
the cross “as though he had no pain” (sec. 4), the cry, “My power, my
power” (sec. 5), and ”he was taken up” (sec. 5).  This fact was
recognised in subsequent times and condemned this gospel in the eye of
the church.  The date of the work is variously fixed by different
scholars; Harnack assigns it to the first quarter of the second century,
while Mr. Armitage Robinson and other scholars place it later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](0090003.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="iii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>Παρέχειν μικροψυχίαν</span>, perhaps “causes you
ill-feeling.”  The translation of Serapion’s letter with this note is
taken from Mr. Armitage Robinson’s edition of the gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gospel According to Peter.](0090004.md)
