[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090430)  [Next](0090432) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>34.  Meaning of “Until.”  No Limitation
of Promise.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p2"></span>But since some one may think that
the promise of the Saviour prescribes a limit of time to their not
tasting of death, namely, that they will not taste of death
“until” <span id="fr_5769"></span>[5770](#fn_5769) they see the Son of
man coming in His own kingdom, but after this will taste of it, let us
show that according to the scriptural usage the word “until” signifies
that the time concerning the thing signified is pressing, but is not so
defined that after the “until,” that which is contrary to the thing
signified should at all take place.  Now, the Saviour says to the eleven
disciples when He rose from the dead, this among other things, “Lo, I am
with you all the days, even until the consummation of the age.” <span
id="fr_5770"></span>[5771](#fn_5770)   When He said this, did He promise
that He was going to be with them until the consummation of the age, but
that after the consummation of the age, when another age was at hand,
which is “called the age to come,” He would be no longer with them?—so
that according to this, the condition of the disciples would be better
before the consummation of the age than after the consummation of the
age?  But I do not think that any one will dare to say, that after the
consummation of the age the Son of God will be no longer with the
disciples, because the expression declares that He will be with them for
so long, until the consummation of the age is at hand; for it is clear
that the matter under inquiry was, whether the Son of God was forthwith
going to be with His disciples before the age to come and the hoped for
promises of God which were given as a recompense.  But there might have
been a question—it being granted that He would be with them—whether
sometimes He was present with them, and sometimes not present. 
Wherefore setting us free from the suspicion that might have arisen from
doubt, He declared that now and even all the days He would be with the
disciples, and that He would not leave those who had become His
disciples until the consummation of the age; (because He said “all the
days” He did not deny that by night, when the sun set, He would be
present with them.)  But if such is the force of the words, “until the
consummation of the age,” plainly we shall not be compelled to admit
that those who see the Son of man coming in His own kingdom shall taste
of death, after being deemed worthy of beholding Him in such guise.  But
as in the case of the passage we brought forward, the urgent necessity
was to teach us that “until the consummation of the age” He would not
leave us but be with us all the days; so also in this case I think that
it is clear to those who know how to look at the logical coherence of
things that He who has seen once for all “the Son of man coming in His
own kingdom,” and seen Him “in His own glory,” and seen “the kingdom of
God come with power,” could not possibly taste of death after the
contemplation of things so good and great.  But apart from the word of
the promise of Jesus, we have conjectured not without reason that we
would taste of death, so long as we were not yet held worthy to see “the
kingdom of God come with power,” and “the Son of man coming in His own
glory and in His own kingdom.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5769"></span>[468:5770](0090431.htm#fr_5769) <span
id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p3"></span> [Matt. xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5770"></span>[468:5771](0090431.htm#fr_5770) <span
id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p4"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="xvi.ii.v.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](0090432)
