[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090327)  [Next](0090329.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>13.  Spiritual Meaning of the
Passover.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p2"></span>A few points may be added in
connection with the doctrines now under consideration, though it would
require a special discussion in many volumes to treat of all the
mystical statements about the law, and specially of those connected with
the festivals, and more particularly still with the passover.  The
passover of the Jews consists of a sheep which is sacrificed, each
taking a sheep according to his father’s house; and the passover is
accompanied by the slaughter of thousands of rams and goats, in
proportion to the number of the houses of the people.  But our Passover
is sacrificed for us, namely, Christ.  Another feature of the Jewish
festival is unleavened bread; all leaven is made to disappear out of
their houses; but “we keep the feast <span
id="fr_5033"></span>[5034](#fn_5033.md) not with the old leaven, nor with
the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth.”  Whether there be any passover and any feast of
leaven beyond the two we have mentioned, is a point we must examine more
carefully, since these serve for a pattern and a shadow of the heavenly
ones we spoke of, and not only such things as food and drink and new
moons and sabbaths, but the festivals also, are a shadow of the things
to come.  In the first place, when the Apostle says, “Our passover is
sacrificed, Christ,” one may feel with regard to this such doubts as
these.  If the sheep with the Jews is a type of the sacrifice of Christ,
then one should have been offered and not a multitude, as Christ is one;
or if many sheep were offered it is to follow out the type, as if many
Christs were sacrificed.  But not to dwell on this, we may ask how the
sheep, which was the victim, contains an image of Christ, when the sheep
was sacrificed by men who were observing the law, but Christ was put to
death by transgressors of the law, and what application can be found in
Christ of the direction, <span id="fr_5034"></span>[5035](#fn_5034.md)
“They shall eat the flesh this night, roast with fire, and unleavened
bread on bitter herbs shall they eat,” and “Eat not of it raw, nor
sodden with water, but roast with fire; the head with the feet and the
entrails; ye shall not set any of it apart till the morning, and a bone
thereof ye shall not break.  But that which is left thereof till the
morning ye shall burn.”  The sentence, “A bone of it ye shall not
break,” John appears to have made use of in his Gospel, as applying to
the transactions connected with Christ, and connecting with them the
occasion spoken of in the law when those eating the sheep are bidden not
to break a bone of it.  He writes as follows: <span
id="fr_5035"></span>[5036](#fn_5035.md)   “The soldiers therefore came and
brake the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with
him; but when they came to Jesus and saw that He was already dead, they
brake not His legs, but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His
side, and straightway there came out blood and water.  And he that hath
seen hath borne witness and his witness is true, and he knoweth that he
sayeth truth that ye also may believe.  And these things took place that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, “A bone of Him ye shall not break.” 
There are a myriad other points besides this in the Apostle’s language
which would call for inquiry, both about the passover and the unleavened
bread, but they would have to be dealt with, as we said above, in a
special work of great length.  At present we can only give an epitome of
them as they bear on the text presently before us, and aim at a short
solution of the principal problem.  We call to mind the words, “This is
the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the <span id="page_390">p.
390</span> <span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-Page_390"></span>world,” for it is
said of the passover, <span id="fr_5036"></span>[5037](#fn_5036.md) “Ye
shall take it of the lambs or of the goats.”  The Evangelist here agrees
with Paul, and both are involved in the difficulties we spoke of above. 
But on the other hand we have to say that if the Word became flesh, and
the Lord says, <span id="fr_5037"></span>[5038](#fn_5037.md) “Unless ye eat
the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no life in
you.  He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My blood, hath eternal life,
and I will raise him up at the last day.  For My flesh is meat indeed
and My blood is drink indeed.  He that eateth My flesh and drinketh My
blood abideth in Me, and I in him,”—then the flesh thus spoken of is
that of the Lamb that takes away the sin of the world; and this is the
blood, some of which was to be put on the two side posts of the door,
and on the lintels in the houses, in which we eat the passover.  Of the
flesh of this Lamb it is necessary that we should eat in the time of the
world, which is night, and the flesh is to be roast with fire, and eaten
with unleavened bread; for the Word of God is not flesh and flesh only. 
He says, in fact, Himself, <span id="fr_5038"></span>[5039](#fn_5038.md) “I
am the bread of life,” and “This is the bread of life which came down
from heaven, that a man should eat of it, and not die.  I am the bread
of life that came down from heaven; if a man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever.”  We must not overlook, however, that by a loose use of
words, any food is called bread, as we read in Moses in
Deuteronomy, <span id="fr_5039"></span>[5040](#fn_5039.md) “Forty days He
ate no bread and drank no water,” instead of, He took no food, either
wet or dry.  I am led to this observation by John’s saying, “And the
bread which I will give is My flesh, for the life of the world.”  Again,
we eat the flesh of the Lamb, with bitter herbs, and unleavened bread,
when we repent of our sins and grieve with the sorrow which is according
to God, a repentance which operates for our salvation, and is not to be
repented of; or when, on account of our trials, we turn to the
speculations which are found to be those of truth, and are nourished by
them.  We are not, however, to eat the flesh of the Lamb raw, as those
do who are slaves of the letter, like irrational animals, and those who
are enraged at men truly reasonable, because they desire to understand
spiritual things; truly, they share the nature of savage beasts.  But we
must strive to convert the rawness of Scripture into well-cooked food,
not letting what is written grow flabby and wet and thin, as those do
who have itching ears, <span id="fr_5040"></span>[5041](#fn_5040.md) and
turn away their ears from the truth; their methods tend to a loose and
flabby conduct of life.  But let us be of a fervent spirit and keep hold
of the fiery words given to us of God, such as Jeremiah received from
Him who spoke to him, <span id="fr_5041"></span>[5042](#fn_5041.md)
“Behold, I have made My words in thy mouth like fire,” and let us see
that the flesh of the Lamb be well cooked, so that those who partake of
it may say, as Christ speaks in us, “Our heart burned by the way, as He
opened to us the Scriptures.” <span id="fr_5042"></span>[5043](#fn_5042.md)
  Further, if it is our duty to enquire into such a point as the
roasting of the flesh of the Lamb with fire, we must not forget the
parallel of what Jeremiah suffered on account of the words of God, as he
says: <span id="fr_5043"></span>[5044](#fn_5043.md)   “And it was as a
glowing fire, burning in my bones, and I am without any strength, and I
cannot bear it.”  But, in this eating, we must begin at the head, that
is to say, at the principal and the most essential doctrines about
heavenly things, and we must end at the feet, the last branches of
learning which enquire as to the final nature in things, or about more
material things, or about things under the earth, or about wicked
spirits and unclean demons.  For it may be that the account of these
things is not obvious, like themselves, but is laid away among the
mysteries of Scripture, so that it may be called, tropically, the feet
of the Lamb.  Nor must we fail to deal with the entrails, which are
within and hidden from us; we must approach the whole of Scripture as
one body, we must not lacerate nor break through the strong and
well-knit connections which exist in the harmony of its whole
composition, as those do who lacerate, so far as they can, the unity of
the Spirit that is in all the Scriptures.  But this aforesaid prophecy
of the Lamb is to be our nourishment only during the night of this dark
life of ours; what comes after this life is, as it were, the dawn of
day, and why should we leave over till then the food which can only be
useful to us now?  But when the night is passed, and the day which
succeeds it is at hand, then we shall have bread to eat which has
nothing to do with the leavened bread of the older and lower state of
things, but is unleavened, and that will serve our turn until that which
comes after the unleavened bread is given us, the manna, which is food
for angels rather than men.  Every one of us, then, may sacrifice his
lamb in every house of our fathers; and <span id="page_391">p.
391</span> <span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-Page_391"></span>while one breaks
the law, not sacrificing the lamb at all, another may keep the
commandment entirely, offering his sacrifice, and cooking it aright, and
not breaking a bone of it.  This, then, in brief, is the interpretation
of the Passover sacrificed for us, which is Christ, in accordance with
the view taken of it by the Apostles, and with the Lamb in the Gospel. 
For we ought not to suppose that historical things are types of
historical things, and material things of material, but that material
things are typical of spiritual things, and historical things of
intellectual.  It is not necessary that our discourse should now ascend
to that third passover which is to be celebrated with myriads of angels
in the most perfect and most blessed exodus; we have already spoken of
these things to a greater extent than the passage demands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5033"></span>[389:5034](0090328.htm#fr_5033.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5034"></span>[389:5035](0090328.htm#fr_5034.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p4"></span> [Exod. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5035"></span>[389:5036](0090328.htm#fr_5035.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p5"></span> [John
19.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#032.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5036"></span>[390:5037](0090328.htm#fr_5036.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p6"></span> [Exod. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5037"></span>[390:5038](0090328.htm#fr_5037.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p7"></span> [John vi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5038"></span>[390:5039](0090328.htm#fr_5038.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p8"></span> [John vi.
48-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#048.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5039"></span>[390:5040](0090328.htm#fr_5039.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p9"></span> [Deut.
9.9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5040"></span>[390:5041](0090328.htm#fr_5040.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p10"></span> [2 Tim.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#004.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5041"></span>[390:5042](0090328.htm#fr_5041.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p11"></span> [Jer. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#014.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5042"></span>[390:5043](0090328.htm#fr_5042.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p12"></span> [Luke xxiv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#032.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5043"></span>[390:5044](0090328.htm#fr_5043.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p13"></span> [Jer.
20.9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0090329.md)
