[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090483)  [Next](0090485) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>11.  The Servant Who Owed a Hundred
Pence.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p2"></span>Only, though he cannot pay the
talents, for he has lost them, he has a wife and children and other
things, of which it is written, “All that he has.” <span
id="fr_6110"></span>[6111](#fn_6110)   And it was possible that when he
had been sold along with his own, he would have prospered if some one
had bought him, and, by his worth and the things that were his, have
paid the whole debt in full; and it was possible that he might no longer
be the servant of the king, but become that of his purchaser.  And he
makes a request that he be not sold along with his own, but may continue
to abide in the house of the king; wherefore he fell down and worshipped
him, knowing that the king was God, and said, “Have patience with me,
and I will pay thee all;” <span id="fr_6111"></span>[6112](#fn_6111) for
he was, as is probable, an active man, who knew that he could by a
second course of action fill up the whole deficiency of the former loss
of many talents.  And this truly good king was moved with compassion for
the man who owed him many talents and then released him, having bestowed
upon him a favour greater than the request which had been made; for the
debtor promised to the long-suffering master to pay all his debts, but
the Lord moved with compassion for him did not merely forgive him with
the idea of receiving his own back as a result of his patience, but even
entirely released him and forgave him the whole debt.  But this wicked
servant, who had besought his master to have patience for his many
talents, acted without mercy, for, having found one of his
fellow-servants which owed him a hundred pence, he laid hold on him and
took him by the throat, saying, “Pay if thou owest.” <span
id="fr_6112"></span>[6113](#fn_6112)   And did he not exhibit the very
excess of wickedness who laid hold of his fellow-servant for a hundred
pence, and took him by the throat and deprived him of freedom to
breathe, when he himself, for the many talents, had neither been laid
hold of, nor seized by the throat, but at first was ordered to be sold
along with his wife and children and all that was his own; but
afterwards, when he had worshipped him, the master was moved with
compassion for him, and he was released and forgiven in regard to the
whole of the debt.  But it were indeed a hard task to tell according to
the conception of Jesus who is the one fellow-servant who was found to
be owing a hundred pence, not to his own lord, but to him who owed many
talents, and who are the fellow-servants who saw the one taking by the
throat, and the other taken, and were exceedingly sorry, and represented
clearly unto their own lord all that had been done.  But what the truth
in these matters is, I declare that no one can interpret unless Jesus,
who explained all things to His own disciples privately, takes up His
abode in his reason, and opens up all the treasures in the parable which
are dark, hidden, unseen, and confirms by clear demonstrations the man
whom He desires to illumine with the light of the knowledge of the
things that are in this parable, that he may at once represent who is
brought to the king as the debtor of many talents, and who is the other
one who owes to him a hundred pence, etc.; whether he can be the man of
sin previously mentioned, <span id="fr_6113"></span>[6114](#fn_6113) or
the devil, or neither of these, but some other, whether a man, or some
one of these under the sway of the devil; for it is a work of the wisdom
of God to exhibit the things that have been prophesied concerning those
who are in themselves of a certain nature, or have been made according
to such and such qualities, whether among visible powers or also among
some men, in whatever way they may have been written by the Holy
Spirit.  But as we have not yet received the competent mind which is
able to be blended with the mind of Christ, and which is capable of
attaining to things so great, and which is able with the Spirit to
“search all things, even the deep things of God,” <span
id="fr_6114"></span>[6115](#fn_6114) we, forming an impression still
indefinitely with regard to the matters in this passage, are of opinion
that the wicked servant indicated by the parable who is here represented
in regard to the debt of many talents, refers to some definite one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6110"></span>[501:6111](0090484.htm#fr_6110) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p3"></span> [Matt. xviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#025)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6111"></span>[501:6112](0090484.htm#fr_6111) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p4"></span> [Matt. xviii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#026)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6112"></span>[501:6113](0090484.htm#fr_6112) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p5"></span> [Matt. xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6113"></span>[501:6114](0090484.htm#fr_6113) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p6"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6114"></span>[501:6115](0090484.htm#fr_6114) <span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p7"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.ii.vii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](0090485)
