[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090331)  [Next](0090333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>17.  Matthew’s Story of the Entry into
Jerusalem.  Difficulties Involved in It for Those Who Take It
Literally.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p2"></span>We have now to take into
consideration the statements of the other Gospels on the expulsion from
the temple of those who made it a house of merchandise.  Take in the
first place what we find in Matthew.  On the Lord’s entering Jerusalem,
he says, <span id="fr_5062"></span>[5063](#fn_5062.md) “All the city was
stirred, saying, Who is this?”  But before this he has the story of the
ass and the foal which were taken by command of the Lord and found by
the two disciples whom he sent from Bethphage into the village over
against them.  These two disciples loose the ass which was tied, and
they have orders, if any one says anything to them, to answer that “the
Lord has need of them; and immediately he will send them.”  By these
incidents Matthew declares that the prophecy was fulfilled which says,
“Behold, the King cometh, meek and sitting on an ass and a colt the foal
of an ass,” which we find in Zechariah. <span
id="fr_5063"></span>[5064](#fn_5063.md)   When, then, the disciples went
and did as Jesus commanded them, they brought the ass and the colt, and
placed on them, he says, their own garments, and the Lord sat upon them,
clearly on the ass and the colt.  Then “the most part of the multitude
spread their garments in the way, and others cut down branches from the
trees and strewed them in the way, and the multitudes that went before
and that followed cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord.  Hosanna in the highest.”  Hence it was
that when He entered Jerusalem, the whole city was moved, saying, Who is
this? “and the multitudes said,” those obviously who went before Him and
who followed Him, to those who were asking who He was, “This is the
prophet Jesus of Nazareth of Galilee.  And Jesus entered into the temple
and cast out all those that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew
the tables of the money-changers and the seats of them that sold doves: 
and He saith unto them, It is written, My house shall be called a house
of prayer; but ye make it a den of robbers.”  Let us ask those who
consider that Matthew had nothing but the history in his mind when he
wrote his Gospel, what necessity there was for two of the disciples to
be sent to the village over against Bethphage, to find an ass tied and
its colt with it and to loose them and bring them?  And how did it
deserve to be recorded that He sat upon the ass and the foal and entered
into the city?  And how does Zechariah prophesy about Christ when he
says, <span id="fr_5064"></span>[5065](#fn_5064.md) “Rejoice greatly, thou
daughter of Zion, proclaim it, thou daughter of Jerusalem.  Behold thy
king cometh unto thee, just is He and bringing salvation, meek and
sitting on an ass and a young foal”?  If it be the case that this
prophecy predicts simply the material incident described by the
Evangelists, how can those who stand on the letter maintain that this is
so with regard to the following part also of the prophecy, which runs: 
“And He shall destroy chariots from Ephraim and horse from Jerusalem,
and the bow of the warrior shall be destroyed, and a multitude and peace
from the <span id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-Page_396"></span>Gentiles, and He shall rule over the
waters as far as the sea, and the rivers to the ends of the earth,”
etc.  It is to be noted, too, that Matthew does not give the words as
they are found in the prophet, for instead of “Rejoice greatly, thou
daughter of Zion, proclaim it, thou daughter of Jerusalem,” he makes it,
“Tell ye the daughter of Zion.”  He curtails the prophetic utterance by
omitting the words, “Just is He and bringing salvation,” then he gives,
“meek and sitting,” as in the original, but instead of “on an ass and a
young colt,” he gives, “on an ass and a colt the foal of an ass.”  The
Jews, examining into the application of the prophecy to what is recorded
about Jesus, press us in a way we cannot overlook with the enquiry how
Jesus destroyed chariots out of Ephraim and horse from Jerusalem, and
how He destroyed the bow of the enemy and did the other deeds mentioned
in the passage.  So much with regard to the prophecy.  Our literal
interpreters, however, if there is nothing worthy of the appearance of
the Son of God in the ass and the foal, may perhaps point to the length
of the road for an explanation.  But, in the first place, fifteen stades
are not a great distance and afford no reasonable explanation of the
matter, and, in the second place, they would have to tell us how two
beasts of burden were needed for so short a journey; “He sat,” it is
said, “on them.”  And then the words:  “If any man say aught unto you,
say ye that the Lord hath need of them, and straightway he will send
them.”  It does not appear to me to be worthy of the greatness of the
Son’s divinity to say that such a nature as His confessed that it had
need of an ass to be loosed from its bonds and of a foal to come with
it; for everything the Son of God has need of should be great and worthy
of His goodness.  And then the very great multitude strewing their
garments in the way, while Jesus allows them to do so and does not
rebuke them, as is clear from the words used in another passage, <span
id="fr_5065"></span>[5066](#fn_5065.md) “If these should hold their peace,
the stones will cry out.”  I do not know if it does not indicate a
certain degree of stupidity on the part of the writer to take delight in
such things, if nothing more is meant by them than what lies on the
surface.  And the branches being cut down from the trees and strewn on
the road where the asses go by, surely they are rather a hindrance to
Him who is the centre of the throng than a well-devised reception of
Him.  The difficulties which met us on the part of those who were cast
out of the temple by Jesus meet us here in a still greater degree.  In
the Gospel of John He casts out those who bought, but Matthew says that
He cast out those who sold and those who bought in the temple.  And the
buyers would naturally be more numerous than the sellers.  We have to
consider if the casting out of buyers and sellers in the temple was not
out of keeping with the reputation of one who was thought to be the Son
of a carpenter, unless, as we said before, it was by a divine power that
He subjected them.  The words addressed to them, too, are harsher in the
other Evangelists than in John.  For John says that Jesus said to them,
“Make not My Father’s house a house of merchandise,” while in the others
they are rebuked for making the house of prayer a den of robbers.  Now
the house of His Father did not admit of being turned into a den of
robbers, though by the acts of sinful men it was brought to be a house
of merchandise.  It was not only the house of prayer, but in fact the
house of God, and by force of human neglect it harboured robbers, and
was turned not only into their house but their den—a thing which no
skill, either of architecture or of reason, could make it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5062"></span>[395:5063](0090332.htm#fr_5062.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p3"></span> [Matt.
21.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5063"></span>[395:5064](0090332.htm#fr_5063.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p4"></span> [Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5064"></span>[395:5065](0090332.htm#fr_5064.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p5"></span> [Zech. ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5065"></span>[396:5066](0090332.htm#fr_5065.md) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p6"></span> [Luke xix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040.md)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](0090333.md)
