[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lit03)  [Next](lit05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lessons in Truth*, by H. Emilie Cady, \[1894\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Thinking Lesson Three 

1\. We learned in the second lesson that the real substance within
everything we see is God; that all things are one and the same Spirit in
different degrees of manifestation; that all the various forms of life
are just the same as one life come forth out of the invisible into
visible form; that all the intelligence and all the wisdom in the world
are God as wisdom in various degrees of manifestation; that all the love
which people feel and express toward others is just a little, so to
speak, of God as love come into visibility through the human form.

2\. When we say there is but one Mind in the entire universe, and that
this Mind is God, some persons, having followed understandingly the
first lesson, and recognized God as the one life, one Spirit, one power,
pushing Himself out into various degrees of manifestation through people
and things, will at once say: "Yes, that is all plain."

3\. But someone else will say: "If all the mind there is, is God, then
how can I think wrong thoughts, or have any but God thoughts?"

4\. The connection between universal Mind and our own individual minds
is one of the most difficult things

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

to put into words, but when it once dawns on one, it is easily seen.

5\. There is in reality only one Mind (or Spirit, which is life,
intelligence, and so forth) in the universe; and yet there is a sense in
which we are individuals, or separate, a sense in which we are free
wills and not puppets.

6\. Man is made up of Spirit, soul, and body. Spirit is the central
unchanging "I" of us, the part that since infancy has never changed, and
to all eternity never will change. That which some persons call "mortal
minds" is the region of the intellect where we do conscious thinking and
are free wills. This part of our being is in constant process of
changing.

7\. In our outspringing from God into the material world, Spirit is
inner--one with God; soul is the clothing, as it were, of Spirit; body
is the external clothing of the soul. Yet all are in reality one, the
composite man--as steam, water, and ice are one, only in different
degrees of condensation. In thinking of ourselves, we must not separate
Spirit, soul, and body, but rather hold all as one, if we would be
strong and powerful. Man originally lived consciously in the spiritual
part of himself. He fell by descending in his consciousness to the
external or more material part of himself.

8\. "Mortal mind," the term so much used and so distracting to many, is
the error consciousness, which gathers its information from the outside
world through the five senses. It is what Paul calls "the mind of the
flesh" in contradistinction to spiritual mind; and he

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

flatly says: "The mind of the flesh \[believing what the carnal mind
says\] is death \[sorrow, trouble, sickness\]; but the mind of the
Spirit \[ability to still the carnal mind and let the Spirit speak
within us\] is life and peace."

9\. The Spirit within you is Divine Mind, the real mind. Without it
human mind would disappear, just as a shadow disappears when the real
thing that casts it is removed.

10\. If you find this subject of human mind and universal Mind puzzling
to you, do not worry over it. Just drop it for the time, and as you go
on with the lesson, you will find that some day an understanding of it
will flash suddenly upon you with perfect clearness.

11\. There are today two classes of people, so far as mentality goes,
who are seeking deliverance out of sickness, trouble, and unhappiness,
by spiritual means. One class requires that every statement made be
proved by the most elaborate and logical argument, before it can or will
be received. The other class is willing at once to "become as little
children" (Mt. 18:3) and just be taught how to take the first step
toward pure understanding (or knowledge of Truth as God sees it), and
then receives the light by direct revelation from the All-Good. Both are
seeking and eventually both will reach the same goal, and neither one
should be unduly condemned.

12\. If you are one who seeks and expects to get any realizing knowledge
of spiritual things through

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

argument or reasoning, no matter how scholarly your attainments or how
great you are in worldly wisdom, you are a failure in spiritual
understanding. You are attempting an utter impossibility--that of
crowding the Infinite into the quart measure of your own intellectual
capacity.

13\. "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for
they are foolishness unto him; and he cannot know them, because they are
spiritually judged" (1 Cor. 2:14). Eventually you will find that you are
only beating around on the outside of the "Kingdom of heaven," though in
close proximity to it, and you will then become willing to let your
intellect take the place of the little child, without which no man can
enter in.

14\. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God hath \[not will\] prepared for them
that love him.

15\. "But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. . . .

16\. "For who among men knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of
the man, which is in him? even so the things of God none knoweth, save
the Spirit of God" (1 Cor.2:11).

17\. For all those who must wade through months and perhaps years of
this purely intellectual or mental process, there are today many books
to help, and many teachers of metaphysics who are doing noble and
praiseworthy work in piloting these earnest seekers after Truth and
satisfaction. To them we cry: "All speed!"

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

18\. But we believe with Paul that "the foolishness of God is wiser than
men" (1 Cor. 1:25), and that each man has direct access to all there is
in God. We are waiting for the "little Children" who, without question
or discussion, are willing at once to accept and try a few plain, simple
rules such as Jesus taught the common people, who "heard him
gladly"--rules by which they can find the Christ (or the Divine) within
themselves, that through it each man for himself may work out his own
salvation from all his troubles.

19\. In other words, there is a shortcut to the top of the hill; and
while there is a good but long, roundabout road for those who need it,
we prefer the less laborious means of attaining the some ends by seeking
directly the Spirit of truth promised to dwell in us and to lead us into
all Truth. My advice is: If you want to make rapid progress in growth
toward spiritual understanding, stop reading many books. They only give
someone's opinion about Truth, or a sort of history of the author's
experience in seeking Truth. What you want is revelation of Truth in
your own soul, and that will never come through the reading of many
books.

20\. Seek light from the Spirit of Truth within you. Go alone. Think
alone. Seek light alone, and if it does not come at once, do not be
discouraged and run off to someone else to get light; for, as we said
before, by so doing you get only the opinion of the intellect, and may
be then further away from the Truth you are seeking than ever before;
for the mortal mind may make false reports.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

21\. The very Spirit of truth is at your call. "The anointing which ye
received of him abideth in you" (1 Jn. 2:27). Seek it. Wait patiently
for it to "guide you into the truth" (Jn. 16:13) about all things.

22\. "Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus" (Phil.
2:5). This is the universal Mind, which makes no mistake. Still the
intellect for the time being, and let universal Mind speak to you; and
when it speaks, though it be but a "still small voice" (1 Kings 19:12),
you will know that what it says is Truth.

23\. How will you know? You will know just as you know that you are
alive. All the argument in the world to convince you against Truth that
comes to you through direct revelation will fall flat and harmless at
your side. And the Truth that you know, not simply believe, you can use
to help others. That which comes forth through your spirit will reach
the very innermost spirit of him to whom you speak.

24\. What is born from the outside, or intellectual perception, reaches
only the intellect of him you would help.

25\. The intellect that is servant to the real Mind, and when servant
(but not when master) is good, loves to argue; but when its information
is based on the evidence of the senses and not on the true thoughts of
the Divine Mind, it is very fallible and full of error.

26\. Intellect argues. Spirit takes the deep things of God and reveals
Truth to man. One may be true; the other always is true. Spirit does not
give opinions about Truth; it is Truth, and it reveals itself.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

27\. Someone has truly said that the merest child who has learned from
the depths of his being to say, "Our Father," is infinitely greater than
the most intellectual man who has not yet learned it. Paul was a man of
gigantic intellect, learned in all the law, a Pharisee of the Pharisees;
but after he was spiritually illumined he wrote, "The foolishness of God
is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men" (1 Cor.
1:25).

28\. It does make a great difference in our daily lives what we think
about God, about ourselves, about our neighbors. Heretofore, through
ignorance of our real selves and of the results of our thinking, we have
let our thoughts flow at random. Our minds have been turned toward the
external of our being, and nearly all our information has been gotten
through our five senses. We have thought wrong because misinformed by
these senses, and our troubles and sorrows are the results of our wrong
thinking.

29\. "But," says someone, "I do not see how my thinking evil or wrong
thoughts about God, or about anyone, can make me sick or my husband lose
his position."

30\. Well, I will not just now try to explain all the steps by which bad
results follow false thinking, but I will just ask you to try thinking
true, right thoughts awhile, and see what the result will be.

31\. Take the thought, "God loves me." Think these words over and over
continually for a few days, trying

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

to realize that they are true, and see what the effect will be on your
body and circumstances.

32\. First, you get a new exhilaration of mind, with a great desire and
a sense of power to please God; then a quicker, better circulation of
blood, with a sense of pleasant warmth in the body, followed by better
digestion. Later, as Truth flows out through your being into your
surroundings, everybody will begin to manifest a new love for you
without your knowing why; and finally, circumstances will begin to
change and fall into harmony with your desires, instead of being adverse
to them.

33\. Everyone knows how strong thoughts of fear or grief have turned
hair white in a few hours; how great fear makes the heart beat so
rapidly as to seem about to "jump out of the body," this result not
being at all dependent on whether there be any real cause of fear or
whether it be a purely imaginary cause. Just so, strong negative
thoughts may render the blood acid, causing rheumatism. Bearing mental
burdens makes more stooped shoulders than does bearing heavy material
loads. Believing that God regards us as "miserable sinners," that He is
continually watching us and our failures with disapproval, bring utter
discouragement and a sort of half paralyzed condition of the mind and
body, which means failure in all our undertakings.

34\. Is it difficult for you to understand why, if God lives in us all
the time, He does not keep our thoughts right instead of permitting us
through ignorance

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

to drift into wrong thoughts, and so bring trouble on ourselves?

35\. Well, we are not automatons. Your child will never learn to walk
alone if you always do his walking. Because you recognize that the only
way for him to be strong, self-reliant in all things--in other words, to
become a man--is to throw him on himself, and let him, through
experience, come to a knowledge of things for himself, you are not
willing to make a mere puppet of him by taking the steps for him, even
though you know that he will fall down many times and give himself
severe bumps in his ongoing toward perfect physical manhood.

36\. We are in process of growth into the highest spiritual manhood and
womanhood. We get many falls and bumps on the way, but only through
these, not necessarily by them, can our growth proceed. Father and
mother, no matter how strong or deep their love, cannot grow for their
children; nor can God, who is omnipotence, at the center of our being,
grow spiritually for us without making of us automatons instead of
individuals.

37\. If you keep your thoughts turned toward the external of yourself,
or of others, you will see only the things that are not real, but
temporal, and which pass away. All the faults, failures, or lacks in
people or circumstances will seem very real to you, and you will be
unhappy and sick.

38\. If you turn your thoughts away from the external toward the
spiritual, and let them dwell on the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

good in yourself and in others, all the apparent evil will first drop
out of your thoughts and then out of your life. Paul understood this
when he wrote to the Philippians: "Finally, brethen, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things" (Phil. 4:8).

39\. We all can learn how to turn the conscious mind toward universal
Mind, or Spirit, within us. We can, by practice, learn how to make this
everyday, topsy-turvy, "mind of the flesh" be still and let the mind
that is in God (all-wisdom, all-love) think in us and out through us.

40\. Imagine, if you will, a great reservoir, out of which lead
innumerable small rivulets or channels. At its farther end each channel
opens out into a small fountain. This fountain is not only being
continually filled and replenished from the reservoir but is itself a
radiating center whence it gives out in all directions that which it
receives, so that all who come within its radius are refreshed and
blessed.

41\. This is our relation with God. Each one of us is a radiating
center. Each one, no matter how small or ignorant, is the little
fountain at the far end of a channel, the other end of which leads out
from all there is in God. This fountain represents the individuality, as
separate from the great reservoir--God--and yet as one with Him, and
without Him we are nothing.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

42\. Each of us, no matter how insignificant he may be in the world, may
receive from God unlimited good of whatever kind he desires, and radiate
it to all about him. But remember, he must radiate if he would receive
more. Stagnation is death.

43\. Oh, I want the simplest mind to grasp the idea that the very wisdom
of God--the love, the life, and the power of God--are ready and waiting
with longing impulse to flow out through us in unlimited degree! When it
flows in unusual degree through the intellect of a certain person men
exclaim, "What a wonderful mind!" When it flows through the hearts of
men it is the love that melts all bitterness, envy, selfishness,
jealousy, before it; when it flows through their bodies as life, no
disease can withstand its onward march.

44\. We do not have to beseech God any more than we have to beseech the
sun to shine. The sun shines because it is a law of its being to shine,
and it cannot help it. No more can God help pouring into us unlimited
wisdom, life, power, all good, because to give is a law of His being.
Nothing can hinder Him except our own lack of understanding. The sun may
shine ever so brightly, but if we have, through willfulness or
ignorance, placed ourselves, or have been placed by our progenitors, in
the far corner of a damp, dark cellar, we get neither joy nor comfort
from its shining; then to us the sun never shines.

45\. So we have heretofore known nothing of how to get ourselves out of
the cellar of ignorance, doubts,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and despair; to our wrong thinking, God has seemed to withhold the life,
wisdom, and power we wanted so much, though we sought Him ever so
earnestly.

46\. The sun does not radiate life and warmth today and darkness and
chill tomorrow; it cannot, from the nature of its being. Nor does God
radiate love at one time, while at other times, anger, wrath, and
displeasure flow from His mind toward us.

47\. "Doth the fountain send forth from the same opening sweet water and
bitter? can a fig tree, my brethren, yield olives, or a vine figs" (Jas.
3:11).

48\. God is All-Good--always good, always love. He never changes, no
matter what we do or may have done. He is always trying to pour more of
Himself through us into visibility so as to make us grander, larger,
fuller, freer individuals.

49\. While the child is crying out for its Father-Mother God, the
Father-Mother is yearning with infinite tenderness to satisfy the child.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"In the heart of man a cry,  
In the heart of God, supply."  
</span>

</div>

RECAPITULATION

50\. There is but one Mind in the universe.

51\. Human mind, or intellect, makes mistakes because it gathers much
information from without.

52\. Universal Mind sees and speaks from within, it is all Truth.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

53\. Our way of thinking makes our happiness or unhappiness, our success
or nonsuccess. We can, by effort, change our ways of thinking.

54\. God is at all times, regardless of our so-called sins, trying to
pour more good into our lives to make them richer and more successful.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 4](lit05.md)
