[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lit07)  [Next](lit09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Lessons in Truth*, by H. Emilie Cady, \[1894\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Personality and Individuality Lesson Seven 

1\. One of the greatest beauties of the Sermon on the Mount is the
childlike simplicity of its language. Every child, every grown person,
be he ever so uneducated, if he can read at all can understand it. Not a
word in it requires the use of a dictionary; not a sentence in it that
does not tell the way so plainly that "the wayfaring men, yea, fools,
shall not err therein" (Is. 35:8). And yet the Nazarene was the fullest,
most complete manifestation of the one Mind that has ever lived; that is
to say, more of the wisdom that is God came forth through Him into
visibility than through anyone else who has ever lived. The more any
person manifests the true wisdom, which is God, the more simple are his
ways of thinking and acting; the more simple are the words through which
he expresses his ideas. The greater the truth to be expressed, the more
simple can it (and should it) be clothed.

2\. Emerson said, "Converse with a mind that is grandly simple, and all
literature looks like word-catching."

3\. In the metaphysical literature of today a good many terms are used
that are very confusing to those who have not taken a consecutive course
of lessons on the subject. It seems to me wise to give here a clear,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

simple explanation of two words frequently used, so that even the most
unlearned may read understandingly.

4\. The words personality and individuality present distinct meanings to
the trained mind, but by the untrained mind they are often used
interchangeably and apart from their real meanings.

5\. Personality applies to the human part of you--the person, the
external. Your personality may be agreeable or disagreeable to others.
When you say that you dislike anyone, you mean that you dislike his
personality--that exterior something that presents itself from the
outside. It is the outer, changeable man, in contradistinction to the
inner or real, man.

6\. Individuality is the term used to denote the real man. The more God
comes into visibility through a person the more individualized he
becomes. By this I do not mean that one's individuality is greater when
one is more religious. Remember, God is wisdom, intelligence, love,
power. The more pronounced the manner in which any one of these
qualities--or all of them--comes forth into visibility through a man,
the greater his individuality.

7\. Emerson was a man of large individuality, but retiring personality.
He was grandly simple. He was of a shrinking, retiring nature (or
personality). But just in proportion as the human side of him was
willing to retire and be thought little of, did the immortal, the God in
him, shine forth in greater degree.

8\. John the Baptist represents the illumined intellect, the highest
development of human conscioussness.

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

We may think of him as standing for personality, whereas Jesus typifies
the divine self or individuality. John, recognizing the superiority of
Jesus, said, "He must increase, but I must decrease" (Jn. 3:30).

9\. One's individuality is that part of one that never changes its
identity. It is the God self. It is that which distinguishes one person
from another. One's personality may become like that of others with whom
one associates. Individuality never changes.

10\. Do not confound the terms. One may have an aggressive, pronounced
personality, or external man, which will, for a time, fight its way
through obstacles and gain its point. But a pronounced individuality
never battles; it is never puffed up; it is never governed by likes and
dislikes and never causes them in others; it is God come forth in
greater degree through a man, and all mere personality instinctively
bends the knee before it in recognition of its superiority.

11\. We cultivate individuality by listening to the "still small voice"
(1 Kings 19:12) down deep within us, and boldly following it, even if it
does make us different from others, as it surely will. We cultivate
personality, in which live pride, fear of criticism, and all manner of
selfishness, by listening to the voices outside ourselves and by being
governed by selfish motives, instead of by the highest within us. Seek
always to cultivate, or bring into visibility, individuality, not
personality. In proportion as one increases, the other must decrease.

12\. Whenever we fear a man, or shrink before him,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

it is because his personality, being the stronger, overcomes ours. Many
timid persons go through life always feeling that they are inefficient,
that others are wiser or better than they. They dread to meet a
positive, self-possessed person; and when in the presence of such a one,
they are laid low, just as a field of tall wheat is after a fierce
windstorm has swept across it. They feel as though they would like to
get out of sight forever.

13\. All this, dear timid ones, is not because your fellow really is
wiser or better than you, but because his personality--the external
man--is stronger than yours. You never have a similar feeling in the
presence of strong individuality. Individuality in another not only
produces in you an admiration for its superiority, but it also gives
you, when you are in its presence, a strange new sense of your own
inherent possibilities, a sense that is full of exhilaration and comfort
and encouragement to you. This is because a pronounced individuality
simply means more of God come forth into visibility through a person,
and by some mind process it has power to call forth more of God through
you.

14\. If you want to know how to avoid being overcome and thrown off your
feet by the strong personality of others, I will tell you:

15\. Always remember that personality is of the human and individuality
is of God. Silently affirm your own individuality, your oneness with
God, and your superiority to personality. Can God fear any person?

16\. If you are naturally inclined to be timid or

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

shrinking, practice of the following will help you overcome it. As you
walk down the street and see anyone coming toward you, even a stranger
to you, silently affirm such words as: "I am a part of God in
visibility; I am one with the Father; this person has no power over me,
for I am superior to all personality." Cultivate this habit of thinking
and affirming whenever you approach any person, and you will soon find
that no personality, however strong and aggressive, has the power to
throw you out of the most perfect poise. You will be self-possessed
because God-possessed.

17\. Some years ago I found myself under a sense of bondage to a strong,
aggressive personality with whom, externally, I had been quite
intimately associated for several months. I seemed to see things through
another's eyes; and while I was more than half conscious of this, yet I
could not seem to throw it off. This personality was able, with very few
words, to make me feel as if all that I said or did was a mistake, and
that I was a most miserable failure. I was always utterly discouraged
after being in this presence, and felt that I had no ability to
accomplish anything.

18\. After vainly trying for weeks to free myself, one day I was walking
along the street, with a most intense desire and determination to be
free. Many times before, I had affirmed that this personality could not
affect or overcome me, but with no effect. This day I struck out farther
and declared (silently of course), "There is no such personality in the
universe as this one," affirming it again and again many times. After a
few

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

moments I began to feel wondrously lifted, and as if chains were
dropping off. Then the voice within me urged me on a step farther to
say, "There is no personality in the universe; there is nothing but
God." After a short time spent in vigorously using these words, I seemed
to break every fetter. From that day to this, without further effort, I
have been as free from any influence of that personality as though it
had never existed.

19\. If at any time the lesser affirmation of Truth fails to free you
from the influence of other minds, try this more sweeping one, "There is
no personality in the universe; there is nothing but God," and you are
bound to be made free.

20\. The more you learn to act from the "still small voice" within you,
the stronger and more pronounced will be individuality in you.

21\. If you are inclined to wilt before strong personalities, always
remember that God has need of you, through whom, in some special manner,
to manifest Himself--some manner for which He cannot use any other
organ--what need have you to quail before any person, no matter how
important?

22\. However humble your place in life, however unknown to the world you
may be, however small your capabilities may seem at present to you, you
are just as much a necessity to God in His efforts to get Himself into
visibility as is the most brilliant intellect, the most thoroughly
cultured person in the world. Remember this always, and act from the
highest within you.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 8](lit09)
