[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lit09)  [Next](lit11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lessons in Truth*, by H. Emilie Cady, \[1894\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Secret Place of the Most High Lesson Nine 

1\. There is nothing the human heart so longs for, so cries out after,
as to know God, "whom to know aright is life eternal."

2\. With a restlessness that is pitiful to see, people are ever shifting
from one thing to another, always hoping to find rest and satisfaction
in some anticipated accomplishment or possession. Men fancy that they
want houses and lands, great learning or power. They pursue these things
and gain them, only to find themselves still restless, still
unsatisfied.

3\. At the great heart of humanity there is a deep and awful
homesickness that never has been and never can be satisfied with
anything less than a clear, vivid consciousness of the indwelling
presence of God, our Father. In all ages, earnest men and women who have
recognized this inner hunger as the heart's cry after God have left
seeking after things, and have sought, by devoted worship and by service
to others, to enter into this consciousness; but few have succeeded in
reaching the promised place where their "joy" is "full" (Jn. 16:24).
Others have hoped and feared alternately; they have tried, with the best
knowledge they possessed, to "work out" their "own salvation" (Phil.
2:12), not yet having learned that there must be an inworking

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

as well as an outworking. "By grace (or free gift) have ye been saved
through faith; and that not of yourselves (nor of any human working), it
is the gift of God, not of works, that no man should glory" (Eph.
2:8-9).

4\. To him who "dwelleth in the secret place of the Most high," there is
promised immunity from the "deadly pestilence" and "the snare of the
fowler," from "the terror by night," and "the arrow that flieth by day"
(Ps. 91); and even immunity from fear of these things. Oh, the awfully
paralyzing effect of fear and evil! It makes us helpless as babes. It
makes us pygmies, whereas we might be giants were we only free from it.
It is at the root of all our failures, of nearly all sickness, poverty,
and distress. But we have the promise of deliverance from even the fear
and evil when we are in the "secret place." "Thou shalt not be afraid
for the terror by night" (Ps. 91:5), and so forth.

"In the day of trouble he will keep me secretly in his pavilion: In the
covert of his tabernacle will he hide me" (Ps. 27:5)." In the covert of
thy presence wilt thou hide them from the plottings of man:

"Thou wilt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues"
(Ps. 31:20).

5\. The secret place! Why call a secret place? What is it? Where may we
find it? How abide in it?

6\. It is a secret place because it is a place of meeting between the
Christ at the center of your being, and your consciousness--a hidden
place into which no outside person can either induct you or enter
himself. We must drop the idea that this place of realization of our

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

divinity can be given to us by any human being. No one can come into it
from the outside. Hundreds of earnest persons are seeking, night and
day, to get this inner revealing. They run from teacher to teacher, many
of them making the most frantic efforts to meet the financial
obligations thus incurred.

7\. You may study with human teachers and from man-made books until
doomsday; you may get all the theological lore of the ages; you may
understand intellectually all the statements of Truth, and be able to
prate healing formulas as glibly as oil flows; but until there is a
definite inner revealing of the reality of an indwelling Christ through
whom and by whom come life, health, peace, power, all things--aye, who
is all things--you have not yet found "the friendship of Jehovah" (Ps.
25:14).

8\. In order to gain this knowledge--this consciousness of God within
themselves--many are willing (and wisely so, for this is greater than
all other knowledge) to spend all they posses. Even Paul, after
twenty-five years of service and of most marvelous preaching, said: "I
count all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord. . .and do count them but refuse, that I may gain
Christ" (or the consciousness of His divine self) (Phil. 3:8).

9\. Beloved, that which you so earnestly desire will never be found by
your seeking it through the mental side alone, any more than it has
heretofore been found through the emotional side alone. Intuition and
intellect

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

are meant to travel together, intuition always holding the reins to
guide intellect. "Come now, and let us reason together, saith Jehovah"
(Is. 1:18). If you have been thus far on the way cultivating and
enlarging only the mental side of Truth, as probably is the case, you
need, in order to come into the fullness of understanding, to let the
mental, the reasoning side rest awhile. "Become as little children" (Mt.
18:3), and learning how to be still, listen to that which the Father
will say to you through the intuitional part of your being. The light
that you so crave will come out of the deep silence and become manifest
to you from within yourself, if you will but keep still and look for it
from that source.

10\. And conscious knowledge of an indwelling God, which we so crave, is
that of which Paul wrote to the Colossians, as "the mystery which hath
been hid for ages and generations: but now hath it been manifested. .
.Christ in you, the hope of glory" (Col. 1:26,27). "The secret place of
the Most high" (Ps. 91:1), where each one of us may dwell and be safe
from all harm or fear of evil, is the point of mystical union between
man and Spirit (or God in us), wherein we no longer believe, but know,
that God in Christ abides always at the center of our being as our
perfect health, deliverance, prosperity, power, ready to come forth into
manifestation at any moment we claim it. We know it. We know it. We feel
our oneness with the Father, and we manifest this oneness.

11\. To possess the secret of anything gives one

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

power over it. This personal, conscious knowledge of the Father in us is
the secret that is the key to all power. What we want is the revelation
to us of this marvelous "secret." What will give it to us--who can give
it to us except Him, the "Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the
Father" (Jn. 15:26)? Surely none other. That which God would say to you
and do through you is a great secret that no man on the face of the
earth knows, or ever will know except yourself as it is revealed to you
by the Spirit that is in you. The secret that He tells me is not
revealed to you, nor yours to me; but each man must, after all is said
and done, deal directly with the Father through the Son within himself.

12\. Secrets are not told upon the housetop; nor is it possible to pass
this, the greatest of secrets, from one to another. God, the creator of
our being, must Himself whisper it to each man living in the very
innermost of himself. "To him that overcometh (or is consciously in
process of overcoming), to him will I give the hidden manna, and I will
give him a white stone (or a mind like a clean white tablet), and upon
the stone a new name written, which no one knoweth but he that receiveth
it" (Rev. 2:17). It is so secret that it cannot even be put into human
language or repeated by human lips.

13\. What you want today and what I want is that the words that we have
learned to say as Truth be made alive to us. We want a revelation of God
in us as life, to be made to our own personal consciousness as health.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

We no longer care to have somebody just tell us the words from the
outside. We want a revelation of God as love within us, so that our
whole being will be filled and thrilled with love--a love that will not
have to be pumped up by a determined effort because we know that it is
right to love and wrong not to love, but a love that will flow with the
spontaneity and fullness of an artesian well, because it is so full at
the bottom that it must flow out.

14\. What we want today is a revelation to our consciousness of God
within us as omnipotent power, so that we can, by a work--or a
look--"accomplish that which I please and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it" (Is. 55:11). We want the manifestation to us of the
Father in us, so that we can know Him personally. We want to be
conscious of God working in us "both to will and to work" (Phil. 2:13),
so that we may "work out" our "salvation" (Phil. 2:12). We have been
learning how to do the outworking, but have now come to a point where we
must learn more of how to place ourselves in an attitude where we can
each be conscious of the divine inner working.

15\. Mary talked with the risen Jesus, supposing that He was the
gardener, until suddenly, as He spoke her name, there flashed into her
consciousness a ray of pure intuition, and in an instant the revelation
of His identity was made to her.

16\. According to the same sacred history, Thomas Didymus had walked
daily for three years with the most wonderful teacher of spiritual
things that has ever

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

lived. He had watched this teacher's life and had been partaker of His
very presence, physical and mental. He had had just what you and I have
thus far received of mental training and external teaching. But there
came a time when there was an inner revealing that made him exclaim, "My
Lord and my God!" (Jn. 20:28). The secret name, which no other man could
know for him, had that moment been given to him. There had come, in the
twinkling of an eye, the manifestation to his consciousness of the
Father in him as his Lord and his God. No longer simply our Father and
our Lord, but my Lord and my God--my divine self revealed to me
personally.

17\. Is not this that which you are craving?

18\. Each man must come to a time when he no longer seeks external
helps, when he knows that the inner revelation of "my Lord and my God"
to his consciousness can come to him only through an in-dwelling power
that has been there all the time, waiting with infinite longing and
patience to reveal the Father to the child.

19\. This revelation will never come through the intellect of man to the
consciousness, but must ever come through the intuitional to the
intellect as a manifestation of Spirit to man. "The natural man
receiveth not (nor can it impart them) the things of the Spirit of God;
for they are foolishness unto him; and he cannot know them, because they
are spiritually judged" (1 Cor. 2:14), and they must be spiritually
imparted.

20\. In our eagerness we have waited upon every

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

source that we could reach for the light that we want. Because we have
not known how to wait upon Spirit within us for the desired revelation,
we have run to and fro. Let no one misunderstand me in what I say about
withdrawing himself from teachers. Teachers are good and are necessary,
up to a certain point. "How then shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? and how shall they believe in him whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?" (Rom. 10:14).

21\. Books and lectures are good, teachers are good, but you must learn
for yourself that Christ, the Son of God, lives in you; that He within
you is your light and life and all. When you have once grasped this
beyond a doubt with the intellect, you cease looking to teachers to
bring you spiritual insight. That Christ lives in you, Spirit itself
must reveal to you. Teachers talk about the light, but the light itself
must flash into the darkness before you can see the light.

22\. Had the Master remained with the apostles, I doubt whether they
would ever have gotten beyond hanging on His words and following in the
footsteps of His personality.

23\. Jesus knew that His treatments for spiritual illumination, given to
His apostles from His recognition of Truth, would act in them as a seed
thought, but He also knew that each man must for himself wait upon God
for the inner illumination which is lasting and real. God alone can
whisper the secret to each one separately.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

24\. The inducement of power was not to come to them by the spoken word
through another personality, not even through that of Jesus, with His
great spiritual power and discernment. It was to come from "on high"
(Is. 32:15) to each individual consciousness. It was the "promise of the
Father, which. . .ye heard from me" (Acts 1:4). He had merely told them
about it, but had no power to give it to them.

25\. So to each of us this spiritual illumination that we are crying out
after, this inducement of power for which we are willing to sell all
that we have, must come from "on high," that is, to the consciousness
from the Spirit within our being. This is the secret that the Father
longs with an infinite yearning to reveal to each individual. It is
because of the Father's desire within us to show us the secret that we
desire the revelation. It is the purpose for which we come into the
world--that we might grow step by step, as we are doing, to the place
where we could bear to have the secret of His inner abiding revealed to
us.

26\. Do not be confused by seeming contradictions in the lessons. I have
said heretofore that too much introspection is not good. I repeat it;
for there are those who, in earnest desire to know God, are always
seeking light for themselves, but neglect to use that which they already
have to help others.

27\. There must be an equal conscious receiving from the Father and
giving out to the world, a perfect equilibrium between the inflowing and
the outgiving, to keep perfect harmony. We must each learn how to

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

wait renewedly upon God for the infilling, and then go and give out to
every creature that which we have received, as Spirit leads us to give,
either in preaching, teaching, or silently living the Truth. That which
fills us will radiate from us without effort right in the place in life
where we stand.

28\. In nearly all teaching of Truth from the purely mental side, there
is much said about the working out of our salvation by the holding of
right thoughts, by denials and affirmations. This is all good. But there
is another side that we need to know a little more about. We must learn
how to be still and let Spirit, the I AM, work in us, that we may indeed
be made "a new creature" (Gal. 6:15), that we may have the mind of
Christ in all things.

29\. When you have learned how to abandon yourself to infinite Spirit,
and have seasons of doing this daily, you will be surprised at the
marvelous change that will be wrought in you without any conscious
effort of your own.

30\. It will search far below your conscious mind, and root out things
in your nature of which you have scarcely been conscious, simply because
they have lain latent there, waiting for something to bring them out. It
will work into your consciousness light, and life, and love, and all
good, perfectly filling all your lack while you just quietly wait and
receive. Of the practical steps in this direction we will speak in
another lesson.

31\. Paul, who had learned this way of faith, this way of being still
and letting the I AM work itself

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

into his conscious mind as the fullness of all his needs was neither
afraid nor ashamed to say:

32\. "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father, from whom every
family in heaven and on earth is named, that he would grant you,
according to the riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened with
power through his Spirit in the inward man; that Christ may dwell in
your heart through faith; to the end that ye, being rooted and grounded
in love, may be strong to apprehend with all saints what is the breadth
and length and height, and depth, and to know the love of Christ which
passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled unto all the fulness of God"
(Eph. 3:14-19).

33\. And then he gives an ascription: "Unto him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the
power that worketh in us" (Eph. 3:20).

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 10](lit11.md)
