[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lit12)  [Next](lit14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lessons in Truth*, by H. Emilie Cady, \[1894\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Twelve Unity of the Spirit 

1\. Did we not know it as a living reality that behind all the multitude
and variety of human endeavors to bring about the millennium there
stands forever the master Mind, which sees the end from the beginning,
the master Artist who Himself is (through human vessels as His hands)
putting on the picture here a touch of one color and there a touch of
another, according to the vessel used, we might sometimes be
discouraged.

2\. Were it not at times so utterly ridiculous, it would always be
pitiful to see the human mind of man trying to limit God to personal
comprehension. However much any one of us may know of God, there will
always be unexplored fields in the realms of expression, and it is an
evidence of our narrow vision to say: "This is all there is of God."

3\. Suppose that a dozen persons are standing on the dark side of a wall
in which are various sized openings. Viewing the scene outside through
the opening assigned to him, one sees all there is within a certain
radius. He says, "I see the whole world; in it are trees and fields."
Another, through a larger opening, has a more extended view; he says: "I
see trees and fields and houses; I see the whole world." The next one,
looking through a still larger opening, exclaims: "Oh! You are

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

all wrong! I alone see the whole world; I see trees and fields and
houses and rivers and animals."

4\. The fact is, each one looking at the same world sees according to
the size of the aperture through which he is looking, and he limits the
world to just his own circumscribed view of it. You would say at once
that such limitation was only a mark of each man's ignorance and
narrowness. Everyone would pity the man who thus displayed--aye, fairly
vaunted--his ignorance.

5\. From time immemorial there have been schisms and divisions among
religious sects and denominations. And now with the newer light that we
have, even the light of the knowledge of one God immanent in all men,
many still cling to external differences, so postponing, instead of
hastening, the day of the millennium; at least they postpone it for
themselves.

6\. I want, if possible, to help break down the seeming "middle wall of
partition" (Eph. 2:14), even as Christ, the living Christ, does in
reality break down or destroy all misunderstanding. I want to help you
to see that there is no real wall of difference between all the various
sects of the new theology, except such as appear to you because of your
circumscribed view. I want you to see, if you do not already, that
everytime you try to limit God's manifestation of Himself in any person
or through any person, in order to make that manifestation conform to
what you see as Truth, you are only crying loudly: "Ho! everyone, come
and view my narrowness and my ignorance!"

7\. I want to stimulate you to lose sight of all

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

differences, all side issues and lesser things, and seek but for one
thing--that is the consciousness of the presence of an indwelling God in
you and your life. And believe me, just as there is less separation
between the spokes of a wheel the nearer they get to the hub, so you
will find that the nearer you both come to the perfect Center, which is
the Father, the less difference will there be between you and your
brother.

8\. The faith healer, he who professes to believe only in what he terms
"divine healing" (as though there could be any other healing than
divine), differs from the so-called spiritual scientist only in
believing that he must ask, seek, knock, importune, before he can
receive; while he of the Truth teaching knows that he has already
received God's free gift of life and health and all things, and that by
speaking the word of Truth the gifts are made manifest. Both get like
results (God made visible) through faith in the invisible. The mind of
the one is lifted to a place of faith by asking or praying; the mind of
the other is lifted to a place of faith by speaking words of Truth.

9\. Is there any real difference?

10\. The mental scientist usually scorns to be classed with either of
the other two sects. He loudly declares that "all is mind" and that all
the God he knows or cares anything about is the invincible,
unconquerable I within him, which nothing can daunt or overcome.

11\. He talks about conscious mind and subconscious mind, and he fancies
that he has something entirely different from the infinitely higher than
either

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

of the other sects. He boldly proclaims, "I have Truth; the others are
in error, too orthodox," and thus he calls the world's attention to the
small size of the aperture through which he is looking at the stupendous
whole.

12\. Beloved, as surely as you and I live, it is all one and the same
Truth. There may be a distinction, but it is without difference.

13\. The happy person who will from his heart exclaim, "Praise the
Lord!" no matter what occurs to him, and who thereby finds that "to them
that love God all things work together for good" (Rom. 8:28), is in
reality saying the "all is good" of the metaphysician. Each one does
simply "in all thy ways acknowledge him \[or God, good\]" (Prov.3:6),
which is indeed a magical wand, bringing sure deliverance out of any
trouble to all who faithfully use it.

14\. The teachings of spirit are intrinsically the same, because Spirit
is one. I heard an uneducated woman speak in a most orthodox prayer
meeting some time ago. She knew no more of religious science than a babe
knows of Latin. Her face, however, was radiant with the light of the
Christ manifest through her. She told how, five or six years before, she
had been earnestly seeking to know more of God (seeking in prayer, as
she knew nothing about seeking spiritual light from people), and one
day, in all earnestness, she asked that some special word of His will
might be given directly to her as a sort of private message. These words
flashed into her mind: "If therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body
shall be full of light. . . .No man can

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

serve two masters" (Mt.6:22-24).

15\. She had read these words many times, but that day they were
illumined by Spirit; and she saw that to have an eye "single" meant
seeing but one power in her life; while she saw two powers (God and
Devil, good and evil) she was serving two masters. From that day to
this, though she had passed through all sorts of troublous
circumstances--trials of poverty, illness in family, intemperate
husband--she found always the most marvelous, full, and complete
deliverance out of them all by resolutely adhering to the "single"
eye--seeing God only. She would not look even for a moment at the
seeming evil to combat it or rid herself of it, because, as she said,
"Lookin' at God with one eye and this evil with the other is bein'
double-eyed, and God told me to keep my eye single."

16\. This woman, who had never heard of any science, or metaphysical
teaching, or laws of mind,

was combating and actually overcoming the tribulations of this world by
positively refusing to have anything but a single eye. She had been
taught in a single day by infinite Spirit the whole secret of how to
banish evil and have only good and joy in her. Isn't it all very simple?

17\. At the center, all is one and the same God forevermore. I believe
that the veriest heathen that ever lived, he who worships the golden
calf as his highest conception of God, worships God. His mind has not
yet expanded to a state where he can grasp any idea of God apart from a
visible form, something that he can

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

see with human eyes and handle with fleshly hands. But at heart he is
seeking something higher than his present conscious self to be his
deliverance out of evil.

18\. Are you and I, with all our boasted knowledge, doing anything more
or different?

19\. The Spirit at the center of even the heathen, who is God's child,
is thus seeking, though blindly, its Father-God. Shall anyone dare to
say that it will not find that which it seeks--its Father? Shall we not
rather say it will find, because of that immutable law that "he that
seeketh findeth" (Mt.7:8)?

20\. You have now come to know that, at the center of your being, God
(omnipotent power) ever lives. From the nature of your relationship to
Him, and by His own immutable laws, you may become conscious of His
presence and eternally abide in Him and He in you.

21\. The moment that any man really comes to recognize that which is
absolute Truth--namely, that one Spirit, even the Father, being made
manifest in the Son, ever lives at the center of all human beings--he
will know that he can cease forever from any undue anxiety about
bringing others into the same external fold that he is in. If your
friend, or your son, or your husband, or your brother does not see Truth
as you see it, do not try by repeated external arguments to convert him.

22\. "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto
myself" (Jn. 12:32). That which is needed is not that you (the human,
which is so fond

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

of talk and argument) try to lift up your brother. The Holy Spirit, or
Christ within him, declares: "And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all
men" (Jn. 13:32). You can silently lift up this I within the man's own
being, and it will draw the man up unto--what? Your teaching? No, unto
Christ, the divine in him.

23\. Keep your own light lifted up by living the victorious life of
Spirit. And then, remembering that your dear one, as well as yourself,
is an incarnation of the Father, keep him silently committed to the care
of his own divine Spirit. You do not know what God wants to do in him;
you never can know.

24\. If you fully recognize that the God that dwells in you dwells in
all men, you know that each one's own Lord, the Christ within each one,
will make no mistake. The greatest help that you can give to any man is
to tell him silently, whenever you think of him: "The Holy Spirit lives
within you; He cares for you, is working in you that which He would have
you do, and is manifesting Himself through you." Then let him alone. Be
at perfect rest about him, and the result will be infinitely better than
you could have asked.

25\. Keep ever in mind that each living person in all God's universe is
a radiating center of the same perfect One, some radiating more and some
less, according to the awakened consciousness of the individual. If you
have become conscious of this radiation in yourself, keep your thought
centered right there, and the Spirit of the living God will radiate from
you in all directions with mighty power, doing without noise

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

or words a great work in lifting others up. If you want to help others
who are not yet awakened to this knowledge, center your thoughts on this
same idea of them--that they are radiating centers of the All-Perfect.
Keep your eye "single" for them, as did the uneducated woman for
herself, and Spirit will teach them more in a day than you could in
years.

26\. Throughout the ages man has leaned to the idea of separateness
instead of oneness. He has believed himself separate from God and
separate from other men. And even in these latter days when we talk so
much about oneness, most teachers of metaphysics manage again to
separate God's children from Him by saying that while the child may
suffer the Father knows no suffering nor does He take cognizance of the
child's suffering; that we, His children, forever a part of Him, are
torn and lacerated, while He, knowing nothing of this, goes on as
serenely and indifferently as the full moon sails through the heavens on
a winter night.

27\. It is little wonder that many, to whom the first practical lessons
in the gospel of the Christ came as liberation and power, should in time
of failure and heartache have turned back to the old limited belief of
the Fatherhood of God.

28\. There is no real reason why we, having come to recognize God as
infinite substance, should be by this recognition deprived of the
familiar fatherly companionship that in all ages has been so dear to the
human heart. There is no necessity for us to separate God as substance
and God as tender Father; no reason

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

why we should not, and every reason why we should, have both in one;
they are one--God principle outside of us as unchangeable law, God
within us as tender, loving Father-Mother, who has compassion for our
every sorrow.

29\. There is no reason why, because in our earlier years some of us
were forced into the narrow puritanical limits that stood for a
religious belief, we should now so exaggerate our freedom as to fancy
that we are entirely self-sufficient and shall never again need the
sweet, uplifting communion between Father and child. The created, who
ever lives, moves, and has his being in his Creator, needs the conscious
presence of that Creator, and cannot be entirely happy in knowing God
only as cold, unsympathetic Principle. Why cannot both conceptions find
lodgment in the minds and hearts? Both are true, and both are necessary
parts of a whole. The two were made to go together, and in the highest
cannot be separated.

30\. God as the underlying substance of all things, God as principle, is
unchanging, and does remain forever uncognizant of and unmoved by the
changing things of time and sense. It is true that God as principle does
not feel pain, is not moved by the cries of children of men for help. It
is a grand, stupendous thought that this power is unchanging law, just
as unchanging in its control of our affairs as it is in the government
of the starry heavens. One is fairly conscious of his entire being's
expanding into grandeur as he dwells on the thought.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

31\. But this is not all, any more than the emotional side is all. True,
there is law; but there is gospel also. Nor does gospel make law of no
effect; it fulfills law. God is principle, but God is individual also.
Principle becomes individualized the moment it comes to dwell in
external manifestation in a human body.

32\. Principle does not change because of pity or sympathy, even "as a
father pitieth his children" (Ps. 103:13). The Father in us always moves
into helpfulness when called on and trusted. It is as though infinite
wisdom and power, which outside are Creator, Upholder, and Principle,
become transformed into infinite love, which is Father-Mother, with all
the warmth and tender helpfulness that this word implies, when they
become focalized, so to speak, within a human body.

33\. I do not at all understand it, but in some way this indwelling One
does move to lift the consciousness of His children up and to place it
parallel with God, Principle, Law, so that no longer two are crossed,
but the two--aye, the three--the human consciousness, the individual
father, and the Holy Spirit--are made one. In every life, with our
present limited understanding, there come times when the bravest heart
goes down, for the moment, under the apparent burdens of life; times
when the strongest intellect bends like a "reed shaken with the wind"
(Mt.11:7), when the most self-sufficient mind feels a helplessness that
wrings from it a cry for help from "the rock that is higher that I" (Ps.
61:2).

34\. Every metaphysician either has reached, or must

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

in the future reach, this place; the place where God as cold principle
alone will not suffice any more than in the past God as personality
alone could wholly satisfy. There will come moments when the human heart
is so suddenly struck as to paralyze it, and for the moment it is
impossible, even with strained effort, to think right thoughts.

35\. At such times there will come but little comfort from the thought:
"This suffering comes as a result of my wrong thinking; but God, my
Father, takes no cognizance of it: I must work it out unaided and
alone." Just here we must have, and we do have, the motherhood of God,
which is not cold Principle any more than your love for your child is
cold. I would not make God as Principle less, but God as individual
more.

36\. The whole business of your Lord (the Father in you) is to care for
you, to love you with an everlasting love, to note your slightest cry,
and to rescue you.

37\. Then you ask, "Why doesn't He do it?" Because you do not recognize
His indwelling and His power, and by resolutely affirming that He does
now manifest Himself as your all-sufficiency, call Him forth into
visibility.

38\. God (Father-Mother) is a present help in time of need; but there
must be a recognition of His presence, a turning away from human
efforts, and an acknowledgement of God only (a single eye) before He
becomes manifest.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Study Guide](lit14.md)
