[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lit10)  [Next](lit12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Lessons in Truth*, by H. Emilie Cady, \[1894\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Finding the Secret Place Lesson Ten 

1\. How to seek the secret place--where to find it--how to abide in
it--these are the questions that today, more than at any other time in
the history of the world, are engaging the hearts of men. More than
anything else it is what I want. It is what you want.

2\. All the steps that we are taking by speaking words of Truth and
striving to manifest the light which we have already received are
carrying us on swiftly to the time when we shall have consciously the
perfect mind of Christ, with all the love and beauty and health and
power which that implies.

3\. We need not be anxious or in a hurry for the full manifestation. Let
us not at any time lose sight of the fact that our desire, great as it
is, is only God's desire in us. "No man can come to me, except the
Father that sent me draw him" (Jn. 6:44). The Father in us desires to
reveal to us the secret of His presence, else we had not known any
hunger for the secret, or for Truth.

4\. "Ye did not choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that ye
should go and bear fruit" (Jn. 15:16).

5\. Whoever you are that read these words, wherever you stand in the
world, be it on the platform preaching

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

the gospel, or in the humblest little home seeking Truth, that you may
make it manifest in a sweeter, stronger, less selfish life, know once
and forever that you are not seeking God, but God is seeking you. Your
longing for greater manifestation is the eternal energy that holds the
worlds in their orbits, outpushing through you to get into fuller
manifestation. You need not worry. You need not be anxious. You need not
strive. Only let it. Learn how to let it.

6\. After all our beating about the bush, seeking here and there for our
heart's desire, we must come right to Him who is the fulfillment of
every desire; who waits to manifest more of Himself to us and through
us. If you wanted my love or anything that I am (not that I have), you
would not go to Tom Jones or to Mary Smith to get it. Either of those
persons might tell you that I could and would give myself, but you would
have to come directly to me, and receive of me that which only I am,
because I am it.

7\. In some way, after all our seeking for the light and Truth, we must
learn to wait, each one for himself, upon God for this inner revelation
of Truth and our oneness with Him.

8\. The light that we want is not some thing that God has to give; it is
God Himself. God does not give us life or love as a thing. God is life
and light and love. More of Himself in our consciousness, then, is what
we all want, no matter what other name we may give it.

9\. My enduement of power must come from "on

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

high," from a higher region within myself than my present conscious
mind; so must yours. It must be a descent of the Holy (whole, entire,
complete) Spirit at the center of your being into your conscious mind.
The illumination we want can never come in any other way; nor can the
power to make good manifest.

10\. We hear a great deal about "sitting in the silence." To many it
does not mean very much, for they have not yet learned how to "wait. .
.in silence for God only" (Ps. 62:5), or to hear any voice except
external ones. Noise belongs to the outside world, not to God. God works
in the stillness, and we can so wait upon the Father of our being as to
be conscious of the still, inner working--conscious of the fulfillment
of our desires. "They that seek Jehovah shall renew their strength" (Is.
40:31).

11\. In one of Edward Everett Hale's stories, he speaks of a little girl
who, amidst her play with the butterflies and birds in a country place,
used to run into a nearby chapel frequently to pray; and after praying
always remained perfectly still a few minutes, "waiting," she said, "to
see if God wanted to say anything" to her. Children are often nearest
the kingdom.

12\. When beginning the practice of sitting in the silence, do not feel
that you must go and sit with some other person. The presence of another
person is apt to distract the mind. Learn first how to commune alone
with the Creator of the universe, who is all-companionship. When you are
able to withdraw from the outside and be alone with Him, then sitting
with

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

others may be profitable to you and to them.

13\. "Sitting in the silence" is not merely a sort of lazy drifting. It
is a passive, but a definite, waiting upon God. When you want to do
this, take a time when you can, for a little while, lay off all care.
Begin your silence by lifting up your heart in prayer to the Father of
your being. Do not be afraid that, if you begin to pray, you will be too
"orthodox." You are not going to supplicate God, who has already given
you things "whatsoever ye desire" (Mk. 11:24 A.V.). You have already
learned that before you call He has sent that which you desire;
otherwise you would not desire it.

14\. You know better than to plead with or to beseech God with an
unbelieving prayer. But spending the first few moments of your silence
in speaking directly to the Father centers your mind on the Eternal.
Many who earnestly try to get still and wait upon God have found that,
the moment they sit down and close their eyes, their thoughts, instead
of being concentrated, are filled with every sort of vain imagination.
The most trivial things, from the fixing of a shoestring to the gossipy
conversation of a week ago, chase one another in rapid succession
through their minds, and at the end of an hour the persons have gained
nothing. This is to them discouraging.

15\. This is but a natural result of trying not to think at all. Nature
abhors a vacuum, and if you make (or try to make) your mind a vacuum,
the thought images of others that fill the atmosphere about you

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

will rush in to fill it, leaving you as far away from the consciousness
of the divine presence as ever. You can prevent this by beginning your
silence with prayer.

16\. It is always easier for the mind to say realizingly, "Thy will is
being done in me now," after having prayed, "Let Thy will be done in
me." It is always easier to say with realization, "God flows through me
as life and peace and power," after having prayed, "Let Thy life flow
through me anew while I wait." Of course prayer does not change God's
attitude toward us, but it is easier for the human mind to take several
successive steps with firmness and assurance than for it to take one
big, bold leap to a point of eminence and hold itself steady there.
While you are thus concentrating your thoughts on God, in definite
conversation with the author of your being, no outside thought images
can possibly rush in to torment or distract you. Your mind, instead of
being open toward the external, is closed to it, and open only to God,
the source of all the good you desire.

17\. Of course there is to be no set form of words used. But sometimes
using words similar to the first few verses of the 103d Psalm, in the
beginning of the silent communion, makes it a matter of face-to-face
speaking: "Thou forgivest all mine iniquities (or mistakes); Thou
healest all my diseases; Thou redeemest my life from destruction, and
crownest me with loving kindness, now, now, while I wait upon Thee."
Sometimes we may enter into the inner chamber with the words of a
familiar hymn; as:

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Thou art the life within me,  
O Christ, Thou King of Kings;  
Thou art Thyself the answer  
To all my questionings.  
</span>

</div>

18\. Repeat the words many times, not anxiously or with strained effort,
not reaching out and up and away to an outside God; but let the petition
be the quiet, earnest uplifting of the heart to a higher something right
within itself, even to "the Father in me" (Jn. 14:11). Let it be made
with the quietness and assurance of a child speaking to his loving
father.

19\. Some persons carry in their faces a strained, white look that comes
from an abnormal "sitting in the silence," as they term it. It is hard
for them to know that God is right here within them, and while in the
silence they fall into the way of reaching away out and up after Him.
Such are earnest men truly feeling after God if haply they may find Him,
when all the time He is near them, even in their very hearts. Do not
reach out thus. This is as though a seed were planted in the earth, and
just because it recognized a vivifying, life-giving principle in the
sun's rays, it did nothing but strain and stretch itself upward and
outward to get more of the sun. You can see at a glance that by so doing
it would get no solid roots in the earth where God intended them to be.
The seed needs to send roots downward while it keeps its face turned
toward the sun, and lets itself be drawn upward by the sun.

20\. Some of us, in our desire to grow, and having

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

recognized the necessity of waiting upon God in the stillness for the
vivifying and renewing of life, make the mistake of climbing up and away
from our bodies. Such abnormal outstretching and upreaching is neither
wise nor profitable. After a little of it, one begins to get cold feet
and congested head. While one is thus reaching out, the body is left
alone, and it becomes correspondingly weak and negative. This is all
wrong. We are not to reach out away from the body even after the Son of
righteousness. We are rather to be still, and let the Son shine on us
right where we are. The sun draws the shoot up as fast as it can bear it
and be strong. We do not need to grow ourselves, only to let the Son
"grow" us.

21\. But we are consciously to let it; not merely to take the attitude
of negatively letting it by not opposing it, but to put ourselves
consciously where the Son can shine on us, and then "be still, and know"
(Ps. 46:10) that while we wait there it is doing the work. While waiting
upon God, we should, as much as possible, relax ourselves both mentally
and physically. To use a very homely but practical illustration, take
much the attitude of the entire being as do the fowls when taking a sun
bath in the sand. Yet there is something more than a lax passivity to be
maintained through it all. There must be a sort of conscious, active
taking of that which God gives freely to us.

22\. Let me see if I can make it plain. We first withdraw ourselves
bodily and mentally from the outside world. We "enter into thine inner
chamber,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and . . . shut thy door" (Mt. 6:6) (the closet of our being, the very
innermost part of ourselves), by turning our thoughts within. Just say,
"Thou abidest within me; Thou art alive there now; Thou has all power;
Thou art now the answer to all I desire; Thou dost now radiate Thyself
from the center of my being to the circumference, and out into the
visible world as the fullness of my desire." Then be still, absolutely
still. Relax every part of your being, and believe that it is being
done. The divine substance does flow in at the center and out into the
visible world every moment you wait; for it is an immutable law that
"every one that asketh receiveth" (Mt. 7:8). And substance will come
forth as the fulfillment of your desire if you expect it to. "According
to your faith be it done unto you" (Mt. 9:29).

23\. If you find your mind wandering, bring it right back by saying
again: "It is being done; Thou art working in me; I am receiving that
which I desire," and so forth. Do not look for signs and wonders, but
just be still and know that the very thing you want is flowing in and
will come forth into manifestation either at once or a little farther
on.

24\. Go even beyond this and speak words of thanksgiving to this
innermost Presence, that it has heard and answered, that it does now
come forth into visibility. There is something about the mental act of
thanksgiving that seems to carry the human mind far beyond the region of
doubt into the clear atmosphere of faith and trust, where "all things
are possible" (Mt. 19:26). Even if at first you are not conscious of
having

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

received anything from God, do not worry or cease from your
thanksgiving. Do not go back of it again to the asking, but continue
giving thanks that while you waited you did receive, and that what you
received is now manifest; and believe me, you will soon rejoice and give
thanks, not rigidly from a sense of duty, but because of the sure
manifest fulfillment of your desire.

25\. Do not let waiting in the silence become a bondage to you. If you
find yourself getting into a strained attitude of mind or "heady," get
up and go about some external work for a time. Or, if you find that your
mind will wander, do not insist on concentrating; for the moment you get
into a rigid mental attitude you shut off all inflow of the Divine into
your consciousness. There must be a sort of relaxed passivity and yet an
active taking it by faith. Shall I call it active passivity?

26\. Of course, as we go in spiritual understanding and desire, we very
soon come to the place where we want more than anything else that the
desires of infinite wisdom and love be fulfilled in us. "My thoughts are
not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith Jehovah. For as
the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my thoughts than your
thoughts" (Is. 55:8).

27\. Our desires are God's desires, but in a limited degree. We soon
throw aside our limitations, our circumscribed desires (as soon, at
least, as we see that more of God means more of good and joy and
happiness), and with all our hearts we cry out in the silent

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

sitting: "Fulfill Thy highest thought in me now!" We make ourselves as
clay in the potter's hands, willing to be molded anew, to be
"transformed into the same image" (2 Cor. 3:18), to be made after the
mind of the indwelling Christ.

28\. We repeat from time to time, while waiting, words something like
these: "Thou art now renewing me according to Thy highest thought for
me; Thou art radiating Thy very self throughout my entire being, making
me like to Thyself--for there is nothing else but Thee. Father, I thank
Thee, I thank Thee." Be still, be still while He works. "Not by might,
nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of Hosts" (Zech. 4:6).

29\. While you thus wait, and let Him, He will work marvelous changes in
you. You will have a strange new consciousness of serenity and quiet, a
feeling that something has been done, that some new power to overcome
has come to you. You will be able to say, "I and the Father are one"
(Jn. 10:30), with a new meaning, a new sense of reality and awe that
will make you feel very still. Oh! how one conscious touch of the
Oversoul makes all life seem different! All the hard things become easy;
the troublesome things no longer have power to worry; the rasping people
and things of the world lose all power to annoy. Why? Because, for a
time, we see as He sees. We do not have to deny evil; we know in that
moment that it is nothing at all. We no longer rigidly affirm the good
from sense of duty, but with delight and spontaneity, because we cannot
help it. It is revealed to us as good. Faith has

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

become reality.

30\. Do not be discouraged if you do not at once get conscious results
in this silent sitting. Every moment that you wait, Spirit is working to
make you a new creature in Christ--a creature possessing consciously His
very own qualities and powers. There may be a working for days before
you see any change; but it will surely come. You will soon get so that
you can go into the silence, into conscious communion with your Lord, at
a moment's notice, at any time, in any place.

31\. There is no conflict or inconsistency between this waiting upon God
to be made perfect, and the way of "speaking the word" out toward the
external to make perfection visible. Waiting upon and consciously
receiving from the Source only make the outspeaking (holding of right
thoughts and words) easy, instead of laborious. Try it and see.

32\. Clear revelation--the word made alive as Truth to the
consciousness--must come to every man who continues to wait upon God.
But remember, there are two conditions imposed. You are to wait upon
God, not simply to run in and out, but to abide, to dwell "in the secret
place of the Most High" (Ps. 91:1).

33\. Of course I do not mean that you are to give all the time to
sitting alone in meditation and silence, but that your mind shall be
continually in an attitude of waiting upon God, not an attitude of
clamoring for things, but of listening for the Father's voice and
expecting a manifestation of the Father to your

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

consciousness.

34\. Jesus, our Master in spiritual knowledge and power, had many hours
of lone communion with the Father, and His greatest works were done
after these. So may we, so must we, commune alone with the Father if we
would manifest the Christ. But Jesus did not spend all His time in
receiving. He poured forth into everyday use, among the children of men
in the ordinary vocations of life, that which He received of the Father.
His knowledge of spiritual things was used constantly to uplift and to
help other persons. We must do likewise; for newness of life and of
revelation flows in the faster as we give out that which we have to help
others. "Go, preach. . .Heal the sick. . .freely ye received, freely
give" (Mt. 10:7,8), He said. Go manifest the Christ within you, which
you have received of the Father. God works in us to will and to do, but
we must work out our own salvation.

35\. The second indispensable condition to finding the secret place and
abiding in it is "my expectation is from him":

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"My soul, wait thou in silence for God only;  
For my expectation is from him."  
--(Ps. 62:5)  
</span>

</div>

"Truly in vain is the help that is looked for from the hills, the tumult
on the mountains: truly in Jehovah our God is the salvation of Israel"
(Jer. 3:23). It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord.

36\. Is your expectation from Him, or is it from books, or teachers, or
friends, or meetings, or societies?

37\. "The King of Israel, even Jehovah is in the midst of thee" (Zeph.
3:15). Think of it; In the midst of you--at the center of your being
this moment while you read these words. Say it, say it, think it, dwell
on it, whoever you are, wherever you are! In the midst of you! Then what
need for all this running around? What need for all this strained
outreaching after Him?

38\. "Jehovah thy God is in the midst of thee (not God in the midst of
another, but in the midst of you, standing right where you are) a mighty
one who will save; he will rejoice over thee with singing" (Zeph. 3:17).
You are His love. It is you that He will rejoice in with singing if you
will turn away from people to Him within you. His singing and joy will
so fill you that your life will be a great thanksgiving.

39\. Your Lord is not my Lord, nor is my Lord your Lord. Your Lord is
the Christ within your own being. My Lord is the Christ within my own
being.

40\. There is one Spirit, one Father of all, in us all,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

but there are different manifestations or individualities. Your Lord is
He who will deliver you out of all your troubles. Your Lord has no other
business but to manifest Himself to you and through you, and so make you
mighty with His own mightiness made visible; whole with His health;
perfect by showing forth the Christ perfection.

41\. Let all your expectation be from your Lord. Let your communion be
with Him. Wait upon the inner abiding Christ often, just as you would
wait upon any visible teacher. When you are sick "wait thou in silence
for God only" (Ps. 62:5) as the Most High, rather than upon healers.
When you lack wisdom in small or large matters, "wait thou in silence
for God only," and see what marvelous wisdom for action will be given
you. When desiring to speak the word that will deliver another from the
bondage of sickness or sin or sorrow, "wait thou in silence for God
only," and exactly the right word will be given you, and power will go
with it, for it will be alive with the power of Spirit.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lesson 11](lit12.md)
