[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130179)  [Next](2130181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Hymn III.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span>1.  Fix thou our hearing, that it be not
loosed and wander!  For it is a-wandering if one enquire, who He is and
what He is like.  For how can we avail, to paint in us the likeness, of
that Being which is like to the mind?  Naught is there in it that is
limited, in all of it He sees and hears; all of <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv-Page_171"></span>it as it were speaks;
all of it is in all senses.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>R., Praise to the One Being, that is to
us unsearchable!

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span>2.  His aspect cannot be discerned, that
it should be portrayed by our understanding:  He hears without ears; He
speaks without mouth; He works without hands, and He sees without eyes. 
Because our soul ceases not nor desists, in presence of Him Who is such;
in His graciousness He put on the fashion of humankind and gathered us
into His likeness.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span>3.  Let us learn in what way that Being
is spiritual and appeared as corporeal; and how it also is tranquil and
appears as wrathful.  These things were for our profit; that Being in
our likeness was made like to us that we may be made like Him.  One
there is that is like Him, the Son Who proceeded from Him, Who is
stamped with His likeness.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span>4.  O Nisibis, hear these things, for,
for thy sake these things were written and spoken.  Both to thyself and
to others, thou hast been in the world a cause of strife and of
disputations.  Mouths over thee, O thou that wast shut up, even over
thee mouths sang; when thou didst triumph and wast enlarged, in thee
mouths were opened, for lamentation and for thanksgiving.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span>5.  The prayer of thy inhabitants,
sufficed for thy deliverance; it was not that they were righteous, but
that they were penitent:  according as they were disgraced, so did they
haste *to submit* to the rod.  In transgressions and in triumphs they
had like part.  They whose crimes were great, so be their fruit great;
they who triumphed in their sackcloth, have triumphed also in their
crowns.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8"></span>6.  The day of thy deliverance, is king
of all days.  The Sabbath overthrew thy walls, it overthrew the
ungrateful; the day of the Resurrection of the Son, raised *again* thy
ruins; the day of Resurrection raised thee according to its name, it
glorified its title.  The Sabbath relaxed its watch; for the making of
the breaches, it took blame to itself.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p9"></span>7.  In Samaria hunger prevailed, but in
thee fulness prevailed.  In Samaria there broke in and came on her,
abundance of a sudden; but in thee there roared and came in on thee a
sea of a sudden.  In her was eaten a child, and it saved her alive; in
thee was eaten the body, living and all life-giving; of a sudden He
delivered them, the Eaten *delivered* the eaters.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p10"></span>8.  We know that the Blessed wills not
the afflictions, that have been in all ages; though He has wrought them,
it is our offences that are the cause of our troubles.  No man can
complain against our Creator; it is for Him to complain against us, who
have sinned and constrained Him, to be wrathful though He wills it not,
and to smite though He desires it not.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p11"></span>9.  The Earth, the vine, and the olive,
are in need of chastisement.  When the olive is bruised, then its fruit
smells sweet; when the vine is pruned, then its grapes are goodly; when
the soil is ploughed its yield is goodly.  When water is confined in
channels, desert places drink of it; brass, silver and gold, when they
are burnished shine.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p12"></span>10.  If *then* it be that man, by
*chastening* makes all things goodly; and if he who despises and rejects
chastening, is hated and all rebels against him; *then* by that which he
chastens, let him learn Him that chastens him; since whoso chastens
*does so* that he may profit *thereby*.  For whoso chastens his
servants, *does so* that he may possess them; the good God chastens
*His* servants that they may possess themselves.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p13"></span>11.  Let thy afflictions be, books to
admonish thee, for the thrice-besieged, suffice to become for thee,
books to meditate therein, every hour on their histories.  Because thou
despisedst the two Testaments, wherein thou mightest read thy life,
therefore He wrote for thee, three hard books wherein thou shouldst read
thy chastisements.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p14"></span>12.  Let us avert by that which has
been, the thing that is yet to be; let us be taught by that which has
come, to escape that which is coming; let us remember that which is
past, to avoid that which is future.  <span id="page_172">p. 172</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iv-Page_172"></span>Because we had forgotten the first
stroke, the second fell on us; because we forgot the second, the third
bore heavy on us.  Who will yet again forget!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn IV](2130181)
