[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130250)  [Next](2130252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>Hymn IV.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.v-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Blessed be He that blots out in
water misdeeds that are without measure!*)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p3"></span>1.  Descend my sealed brethren, put ye on
our Lord,—and be rejoined to His lineage, for He is son of a great
lineage,—as He has said in His Word.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p4"></span>2.  From on high is His Nature, and from
beneath His Vesture.—Each that puts off his vesture, commingled is that
vesture, with His Vesture forever.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p5"></span>3.  Ye too in the water, receive from him
the vesture,—that wastes not or is lost for it is the vesture that
vests—them that are vested in it forever.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p6"></span>4.  But the blessed Priest, is daysman
between two:—the covenant shall be made before Him, He is daysman of his
Lord,—and surety on our part.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p7"></span>5.  The Godhead in the water, lo! has
mingled His leaven;—for the creatures of dust, that leaven raises
up,—and the Godhead joins them.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p8"></span>6.  For it is the leaven of the Lord, that
can glide into the bondman,—and raise him to freedom; it has joined the
bondman to the lineage,—of Him the Lord of all.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p9"></span>7.  For the bondman who has put on Him,
Who makes all free in the waters,—though bondman he be on earth, is son
of the free on high,—for freedom he has put on.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p10"></span>8.  The freeman who has put on, that
Angel in the waters,—is as the fellow of servants, that he may be made
like to the Lord,—Who became bondman unto bondmen.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p11"></span>9.  He Who enriches all came down, and
put on poverty,—that He might divide to the poor, the stores that were
hidden,—out of the treasure-house of the water.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p12"></span>10.  The lowly one again that has put on,
the Giver of all greatness, in the water,—even though he be base in the
sight of fools, yet is great in the sight of the Watchers,—for that he
is clad in greatness.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p13"></span>11.  For like as He Who is great, Who
became lowly in His love,—by the unbelievers was persecuted, and by the
Watchers was worshipped,—was made lowly and makes the lowly great.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p14"></span>12.*  Thus* let him be lowly who is
great, that in him the lowly may be great:—Let <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> <span id="iii.vi.v-Page_272"></span>us be like to Him Who is
greater than all, Who became less than all:—He was made lowly, and makes
all *men* great.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p15"></span>13.  The meek man who has put on Him Who
is great, in the water,—though humble *be* his countenance, very great
is his discernment,—for He Who is exalted above all dwells in him.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p16"></span>14.  For who could be found to despise
the bush of thorn,—the despised and humble, wherein the Majesty in
fire,—made its dwelling within?

<span id="iii.vi.v-p17"></span>15.  Who again could be found, to despise
Moses,—the meek and slow of speech,—when that excelling glory—dwelt upon
his meekness?

<span id="iii.vi.v-p18"></span>16.  They that despised him despised his
Lord; the wicked that despised him—the earth swallowed up in anger; the
Levites who scorned Him,—the fire devoured in fury.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p19"></span>17.  Of Him Christ commanded, “Thou shalt
not call him Raca,” who is baptized and has put Him on; for whoso
despises the despised, despises with him the Mighty.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p20"></span>18.  In Eden and in the world, are
parables of our Lord;—and what tongue can gather, the similitudes of His
mysteries?—for He is figured all of Him in all things.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p21"></span>19.  In the Scriptures He is written of;
on Nature He is impressed;—His crown is figured in kings, in prophets
His truth, His atonement in priests.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p22"></span>20.  In the rod was He of Moses, and in
the hyssops of Aaron,—and in the crown of David:  to the prophets
*pertains* His similitude, to the Apostles His Gospel.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p23"></span>21.  Revelations beheld Thee, proverbs
looked for Thee,—mysteries expected Thee, similitudes saluted Thee,
parables showed types of Thee.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p24"></span>22.  The Covenant of Moses looked forward
to the Gospel:—all things of old time, flew on and alighted thereon, in
the new Covenant.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p25"></span>23.  Lo! the prophets have poured out on
Him, their glorious mysteries;—the priests and kings have poured out
upon Him, their wonderful types:—they all have poured *them* out on all
of Him.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p26"></span>24.  Christ overcame and surpassed, by
His teachings the mysteries,—by His interpretations the parables; as the
sea into its midst—receives all streams.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p27"></span>25.  For Christ is the sea, and He can
receive—the fountains and brooks, the rivers and streams, that flow from
the midst of the Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn V.](2130252)
