[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130117)  [Next](2130119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p2"></span>To Mellitus, Abbot.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Mellitus, Abbot in
France <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p5"></span>Since the departure of our
congregation, <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-Page_85"></span>which is with thee, we have been in a
state of great suspense from having heard nothing of the success of your
journey.  But when Almighty God shall have brought you to our most
reverend brother the bishop Augustine, tell him that I have long been
considering with myself about the case of the Angli; to wit, that the
temples of idols in that nation should not be destroyed, but that the
idols themselves that are in them should be.  Let blessed water be
prepared, and sprinkled in these temples, and altars constructed, and
relics deposited, since, if these same temples are well built, it is
needful that they should be transferred from the worship of idols to the
service of the true God; that, when the people themselves see that these
temples are not destroyed, they may put away error from their heart,
and, knowing and adoring the true God, may have recourse with the more
familiarity to the places they have been accustomed to.  And, since they
are wont to kill many oxen in sacrifice to demons, they should have also
some solemnity of this kind in a changed form, so that on the day of
dedication, or on the anniversaries of the holy martyrs whose relics are
deposited there, they may make for themselves tents of the branches of
trees around these temples that have been changed into churches, and
celebrate the solemnity with religious feasts.  Nor let them any longer
sacrifice animals to the devil, but slay animals to the praise of God
for their own eating, and return thanks to the Giver of all for their
fulness, so that, while some joys are reserved to them outwardly, they
may be able the more easily to incline their minds to inward joys.  For
it is undoubtedly impossible to cut away everything at once from hard
hearts, since one who strives to ascend to the highest place must needs
rise by steps or paces, and not by leaps.  Thus to the people of Israel
in Egypt the Lord did indeed make Himself known; but still He reserved
to them in His own worship the use of the sacrifices which they were
accustomed to offer to the devil, enjoining them to immolate animals in
sacrifice to Himself; to the end that, their hearts being changed, they
should omit some things in the sacrifice and retain others, so that,
though the animals were the same as what they had been accustomed to
offer, nevertheless, as they immolated them to God and not to idols,
they should be no longer the same sacrifices.  This then it is necessary
for thy Love to say to our aforesaid brother, that he, being now in that
country, may consider well how he should arrange all things.  God keep
thee safe, most beloved son.  Given this 15th day of the Kalends of
July, the 19th year of the empire of our most pious lord Mauricius
Tiberius Augustus, the 18th year after the consulship of the same our
lord, Indiction 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[84:185](2130118.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p4"></span> This letter was sent after the
departure of Mellitus with the band of new missionaries from Rome to
Britain (see *Prolegomena*, p. xxvi.), being intended to reach him while
still in France.  In the date given at the end there is evidently an
error with regard to the day of the month.  For several of the letters
sent by Mellitus being dated 10 Kal. Jul. (i.e. June 22), this, which
was subsequent, cannot have been originally dated xv Kal. Jul. (i.e.
June 17).  The Indiction is given correctly.  Gregory had directed King
Ethelbert (XI. 66) to destroy the heathen temples.  He now sees reason
to modify any such orders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Boniface, Guardian (Defensorem), in Corsica.](2130119)
