[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130055)  [Next](2130057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.l"></span>

<span id="ii.v.l-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.l-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.l-p2"></span>To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles).

<span id="ii.v.l-p3"></span>Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.l-p4"></span>Inasmuch as the desire of a pious purpose
and the bent of a laudable devotion ought always to be aided by the
earnest endeavours <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="ii.v.l-Page_31"></span>of priests, anxious care should be taken that
neither remissness, neglect nor presumption disturb whatever has been
ordained for the quiet of monks and of religious conversation.  But, as
it was right that what reason required should be profitably prescribed,
so what has been prescribed ought not to be violated.  Now Childebert of
glorious memory, King of the Franks, inflamed by love of the Catholic
religion, in founding for his own reward a monastery for men within the
walls of the city of Arelate, as we find set down in writing, granted
certain things there for the sustentation of its inmates.  And, lest his
purpose should ever be frustrated, and what had been arranged for the
quiet of the monks be disturbed, he prayed in his letters that whatever
rights he conceded to the said monastery might be confirmed by
apostolical authority; adding this also to his petition, that certain
privileges might at the same time be accorded to the same monastery, as
well in the management of its affairs as in the ordination of its
abbot.  This he did as knowing such reverence to be paid by the faithful
to the Apostolic See that what had been settled by its decree no
molestation of unlawful usurpation would thereafter shake.  Hence, since
the royal purpose as well as the thing desired, urgently demanded effect
to be given to it, letters were sent by our predecessor Vigilius, bishop
of the Roman See, to your predecessor Aurelius, wherein all things that
a desire to embrace that purpose demanded were willingly confirmed by
the support of apostolical authority, inasmuch as a thing of this kind,
when requested, could not be allowed to encounter difficulty.  But, that
your Fraternity may know what was decreed at that time, we have seen to
the written orders of our aforesaid predecessor being added to this
letter.  These having been perused, we exhort thee to keep them all
inviolate with priestly earnestness, as becomes thee, and to allow
nothing undue or unlawful to be imposed on that monastery, or the said
orders to be infringed by any usurpation.  For, though what has once
been sanctioned by the authority of the Apostolic See has no lack of
validity, yet we do, over and above, once more corroborate by our
authority in all respects all things that were ordained by our
predecessor for quiet in this matter.  Let your Fraternity, then, so
acquit yourself in observing them as both to shut out all occasion of
disturbance, and also to persuade others to carry these things out,
while you shew yourself careful and devoted, as becomes you, in
observing the most pious will of the departed one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle CXIV](2130057)
