[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130239)  [Next](2130241) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Hymn XIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.xv-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.xv-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Blessed be he who became beyond
measure low, that he might make us beyond measure great*)

<span id="iii.v.xv-p3"></span>1.  Of the Birth of the Firstborn, let us
tell on His Feast-day. <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) —He gives
on His day, secret comforts.—If the unclean *King* at his feast, in
memory of his day,—gave the gift of wrath, the head in a charger,—how
much more shall the Blessed, give blessings to him—who sings praise at
His Feast!

<span id="iii.v.xv-p5"></span>2.  Let us not count our vigil like vigils
of every day.—His feast, its reward, exceeds an hundredfold.—For this
feast makes war, on sleep by its vigil;—speaking it makes war, on
silence by its voice;—clad with all blessings, it is chief of
feasts,—and of every joy.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p6"></span>3.  To-day the angels, and the
archangels,—descended to sing—a new song on earth.—In this mystery they
descend, and rejoice with the vigil-keepers.—At the time when they gave
praise, blasphemy abounded.—Blessed be the Birth by which, lo! the world
resounds—with anthems of praise.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p7"></span>4.  For this is the night that joined, the
Watchers on high with the vigil-keepers.—The Watcher came to make
watchers in the midst of creation.—Lo! the vigil-keepers are made
comrades with the Watchers:—the singers of praise are made, companions
of the Seraphs.—Blessed be he who becomes, the harp of Thy praise!—and
Thy grace becomes his reward.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p8"></span>5.  The Birth then of the Firstborn, I
will sing *and tell* how—the Godhead in the womb wove itself a
vesture.—He put it on and came forth in birth, in death again put it
off;—once he put it off, twice He put it on.—On the left He wore it,
then took it off thence,—and laid it at the right.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p9"></span>6.  He dwelt in a narrow bosom, the Might
that rules all.—While He was dwelling there, He held the reins of the
whole:—to His Father He made offering, that He might fulfil His
Will:—Heaven was filled by Him, and every creature.—The Sun entered the
womb, and in the height and the depth—his splendour abode.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p10"></span>7.  He dwelt in the wide bosoms, of all
the creatures;—too narrow to hold, the greatness of the Firstborn.—How
then sufficed for it, that bosom of Mary?—Marvellous if it sufficed,
bewilderment if it sufficed not.—Of all bosoms that held Him, one bosom
sufficed for Him,—His, the Supreme Who begat Him.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p11"></span>8.  The bosom that held Him, if it held
Him Wholly,—equals the wondrous bosom, of the Supreme Who begat Him.—But
who dare say the bosom, that is narrow weak and lowly,—is equal to His,
Who is the Supreme Being?—He dwelt there of His mercy, though so great
is His Nature:—it is without bound.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p12"></span>9.  Reconciling Peace, sent to the
nations!—gladdening Brightness, that camest to the sad!—Mighty Leaven in
silence, overcoming all!—Patient One that hast taken, man after man in
Thy net!—Happy he who has welcomed, thy joy in his heart,—and forgot his
groans in Thee!

<span id="iii.v.xv-p13"></span><span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="iii.v.xv-Page_251"></span>10.  They sounded forth peace, the
Watchers to the vigil-keepers.—Among the vigil-keepers the good tidings,
were announced by the Watchers.—Who would sleep on that night, which has
waked all creatures?—For they bear good tidings of peace, where warfare
had been.—Blessed is he who has pleased, the *Divine* Majesty by his
silence,—when speaking moved His wrath!

<span id="iii.v.xv-p14"></span>11.  Watchers mixed with watchers, they
rejoiced that the world came to life.—The Evil One was shamed who was
king, and had woven a crown of lies;—and set up his throne, as God in
the world.—The Babe laid in the manger, cast him from his dominion.—The
Sun rendered worship, doing Him homage by his Magi;—in his worshippers
he worshipped Him.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p15"></span>12.  God saw that mankind, worship things
created:—He put on a created body, that in our custom He might capture
us.—Lo! in this *our* form, He that formed us healed us;—and in this
created shape, our Creator gave us life.—He drew us not by force: 
blessed be He Who came in ours,—and joined us in His!

<span id="iii.v.xv-p16"></span>13.  Who would not marvel, at Mary,
David’s daughter,—bearing an infant, and her virginity kept!—She lays
Him on her breast, and lulls Him with song and He rejoices.—The Angels
raise hymns, the Seraphs cry “Holy,”—the Magi offer, acceptable
gifts,—to the Son Who is born.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p17"></span>14.  O great above measure, immeasurably
made low,—praised beyond praises, debased to humiliation!—the tender
mercies laid on Thee, bowed Thee down to all this;—let Thy grace bow me
down, though evil to give praise!—Happy he who becomes, a fountain of
voices,—all praising Thee in all!

<span id="iii.v.xv-p18"></span>15.  He was servant on earth; He is Lord
in Heaven.—Heir of height and depth, He became a stranger:—Whom men
judged in guile, He is judge in truth:—He Whose face they spat on,
breathes His Spirit on theirs:—He Who held the frail reed, is become the
staff of the world,—which grows old and leans on Him.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p19"></span>16.  He Who rose to wait on His servants,
now sits to be worshipped.—Whom the scribes despised, before Him Seraphs
cry “Holy.”—This praise Adam desired, to steal privily.—The serpent
which made him fall, saw to what height he was raised:—he crushed it
because it deceived him; the feet of Eve trod it down,—which had sent
venom into her ears.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p20"></span>17.  The wife proved barren, and withheld
her fruit;—but the bosom of Mary, holily conceived.—To wonder at fields,
and to admire plants—she needed not who received, and rendered what she
borrowed not.—Nature confessed its defeat; the womb was aware of it,—and
restored what *Nature* gave not.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p21"></span>18.  Mary was defeated, in the judgment
by Elizabeth.—She that was barren pleaded, that the Will which
prevailed—to close the open door, has opened the closed.—He has made
childless the married womb; He has made fruitful the virgin
womb.—Because the People were accurst faithless, He made her that was
married,—held from bearing before the face of the maiden.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p22"></span>19.  He Who could give moisture, to
breasts barren and dead,—caused them to fail in youth, made them to flow
in age;—forced and changed nature, in its season and out of its
season.—The Lord of natures changed, the Virgin’s nature.—Because the
People were barren, He made her that was aged,—a mouth on behalf of the
damsel.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p23"></span>20.  And as He began at birth, He went on
and fulfilled in death.—His Birth received worship; His Death paid the
debt.—As He came to His Birth, the Magi worshipped Him;—again He came to
His Passion, and the thief sought refuge in Him—Between His Birth and
Death, midway He set the world:—in birth and Death he gave it life.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p24"></span>21.  Thousand thousands stand, and ten
thousand thousands haste.—The thousands <span id="page_252">p.
252</span> <span id="iii.v.xv-Page_252"></span>and ten thousands, cannot
search out the One:—for all of them stand, in silence to serve.—He has
no heir of His Throne, save the Son Who is of Him.—In the midst of
silence is the enquiry into Him, when the watchers come to search Him
out,—they attain to silence and are stayed.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p25"></span>22.  The Firstborn entered the womb, and
the pure Virgin was not harmed.—He stirred and came forth in *her*
travail, and the fair Mother was troubled by Him.—Glorious and unseen in
entering, humble and manifest in issuing;—for He was God in entering,
and He was man in issuing.—A marvel and bewilderment to hear:  fire
entered the womb; put on a body and came forth!

<span id="iii.v.xv-p26"></span>23.  Gabriel chief of Angels, called Him
“My Lord”:—he called Him “My Lord,” to teach that He was his Lord, not
his fellow.—Gabriel had with him, Michael as fellow:—the Son is Lord of
the servants; exalted *is* His Nature as His Name.—*No* servant can
search Him out; for the greater the servant,—He is great above His
servant.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p27"></span>24.  When they stand before Thee, the
watchers with songs of praise,—they know not in what part, they shall
discern Thee.—They have sought Thee above in the height; they have seen
Thee below in the depth:—they have searched for Thee in the midst of
heaven; they have seen Thee in the midst of the abyss:—they have
discerned Thee beside Him that is worshipped; they have found Thee in
the midst of the creatures:—they have come down to Thee and sung Glory
to Thee.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p28"></span>25.  Thou art all wonderful, in all parts
where we seek Thee.—Near art Thou,—and far, and who may attain to
Thee?—No seeking avails, that its stretch should reach unto
Thee.—Whereon it stretches to reach Thee, it is checked and stops,—it
falls short of Thy mountain; Faith reaches thither,—and Love with
prayer.

<span id="iii.v.xv-p29"></span>26.  The Magi also sought Him, and in the
manger when they found Him,—instead of scrutiny worship, they offered
Him in silence;—for empty strivings, oblations gave they Him.—Seek thou
too the Firstborn, and if thou find Him in the height,—instead of
troubled questionings, open thy treasures before Him,—and offer Him thy
works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_504"></span>[250:505](2130240.htm#fr_504) <span
id="iii.v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xv-p4"></span> See p. 177 n.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XV.](2130241)
