[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130208)  [Next](2130210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Hymn LIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxiii-p2"></span>1.  Come, let us hear how they
contend for victory:  the guilty ones who never have conquered, nor will
conquer.—2. Death said unto the Evil One, In the end the victory is
mine:  for Death is master of the close, as a conqueror.—3. *Satan*,
This were to be Death indeed, wert thou able:  to bring to death a
living man, by means of lusts.—4. *D*., Lo! I who behold the dead, both
good and bad:  the righteous who despise thee, O Evil One, me they
despise not.—5. *S*., This dying of the body, is sleep for a time: 
think not, O Death, that thou art Death, who art as a shadow.—6. *D*.,
Thee, O Evil One, the just have conquered, yea will conquer:  but these
that have conquered thee, lo! I conquer.—7. *S*., Even this that thou
bringest to death the just, is not of thyself:  because of Adam whom I
conquered, they drink this cup.—8. *D*., Lo! Sheol is full of the men of
Sodom, and the Assyrians:  and the giants who *were* in the flood, who
is like me?—9. *S*., These, O Death, all of them, by me were slain:  I
am he that caused them to sin so that they perished.—10. *D*., Joseph
who conquered thee I conquered, O Satan:  in the chamber he conquered
thee but I conquered, and cast him into the tomb.—11. *S*., Moses who
conquered thee, O Death, by sprinkling of blood:  he conquered thee in
Egypt, but at the rock, who conquered him?—12. *D*., Elijah who feared
thee not, O Satan:  fled before Jezebel’s face, because he feared
me.—13. *S*., Aaron who withstood thee, O Death, with smoke of incense: 
to him I gave earrings of gold:  and he fashioned a calf.—14. *D*., Thou
wentest down to contend with Job, and he conquered thee and came up: 
but I, after he had conquered thee, then conquered him.—15. *S*., David
who by his sackcloth stayed that pestilence:  him on the house-top I
conquered, who had conquered Goliath.—16. *D*., Jehu who destroyed the
house of Baal, the temple of the Evil One:  was unable to destroy Sheol,
the stronghold of my realm.—17. *S*., Solomon who snatched from thy
mouth, a child by *his* judgment:  him in his old age I made a builder
of idol-altars.—18. *D*., Samuel who in *respect of* gold scorned thee,
O Satan:  him I conquered, the conqueror, who conquered bribes.—19.
*S*., <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxxiii-Page_208"></span>Samson who in *respect of* the lion’s
whelp, scorned thee, O Death:  through Delilah, frail vessel, I yoked
him to the mill.—20. *D*., Josiah from his childhood despised thee, Evil
One:  but me not even in his old age, could he withstand.—21. *S*.,
Hezekiah withstood thee, Death, when he overcame the bound *of life*:  I
misled him and he neglected the miracle, and showed his treasures.—22.
*D*., John who conquered thee, Evil One, and absolved and baptized:  I
extinguished that torch, which had disclosed thee.—23. *S*., Simon
overcame thee, when he brought to life that blessed woman:  in a woman
he overcame thee and by a woman I overcame him and made him deny.—24.
*S*., Apostles and prophets with one voice, curse thee, O Death:  “Where
is the victory of Death, and the sting of Sheol?”—25. Thy Lord in Sheol
thou hast shut up, O cursed servant:  God hates thee and also man, hold
then thy peace.—26. *S*., It was the will of Him who gives life to all,
that shut him in Sheol:  it was thou that called Him to this, when thou
madest Adam sin.—27. O comrade of Nabal who in the wilderness reproached
his lord:  abhorred be thy mouth which said to Him, “Fall down and
worship me!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LIV.](2130210)
