[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130153)  [Next](2130155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>Epistle VIII.</span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p2"></span>To Boniface, Deacon.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p3"></span>Gregory to Boniface, Deacon at
Constantinople <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) .

<span id="ii.x.iv-p5"></span>As often as the discord of those who ought
to have been preachers of peace makes us sad, we should study with great
solicitude that cause of contention may be removed, and that those who
differ among themselves may return to concord.  Now what has been done
with respect to the camp of Cassiopus, which is situate in the island of
Corcyra, and how the bishop of Euria is endeavouring to withdraw it from
the jurisdiction of the bishop of Corcyra, and iniquitously to subject
it to his own jurisdiction, it would be very tedious to tell <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) .  But, that your Love may understand
all things fully, we have sent to you the letters of our brother
Alcyson, the bishop of Corcyra, and have caused his man to go to you to
inform you of everything more particularly by word of mouth.  This,
however, we briefly mention, that an order having been surreptitiously
obtained from the late Emperor Mauricius, which order, having been given
in opposition to the laws and sacred canons, had no effect, and the
dispute between the parties remaining undecided, he gave another order
to our late brother Andrew, then Metropolitan of Nicopolis, to the
effect that, as both parties were subject to his jurisdiction, he should
take cognizance of the case and terminate it canonically.  The said
Metropolitan, having taken cognizance of the case and pronounced
sentence, of which we send you a copy, decided the aforesaid camp of
Cassiopus to be under the power and jurisdiction of the bishop of
Corcyra, in whose diocese it always was; and we, approving his sentence,
have thought fit to confirm it by the authority of the Apostolic See. 
And, lest what we decreed should be so strict as to seem to have no
admixture of benignity, we took care so to order the matter for the time
being (as the text of our sentence which we send to thee shews) that
neither should the bishop or clergy of the city of Euria incur the
necessity of residence, nor the privileges of the Church of Corcyra be
in any way disturbed.  But inasmuch as at the very beginning of
proceedings an order was surreptitiously got from the most serene lord
the Emperor, and (contrary to the judgment of the Metropolitan of
Nicopolis, which rested on ecclesiastical propriety and canonical
reason) the aforesaid camp of Cassiopus is said to have been handed over
to the bishop of Euria (a thing we cannot hear without grief or tell
without groans), with still greater wrong to the bishop of Corcyra and
his clergy, in such sort as (sad to say) to take away entirely the
jurisdiction of the Church of Corcyra, and give as it were to the bishop
of Euria the whole principal jurisdiction there; this being so, we have
thought right to deliver our sentence to no one, lest we should seem to
do anything contrary to the order of our most clement lord the Emperor,
or (which God forbid) in contempt of him.  Wherefore let thy Love <span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="ii.x.iv-Page_106"></span>diligently represent the whole matter to
his Piety, and steadily insist that the thing is altogether unlawful,
altogether bad, altogether unjust, and greatly opposed to the sacred
canons.  And so may he not allow a sin of this sort to be introduced in
his times to the prejudice of the Church.  But represent to him what is
contained in the judgment of the aforesaid late metropolitan on the
business, and in what manner his decision had been confirmed by us, and
endeavour so to act that our sentence, with an order from him, may be
sent to those parts, to the end that we may be seen to have paid due
deference to his Serenity, and to have corrected reasonably what had
been presumptuously done amiss.  In this affair pains must by all means
be taken that, if it can be effected, he may contribute also his own
order, enjoining the observance of what has been decided by us.  For if
this is done, all place for subornation hereafter will be shut out. 
Make haste, then, so to exercise thy vigilance, with the help of
Almighty God, for abating these wrongs, that neither may the will of
those who attempt perverse things obtain any advantage now against the
ancient settlement of ecclesiastical usage, nor a nefarious proceeding
gain ground for example afterwards.

<span id="ii.x.iv-p7"></span>Furthermore, that thou mayest know what
wrongs and what oppressions the above-written Alcyson, our brother and
fellow-bishop, asserts that he endures from the agents (*actionariis*)
of the Church of Thessalonica, we have forwarded to thy Love the letter
which he has sent to us.  And do thou accordingly cause the
*responsalis* of the aforesaid Church to come to thee, and take
cognizance of the case in his presence, and write to our brother and
fellow-bishop Eusebius, on such heads as reason may suggest to thee,
that he may prohibit his men from acting unjustly, and warn them not to
oppress inferiors, but rather help them in whatever may be just.  This
also we desire; that thy Love should write to him who may have been
ordained as Metropolitan in the city of Nicopolis, to the end that he
may take cognizance of the case with regard to the injuries which our
aforesaid brother Alcyson complains of having been inflicted on his
Church, and decide what is just, seeing that the matter itself is stated
not to have been decided by his predecessors, but reserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[105:236](2130154.htm#fr_235) <span
id="ii.x.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p4"></span> See XIII. 38, note 1.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[105:237](2130154.htm#fr_236) <span
id="ii.x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iv-p6"></span> Cf. preceding epistle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XII](2130155)
