[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130229)  [Next](2130231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.v.v-p1.1"></span>Hymn IV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v-p2.1"></span>This</span> is the month which brings all
manner of joy; it is the freedom of the bondsmen, the pride of the free,
the crown of the gates, the soothing of the body, that also in its love
put purple upon us as upon kings.

<span id="iii.v.v-p3"></span>This is the month that brings all manner of
victories; it frees the spirit; it subdues the body; it brings forth
life among mortals; it caused, in its love, Godhead, to dwell in
Manhood.

<span id="iii.v.v-p4"></span>In this day the Lord exchanged glory for
shame, as being humble; because Adam changed the truth for
unrighteousness as being a rebel:  the Good One had mercy on him,
justified and set right them that had turned aside.

<span id="iii.v.v-p5"></span>Let every man chase away his weariness,
since that Majesty was not wearied with being in the womb nine months
for us, and in being thirty years in Sodom among the madmen. <span
id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439)

<span id="iii.v.v-p7"></span>Because the Good One saw that the race of
man was poor and humbled, He made feasts as a treasure-house, and opened
them to the slothful, that the feast might stir up the slothful one to
rise and be rich.

<span id="iii.v.v-p8"></span><span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="iii.v.v-Page_235"></span>Lo! the First-born has opened unto us His
feast as a treasure-house.  This one day in the whole year alone opens
that treasure-house:  come, let us make gain, let us grow rich from it,
ere they shut it up.

<span id="iii.v.v-p9"></span>Blessed be the watchful, that have taken by
force <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) from it the spoil of
Life.  It is a great disgrace, when a man sees his neighbor take and
carry out treasure, and himself sits in the treasure-house slumbering,
so as to come forth empty.

<span id="iii.v.v-p11"></span>In this feast, let each one of us crown
the gates of his heart.  The Holy Spirit longs for the gates thereof,
that He may enter in and dwell there, and sanctify it, and He goes round
about to all the gates to see where He may enter.

<span id="iii.v.v-p12"></span>In this feast, the gates are glad before
the gates, <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) and the Holy One
rejoices in the holy temple, and the voice resounds in the mouth of
children, and Christ rejoices in His own feast as a mighty man.

<span id="iii.v.v-p14"></span>At the Birth of the Son the king was
enrolling all men for the tribute-money, that they might be debtors to
Him:  the King came forth to us Who blotted out our bills, <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) and wrote another bill in His own Name
that He might be our debtor.  The sun gave longer light, and
foreshadowed the mystery by the degrees which it had gone up. <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443)   It was twelve days since it had gone
up, and to-day is the thirteenth day:  a type exact of the Son’s
birth <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) and of His Twelve.

<span id="iii.v.v-p18"></span>Moses shut up a lamb in the month Nisan on
the tenth day; a type this of the Son that came into the womb and shut
Himself up therein on the tenth day. <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445)   He came forth from the womb in this
month in which the sun gives longer light.

<span id="iii.v.v-p20"></span>The darkness was overcome, that it might
proclaim that Satan was overcome; and the sun gave longer light, that it
might triumph, because the First-born was victorious.  Along with the
darkness the dark one was overcome, and with the greater light our Light
conquered!

<span id="iii.v.v-p21"></span>Joseph caressed the Son as a Babe; he
ministered to Him as God.  He rejoiced in Him as in the Good One, and he
was awe-struck at Him as the Just One, greatly bewildered.

<span id="iii.v.v-p22"></span>“Who hath given me the Son of the Most
High to be a Son to me?  I was jealous of Thy Mother, and I thought to
put her away, and I knew not that in her womb was hidden a mighty
treasure, that should suddenly enrich my poor estate.  David the king
sprang of my race, and wore the crown:  and I have come to a very low
estate, who instead of a king am a carpenter.  Yet a crown hath come to
me, for in my bosom is the Lord of crowns!”

<span id="iii.v.v-p23"></span>With rival words Mary burned, yea she
lulled Him, \[saying,\] Who hath given me, the barren, that I should
conceive and bring forth this One, that is manifold; a little One, that
is great; for that He is wholly with me, and wholly everywhere?

<span id="iii.v.v-p24"></span>The day that Gabriel came in unto my low
estate, he made me free instead of a handmaid, of a sudden:  for I was
the handmaid of Thy Divine Nature, and am also the Mother of Thy human
Nature, O Lord and Son!

<span id="iii.v.v-p25"></span>Of a sudden the handmaid became the King’s
daughter in Thee, Thou Son of the King.  Lo, the meanest in the house of
David, by reason of Thee, Thou Son of David, lo, a daughter of earth
hath attained unto Heaven by the Heavenly One!

<span id="iii.v.v-p26"></span>How am I astonied that there is laid
before me a Child, older than all things!  <span id="page_236">p.
236</span> <span id="iii.v.v-Page_236"></span>His eye is gazing
unceasingly upon Heaven.  As for the stammering of His mouth, to my
seeming it betokens, that with God its silence speaks.

<span id="iii.v.v-p27"></span>Who ever saw a Child the whole of Whom
beholdeth every place?  His look is like one that orders all creatures
that are above and that are below!  His visage is like that Commander
that commandeth all.

<span id="iii.v.v-p28"></span>How shall I open the fountain of milk to
Thee, O Fountain?  Or how shall I give nourishment to Thee that
nourishest all from Thy Table?  How shall I bring to swaddling clothes
One wrapped round with rays of glory?

<span id="iii.v.v-p29"></span>My mouth knows not how I shall call Thee,
O Thou Child of the Living One:  for to venture to call Thee as the
Child of Joseph, I tremble, since Thou art not his seed:  and I am
fearful of denying the name of him to whom they have betrothed me.

<span id="iii.v.v-p30"></span>While Thou art the Son of One, then should
I be calling Thee the Son of many.  For ten thousand names would not
suffice Thee, since Thou art the Son of God and also the Son of man,
yea, David’s Son and Mary’s Lord.

<span id="iii.v.v-p31"></span>Who hath made the Lord of mouths to be
without a mouth?  For my pure conception of Thee wicked men have
slandered me.  Be, O Thou Holy One, a Speaker for Thy Mother.  Show a
miracle that they may be persuaded, from Whom it is that I conceived
Thee!

<span id="iii.v.v-p32"></span>For Thy sake too I am hated, Thou Lover of
all.  Lo! I am persecuted who have conceived and brought forth One House
of refuge for men.  Adam will rejoice, for Thou art the Key of Paradise.

<span id="iii.v.v-p33"></span>Lo, the sea raged against Thy mother as
against Jonah.  Lo, Herod, that raging wave, sought to drown the Lord of
the seas.  Whither I shall flee Thou shalt teach me, O Lord of Thy
Mother.

<span id="iii.v.v-p34"></span>With Thee I will flee, that I may gain in
Thee Life in every place.  The prison with Thee is no prison, for in
Thee man goes up unto Heaven:  the grave with Thee is no grave, for Thou
art the Resurrection! <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446)

<span id="iii.v.v-p36"></span>A star of light which was not nature,
shone forth suddenly; less than the sun and greater than the sun, less
than it in its visible light, but greater than it in its hidden might,
by reason of its mystery.

<span id="iii.v.v-p37"></span>The Morning Star cast its bright beams
among the darknesses, and led them as blind men, and they came and
received a great light:  they gave offerings and received life, and they
worshipped and returned.

<span id="iii.v.v-p38"></span>In the height and the depth two preachers
were there to the Son:  the bright star shouted above; John also
preached below, two preachers, an earthly and a heavenly.

<span id="iii.v.v-p39"></span>That above showed His Nature to be from
the Majesty, and that below too showed his Nature to be from mankind.  O
great marvel, that His Godhead and His Manhood each was preached by
them.

<span id="iii.v.v-p40"></span>Whoso thought Him earthly, the bright star
convinced him that He was heavenly; and whoso thought Him spiritual,
John convinced him that He was also corporeal.

<span id="iii.v.v-p41"></span>In the Holy temple Simeon carried Him, and
lulled Him, \[saying,\] “Thou art come, O Merciful One, showing mercy on
my old age, making my bones to go into the grave in peace.  In Thee
shall I be raised from the grave into Paradise!”

<span id="iii.v.v-p42"></span>Anna embraced Him, and put her mouth to
His lips, and the Spirit dwelt upon her own lips.  As when Isaiah’s
mouth was silent, the coal <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) which
approached his lips opened his mouth; so Anna burned with the Spirit of
His mouth, yea, she lulled Him, \[saying,\] “Son of the Kingdom, Son of
the lowliness, that hearest and art still, that <span id="page_237">p.
237</span> <span id="iii.v.v-Page_237"></span>seest and art hidden, that
knowest and art unknown, God, Son of Man, glory be unto Thy Name.”

<span id="iii.v.v-p44"></span>The barren also heard, ran, and came with
their provisions:  the Magi came with their treasures, the barren came
with their provisions.  Provisions and riches were suddenly heaped up in
the house of the poor.

<span id="iii.v.v-p45"></span>The barren woman cried out, as at that
which she looked not for, Who hath granted me this sight of thy Babe, O
Blessed One, by whom the heaven and earth are filled!  Blessed be thy
Fruit, which made the barren vine to bear a cluster.

<span id="iii.v.v-p46"></span>Zacharias came and opened his venerable
mouth and cried, “Where is the King, for whose sake I have begotten the
Voice that is to preach before His face?  Hail, Son of the King, to whom
also our Priesthood shall be given up!”

<span id="iii.v.v-p47"></span>John approached with his parents and
worshipped the Son, and He shed glory upon his countenance; and he was
not moved as when in the womb!  Mighty miracle, that here he was
worshipping, there he leaped.

<span id="iii.v.v-p48"></span>Herod also, that base fox, that stalked
about like a lion, as a fox crouched down, and howled, when he heard the
roaring of the Lion, who came to sit in the kingdom according to the
Scriptures.  The fox heard that the Lion was a whelp, and as a suckling;
and he sharpened His teeth, that while He was yet a child the fox might
lie in wait and devour the Lion ere He had grown up, and the breath of
His mouth should destroy him.

<span id="iii.v.v-p49"></span>The whole creation became mouths to Him,
and cried concerning Him.  The Magi cried by their offerings! the barren
cried with their children, the star of light cried in that air, lo! the
Son of the King!

<span id="iii.v.v-p50"></span>The Heavens were opened, the waters were
calmed, the Dove glorified Him, the voice of the Father, louder than
thunder, was instant and said, This is my beloved Son.  The Angels
proclaim Him, the children shout to Him with their Hosannas.

<span id="iii.v.v-p51"></span>These voices above and below proclaim Him
and cry aloud.  The slumber of Sion was not dispersed by the voice of
the thunders, but she was offended, stood up, and slew Him because He
aroused her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_439"></span>[234:440](2130230.htm#fr_439) <span
id="iii.v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p6"></span> [Isa.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010), [Rev.
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)<span id="iii.v.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[235:441](2130230.htm#fr_440) <span
id="iii.v.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p10"></span> [Mat. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="iii.v.v-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[235:442](2130230.htm#fr_441) <span
id="iii.v.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p13"></span> *I. e*., the gates of the heart, before
the gates of the Church.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[235:443](2130230.htm#fr_442) <span
id="iii.v.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p15"></span> [Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="iii.v.v-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[235:444](2130230.htm#fr_443) <span
id="iii.v.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p16"></span> The increase of light at the time of the
Nativity is meant.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[235:445](2130230.htm#fr_444) <span
id="iii.v.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p17"></span> [Exod. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)<span id="iii.v.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[235:446](2130230.htm#fr_445) <span
id="iii.v.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p19"></span> Of Nisan.  So St. E. writes on [Exod.
xii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)<span
id="iii.v.v-p19.1"></span>.  “The Lamb is a type of our Lord, who on the
tenth of Nisan entered into the womb; for from the tenth day of the
seventh month when Zachary received the message of John’s birth, even to
the tenth day of the first month when Mary received the message from the
Angel, are six months.”

<span id="fn_446"></span>[236:447](2130230.htm#fr_446) <span
id="iii.v.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p35"></span> [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span id="iii.v.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[236:448](2130230.htm#fr_447) <span
id="iii.v.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p43"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.v-p43.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn V.](2130231)
