[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130114)  [Next](2130116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXVII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p2"></span>To Quiricus, Bishop, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p3"></span>Gregory to Quiricus, Bishop, and the
other catholic bishops in Hiberia <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p5"></span>Since to charity nothing is afar off,
let those who are divided in place be joined by letter.  The bearer of
these presents, coming to the Church of the blessed Peter, Prince of the
apostles, asserted that he had received letters for us from your
Fraternity, and had lost them, with other things also, in the city of
Jerusalem.  In them, as he says, you were desirous of enquiring with
regard to priests and people who have been bewildered in the error of
Nestorian heresy, when they return to the Catholic Church which is the
mother of all the elect, whether they should be baptized, or joined to
the bowels of the same mother <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-Page_83"></span>Church by confession only of the one
true faith.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p6"></span>And indeed we have learnt from the
ancient institution of the Fathers that whosoever among heretics are
baptized in the name of the Trinity, when they return to holy Church,
may be recalled to the bosom of mother Church either by unction of
chrism, or by imposition of hands, or by profession of the faith only. 
Hence the West reconciles Arians to the holy Catholic Church by
imposition of hands, but the East by the unction of holy chrism.  But
Monophysites and others are received by a true confession only, because
holy baptism, which they have received among heretics, then acquires in
them the power of cleansing, when either the former receive the Holy
Spirit by imposition of hands, or the latter are united to the bowels of
the holy and universal Church by reason of their confession of the true
faith.  Those heretics, however, who are not baptized in the name of the
Trinity, such as the *Bonosiaci* and the *Cataphrygæ*, because the
former do not believe in Christ the Lord, and the latter with a perverse
understanding believe a certain bad man, Montanus, to be the Holy
Spirit, like unto whom are many others;—these, when they come to holy
Church, are baptized, because what they received while in their error,
not being in the name of the Holy Trinity, was not baptism.  Nor can
this be called an iteration of baptism, which, as has been said, had not
been given in the name of the Trinity.  But the Nestorians, since they
are baptized in the name of the Holy Trinity—though darkened by the
error of their heresy in that, after the manner of Jewish unbelief, they
believe not the Incarnation of the Only-begotten—when they come to the
Holy Catholic Church, are to be taught, by firm holding and profession
of the true faith, to believe in one and the same Son of God and man,
our Lord God Jesus Christ, the same existing in Divinity before the
ages, and the same made man in the end of the ages, because *The Word
was made flesh and dwelt among us* ([Joh. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p7"></span>But we say that the Word was made
flesh not by losing what He was, but by taking what He was not.  For in
the mystery of His Incarnation the Only-begotten of the Father increased
what was ours, but diminished not what was His.  Therefore the Word and
the flesh is one Person, as He says Himself, *No man hath ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is
in heaven* ([Joh. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>).  He Who is the Son of God in heaven
was the Son of man who spoke on earth.  Hence John says, *We know that
the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding* ([1 Joh. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p7.2"></span>).  And as to what understanding He has
given us, he straightway added, *That we may know the true God.*  Whom
in this place does he mean as the true God but the Father Almighty? 
But, as to what he conceives also of the Almighty Son, he added, And
that we may be in his true Son Jesus Christ.  Lo, he says that the
Father is the true God, and that Jesus Christ is His true Son.  And what
he conceives this true Son to be he shews more plainly; *This is the
true God, and eternal life*.  If, then, according to the error of
Nestorius the Word were one and the man Jesus Christ were another, he
who is true man would not be the true God and eternal life.  But the
Only-begotten Son, the Word before the Ages, was made man.  He is, then,
the true God and eternal life.  Certainly, when the holy Virgin was
about to conceive Him, and heard the angel speaking to her, she said,
*Behold the hand-maid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word*
([Luke i. 38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#038)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p7.3"></span>).  And, when she had conceived Him, and
went to Elizabeth her kinswoman, at once she heard, *Whence am I worthy
that the mother of my Lord should come to me?*  Lo, the same Virgin is
called both the handmaid and the mother of the Lord.  For she is the
handmaid of the Lord, because the Word before the Ages, the
Only-begotten, is equal to the Father; but the mother, because in her
womb from the Holy Spirit and of her flesh He was made man.  Nor is she
the handmaid of one and the mother of another, because, when the
Only-begotten of God, existing before the ages, of her womb was made
man, by an inscrutable miracle she became both the handmaid of man by
reason of the divinity and the mother of the Word by reason of the
flesh.  It was not that the flesh was first conceived in the womb of the
Virgin, and the divinity afterwards came into the flesh; but that as
soon as the Word came into the womb, immediately the Word, retaining the
excellence of His own nature, was made flesh.  And the Only-begotten Son
of God, through the womb of the Virgin, was born a perfect man, that is,
in verity of flesh and of rational soul.  Whence also He is called
Anointed above his fellows, as the Psalmist says, *God, thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows* ([Psa.
45.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p7.4"></span>) <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)
.  For He is anointed with oil, that is to say with the gift of the Holy
Spirit.  But He was anointed above His fellows, because all we men first
exist as sinners, and afterwards are sanctified through the unction of
the Holy Spirit.  But He Who, existing as God before the ages, was
conceived as man through the <span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-Page_84"></span>Holy Spirit in the Virgin’s womb at
the end of the ages, was there anointed by the same Spirit, even where
He was conceived.  Nor was He first conceived and afterwards anointed;
but to be conceived by the Holy Spirit of the flesh of the Virgin was
itself to be anointed by the Holy Spirit.  This truth, then, concerning
His nativity let all who are brought back from the perverse error of
Nestorius confess before the holy congregation of your Fraternity,
anathematising the same Nestorius with all his followers, and all other
heresies.  The venerable synods also which the universal Church receives
let them promise to receive and venerate; and let your Holiness without
any hesitation receive them in your assembly, allowing them to retain
their own orders, in order that, while you both carefully sift the
secrets of their hearts, and teach them through true knowledge the right
things they ought to hold, and in gentleness make no difficulty or
contradiction with them with respect to their own orders, you may snatch
them from the mouth of the ancient foe; and that the retribution of
eternal glory with Almighty God may increase to you the more as you
gather together many who may glory with you in the Lord without end. 
Now may the Holy Trinity keep you in its protection while you pray for
us, and grant you in its love still more manifold gifts.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p9"></span>\[In *Colbert.* and *Collect. Paul*,
“Given on the tenth day of the Kalends of Jul. Indict. 4.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[82:183](2130115.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p4"></span> Or *Iberia*, corrected from
*Hibernia* by the Benedictine Editors, with the support of some few
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>mss.</span>  That
the letter was addressed to the bishops of Hibernia (i.e. Ireland) is
highly improbable.  Not only is it unlikely that the Eastern heresy of
Nestorianism would have infected Ireland, but the fact also, mentioned
in the beginning of the letter, that the messenger from the bishops
addressed had passed through Jerusalem on his way to Rome evidently
points to some Eastern locality.  For similar reasons it cannot well be
supposed that *Iberia* here denotes Spain.  It may have been the
territory so-called in the neighbourhood of Armenia, between Cholchis on
the West, and Albania on the East, now *Gurgistan*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[83:184](2130115.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiii-p8"></span> xlv. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate (Arles).](2130116)
