[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130108)  [Next](2130110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXI.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii-p2"></span>*To Clotaire, King of the
Franks* <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii-p4"></span>Gregory to Clotaire, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii-p5"></span>Among so many cares and anxieties
which you sustain for the government of the peoples under your sway, it
is to your exceeding praise and great reward that you are helpers of
those who labour in the cause of God.  And, since you have shewn
yourselves by the good things you have already done to be such that we
may presume still better things of you, we are moved most gladly to
request of you what will be to your own reward.  Now certain monks, who
had proceeded with our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine
to the nation of the Angli, have returned and told us with what great
charity your Excellence refreshed this our brother when he was present
with you, and with what supports you aided him on his departure.  But,
since the works of those who do not recede from the good they have begun
are acceptable to our God, we beg of you, greeting you with fatherly
affection, to hold as peculiarly commended to you the monks, bearers of
these presents, whom we have sent to our aforesaid brother together with
our most beloved sons, the presbyter Laurentius and the abbot Mellitus. 
And whatever kindness you before shewed to him bestow ye on them also to
the richer increase of your praise, to the end that, when through your
provision they shall have accomplished without delay the journey they
have begun, Almighty God may be the recompenser of your good deeds, and
both your guardian in prosperity and your helper in adversity.

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii-p6"></span>Furthermore, it has come to our ears
that in your parts sacred orders are conferred with payment of money. 
And we are exceedingly distressed if the gifts of God are not attained
by merit, but pounced upon by bribes.  And, because this simoniacal
heresy, which was the first to arise in the Church, was condemned by the
authority of the apostles, we beg of you for your own reward to cause a
synod to be assembled; to the end that, having been put down and
eradicated by the definition of all the priests, it may in future find
no power in your parts to endanger souls, nor be allowed henceforth to
arise under any pretext whatever, that so our Almighty God may exalt you
against your adversaries in proportion as He sees that you have zeal in
fulfilling His commands, and as you take thought for the salvation of
souls which had been in danger of perishing by the sword of this
atrocity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[73:172](2130109.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.vii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxvii-p3"></span> Clotaire II., at this time king of
Neustria, his capital being Soissons.  There is no letter to him among
those which had been carried by Augustine.  But it appears from this
epistle that the missionaries had passed through his dominions and had
been well received.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.](2130110)
