[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130228)  [Next](2130230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>Hymn III.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv-p2.1"></span>Blessed</span> be that first day of thine,
Lord, wherewith this day of Thy Feast is stamped!  Thy day is like Thee,
in that it shows mercy unto men, in that it is handed down and comes
with all generations.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p3"></span>This is the day that ends with the aged,
and returns that it may begin with the young! a day that by its love
refreshes itself, that it may refresh by its might us decayed
creatures.  Thy day when it had visited us and passed, and gone away, in
its mercy returned and visited us again:  for it knows that human nature
needs it; in all things like unto Thee as seeking us.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p4"></span>The world is in want of its fountain; and
for it, Lord, as for Thee, all therein are athirst.  This is the day
that rules over the seasons! the dominion of Thy day is like Thine,
which stretches over generations that have come, and are to come!  Thy
day is like unto Thee, because when it is one, it buds and multiplies
itself, that it may be like Thee!

<span id="iii.v.iv-p5"></span>In this Thy day, Lord, which is near unto
us, we see Thy Birth that is far off!  Like to Thee be Thy day to us,
Lord; let it be a mediator and a warranter of peace.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p6"></span>Thy day reconciled Heaven and earth,
because therein the Highest came down to the lowest.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p7"></span>Thy day was able to reconcile the Just
One, who was wroth at our sins; Thy day forgave thousands of sins, for
in it bowels of mercy shone forth upon the guilty!

<span id="iii.v.iv-p8"></span>Great, Lord, is Thy day; let it not be
small upon us, let it show mercy according as it used to do, upon us
transgressors!

<span id="iii.v.iv-p9"></span>And if every day, Lord, Thy forgiveness
wells forth, how exceeding great should it be upon this day!  All the
days from the Treasure of Thy bright day gain blessings.  All the feasts
from the stores of this feast have their fairness and their ornaments. 
Thy bowels of mercy upon Thy day make Thou to abound unto us, O Lord! 
Make us to distinguish Thy day from all days! for great is the
treasure-house of the day of Thy Birth; let it be the ransomer of
debtors!  Great is this day above all days, for in <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span id="iii.v.iv-Page_230"></span>it came
forth mercy to sinners.  A store of medicines is this Thy great day,
because on it shone forth the Medicine of Life to the wounded!  A
treasure of helpful graces is this day, for that on it Light gleamed
forth upon our blindness!  Yea, it also brought a sheaf unto us; and it
came, that from it might flow plenty upon our hunger.  This day is that
forerunning Cluster, in which the cup of salvation was concealed!  This
day is the first-born feast, which, being born the first, overcomes all
feasts.  In the winter which strips the fruit of the branches off from
the barren vine, Fruit sprang up <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399)
unto us; in the cold that bares all the trees, a shoot was green for us
of the house of Jesse.  In December <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) when the seed is hidden in the earth,
there sprouted forth from the Womb the Ear of Life.  In March <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) when the seed was sprouting in the
air, a Sheaf <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) sowed itself in the
earth.  The harvest thereof, Death devoured it in Hell; which the
Medicine of life that is hidden therein did yet burst open!  In March
when the lambs bleat in the wilderness, into the Womb the Paschal Lamb
entered!  Out of the stream whence the fishers came up, <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) He was baptized and came up Who
incloses all things in his net; out of the stream the fish whereof Simon
took, out of it the Fisher of men came up, and took him.  With the Cross
which catches all robbers, He caught up unto life that robber! <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404)   The Living by His death emptied
Hell, He unloosed it and let fly away from it entire multitudes!  The
publicans and harlots, the impure snares, the snares of the deceitful
fowler the Holy One seized!  The sinful woman, who was a snare for men,
He made a mirror for penitent women!  The fig that cast its fruit, that
refused fruit, <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) offered Zacchæus
as fruit; the fruit of its own nature it gave not, but it yielded one
reasonable fruit!  The Lord spread His thirst over the well, and caught
her that was thirsty with the water that He asked of her.  He caught one
soul at the well, and again caught with her the whole city: <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406)   twelve fishers the Holy One caught,
and again caught with them the whole world.  As for Iscariot, that
escaped from His nets, the strangling halter fell upon his neck!  His
all-quickening net catches the living, <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) and he that escapes from it escapes
from the living.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p19"></span>And who is able, Lord, to tell me up the
several succours that are hid in Thee?  How shall the parched mouth be
able to drink from the Fountain of the Godhead!  Answer today the voice
of our petition; let our prayer which is in words take effect in deeds.
 Heal us, O my Master; every time that we see Thy Feast, may it cause
rumours that we have heard to pass away.  Our mind wanders amid these
voices.  O Voice of the Father, still \[other\] voices; the world is
noisy, in Thee let it gain itself quiet; for by Thee the sea was stilled
from its storms.  The devils rejoiced when they heard the voice of
blasphemy:  let the Watchers rejoice in us as they are wont. <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408)   From amongst Thy fold there is the
voice of sorrowfulness; O Thou that makest all rejoice, <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) let Thy flock rejoice! as for our
murmur, O my Master, in it reject us not:  our mouth murmurs since it is
sinful.  Let Thy day, O Lord, give us all manner of joy, with the
flowers <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) of peace, let us keep
Thy passover.  In the day of Thy Ascension we are lifted up: <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411)   with the new Bread shall be the
memorial thereof.  O Lord, increase our peace, that we may keep three
feasts of the Godhead.  Great is Thy day, Lord, let us not be despised. 
All men honour the day of Thy birth.  Thou righteous One, keep Thou the
glory of Thy birth; for even Herod honoured the day of His birth!  The
dances of the impure one pleased the tyrant; to Thee, Lord, let the
voice of chaste women be sweet!  Thee, Lord, let the voice of chaste
women please, whose bodies Thou guardest holily.  The day of Herod <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span id="iii.v.iv-Page_231"></span>was like
him:  Thy day too is like Thee!  The day of the troubled one was
troubled with sin; and fair as Thou art is Thy fair day!  The feast of
the tyrant killed the preacher; in Thy feast every man preaches glory. 
On the day of the murderer, the Voice <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) was put to silence; but on Thy day are
the voices of the feast.  The foul one in his feast put out the Light,
that darkness might cover the adulterers.  The season of the Holy One
trims lamps, that darkness may flee with the hidden things thereof.  The
day of that fox <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) stank like
himself; but holy is the feast of the True Lamb. <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414)   The day of the transgressor
passed <span id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) away like himself; Thy
day like Thyself abideth for ever.  The day of the tyrant raged like
himself, because with his chain it put to silence the righteous Voice. 
The feast of the Meek One is tranquil like Himself, because His sun
shines upon His persecutors.  The tyrant was conscious that He was not a
king, therefore to the King of kings he gave place.  The whole day,
Lord, suffices me not to balance Thy praise with his blame.  May Thy
Gracious day cause my sin to pass away, seeing that it is with the day
of the impure one, that I have weighed Thy day!  For great is Thy day
beyond comparison! nor can it be compared with our days.  The day of man
is as of the earthy:  the day of God is as of God!  Thy day, Lord, is
greater than those of the prophets, <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) and I have taken and set it beside
that of the murderer!  Thou knowest, O Lord, as knowing all things, how
to hear the comparison that my tongue hath made.  Let Thy day grant our
requests for life, since his day granted the request for death.  The
needy king swore on his feast that half his kingdom should be the reward
of the dance!  Let Thy feast then, O Thou that enrichest all, shed down
in mercy a crumb of fine wheat flour!  From the dry land gushed the
Fountain, which sufficed to satisfy the thirst of the Gentiles!  From
the Virgin’s womb as from a strong rock sprouted up the seed, whence was
much fruit!  Barns without number did Joseph fill; <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) and they were emptied and failed in
the years of the famine.  One true Sheaf gave bread; the bread of
Heaven, whereof there is no stint.  The bread which the First-born brake
in the wilderness, <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) failed and
passed away though very good.  He returned again and broke the New
Bread <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) which ages and generations
shall not waste away!  The seven loaves also that He brake failed, <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) and the five loaves too that He
multiplied were consumed; <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) the
Bread that He brake exceeded the world’s needs, for the more it was
divided, the more it multiplied exceedingly.  With much wine also He
filled the waterpots; they drew it out, yet it failed though it was
abundant:  of the Cup that He gave though the draught was small, very
great was its strength, so that there is no stint thereto.  A Cup is
He <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) that contains all strong
wines, and also a Mystery in the midst of which He Himself is!  The one
Bread that He brake has no bound, and the one Cup that He mingled has no
stint! <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423)   The Wheat that was
sown, <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) on the third day came up
and filled the Garner of Life. <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425)  
The spiritual Bread, as the Giver of it, quickens the spiritual
spiritually, and he that receives it carnally, receives it rashly to no
profit.  This Bread of grace let the spirit receive discerningly, as the
medicine of Life.  If the dead sacrifices in the name of devils were
offered, <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426) yea eaten, not without
a mystery; at the holy thing of the offering, how much more does it
behove us that this mystery be circumspectly administered by us.  He
that eateth of the sacrifice in the name of devils, becomes devilish
without all contra<span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="iii.v.iv-Page_232"></span>diction.  He that eateth the Heavenly
Bread, becomes Heavenly without doubt!  Wine teaches us, in that it
makes him that is familiar therewith like itself:  for it hates much him
that is fond of it, and is intoxicating and maddening, and a
mocker <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) to him!  Light teaches
us, in that it makes like unto itself the eye the daughter of the sun: 
the eye by the light saw the nakedness, and ran and chastely hid the
chaste man. <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428)   As for that
nakedness it was wine that made it, which even to the chaste skills not
to show mercy!

<span id="iii.v.iv-p41"></span>With the weapon of the deceiver the
First-born clad Himself, that with the weapon that killed, He might
restore to life again!  With the tree wherewith he slew us, He delivered
us.  With the wine which maddened us, with it we were made chaste!  With
the rib that was drawn out of Adam, the wicked one drew out the heart of
Adam.  There rose from the Rib <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429) a
hidden power, which cut off Satan as Dagon:  for in that Ark a book was
hidden that cried and proclaimed concerning the Conqueror!  There was
then a mystery revealed, in that Dagon was brought low in his own place
of refuge! <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430)   The accomplishment
came after the type, in that the wicked one was brought low in the place
in which he trusted!  Blessed be He Who came and in Him were
accomplished the mysteries of the left hand, and the right hand. <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431)   Fulfilled was the mystery that was
in the Lamb, and fulfilled was the type that was in Dagon.  Blessed is
He Who by the True Lamb redeemed us, and destroyed our destroyer as He
did Dagon!  In December when the nights are long, rose unto us the Day,
of Whom there is no bound!  In winter when all the world is gloomy,
forth came the Fair One Who cheered all in the world!  In winter that
makes the earth barren, virginity learned to bring forth.  In December,
that causes the travails of the earth to cease, in it were the travails
of virginity.  The early lamb no one ever used to see before the
shepherds:  and as for the true Lamb, in the season of His birth, the
tidings of Him too hasted unto the shepherds.  That old wolf saw the
sucking Lamb, and he trembled before Him, though He had concealed
himself; for because the wolf had put on sheep’s clothing, the Shepherd
of all became a Lamb in the flocks, in order that when the greedy one
had been bold against the Meek, the Mighty One might rend that
Eater. <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432)   The Holy One dwelt
bodily in the womb; and He dwelt spiritually in the mind.  Mary that
conceived Him abhorred the marriage bed; let not that soul commit
whoredom in the which He dwelleth.  Because Mary perceived Him, she left
her betrothed:  He dwelleth in chaste virgins, if they perceive
Him. <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433)   The deaf perceive not the
mighty thunder, neither does the heady man the sound of the
commandment.  For the deaf is bewildered in the time of the thunderclap,
the heady man is bewildered also at the voice of instruction; if fearful
thunder terrifies the deaf, then would fearful wrath stir the unclean! 
That the deaf hears not is no blame to him; but whoso tramples \[on the
commandments\] it is headiness.  From time to time there is thunder: 
but the voice of the law thunders every day.  Let us not close our ears
when their openings, as being opened and not closed against it, accuse
us; and the door of hearing is open by nature, that it might reproach us
for our headiness against our will.  The door of the voice and the door
of the mouth our will can open or close.  Let us see what the Good One
has given us; and let us hear the mighty Voice, and let not the doors of
our ears be closed.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p47"></span>Glory to that Voice Which became Body,
and to the Word of the High One Which became Flesh!  Hear Him also, O
ears, and see Him, O eyes, and feel Him, O hands, and eat Him, O mouth! 
Ye members and senses give praise unto Him, that came and quickened the
whole body!  Mary bare the silent Babe, while in Him were hidden all
<span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="iii.v.iv-Page_233"></span>tongues!  Joseph bare Him, and in Him was
hidden a nature more ancient than aught that is old!  The High One
became as a little child, and in Him was hidden a treasure of wisdom
sufficing for all!  Though Most High, yet He sucked the milk of Mary,
and of His goodness all creatures suck!  He is the Breast of Life, and
the Breath of Life; the dead suck from His life and revive.  Without the
breath of the air no man lives, without the Might of the Son no man
subsists.  On His living breath that quickeneth all, depend the spirits
that are above and that are beneath.  When He sucked the milk of Mary,
He was suckling all with Life.  While He was lying on His Mother’s
bosom, in His bosom were all creatures lying.  He was silent as a Babe,
and yet He was making His creatures execute all His commands.  For
without the First-born no man can approach unto the Essence, to which He
is equal.  The thirty years He was in the earth, Who was ordering all
creatures, Who was receiving all the offerings of praise from those
above and those below.  He was wholly in the depths and wholly in the
highest!  He was wholly with all things and wholly with each.  While His
body was forming within the womb, His power was fashioning all members! 
While the Conception of the Son was fashioning in the womb, He Himself
was fashioning babes in the womb. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434)   Yet not as His body was weak in the
womb, was His power weak in the womb!  So too not as His body was feeble
by the Cross, was His might also feeble by the Cross.  For when on the
Cross He quickened the dead, His Body quickened them, yea, rather His
Will; just as when He was dwelling wholly in the womb, His hidden Will
was visiting all!  For see how, when He was wholly hanging upon the
Cross, His Power was yet making all creatures move!  For He darkened the
sun and made the earth quake; He rent the graves and brought forth the
dead!  See how when He was wholly on the Cross, yet again He was wholly
everywhere!  Thus was He entirely in the womb, while He was again wholly
in everything!  While on the Cross He quickened the dead, so while a
Babe He was fashioning babes.  While He was slain, He opened the
graves; <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) while He was in the
womb, He opened wombs.  Come hearken, my brethren, concerning the Son of
the Secret One that was revealed in His Body, while His Power was
concealed!  For the Power of the Son is a free Power; the womb did not
bind it up, as it did the Body!  For while His Power was dwelling in the
womb, He was fashioning infants in the womb!  His Power compassed her,
that compassed Him.  For if He drew in His Power, all things would fall;
His Power upholds all things; while He was within the womb, He left not
His hold of all.  He in His own Person shaped an Image in the womb, and
was shaping in all wombs all countenances.  Whilst He was increasing in
stature among the poor, from an abundant treasury He was nourishing
all! <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436)   While she that anointed
Him was anointing Him, with His dew and His rain He was anointing all! 
The Magi brought myrrh and gold, while in Him was hidden a treasure of
riches.  The myrrh and spices which He had prepared and created, did the
Magi bring Him of His own.  It was by Power from Him that Mary was able
to bear in Her bosom Him that bears up all things!  It was from the
great storehouse of all creatures, Mary gave Him all which she did give
Him! <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437)   She gave Him milk from
Himself that prepared it, she gave Him food from Himself that made it! 
He gave milk unto Mary as God:  again He sucked it from her, as the Son
of Man.  Her hands bare Him in that He had emptied His strength; and her
arm embraced Him, in that He had made Himself small.  The measure of His
Majesty who has measured?  He caused His measures to shrink into a
Raiment.  She wove for Him and clothed Him because He had put off His
glory.  She measured Him and wove for Him, since He had made Himself
little.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p52"></span><span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="iii.v.iv-Page_234"></span>The sea when it bore Him was still and
calmed, and how came the lap of Joseph to bear Him?  The womb of hell
conceived Him and was burst open, and how did the womb of Mary contain
Him?  The stone that was over the grave He broke open by His might, and
how could Mary’s arm contain Him?  Thou camest to a low estate, that
Thou mightest raise all to life!  Glory be unto Thee from all that are
quickened by Thee!  Who is able to speak of the Son of the Hidden One
who came down and clothed Himself with a Body in the womb?  He came
forth and sucked milk as a child, and among little children the Son of
the Lord of all crept about.  They saw Him as a little Child in the
street, while there was dwelling in Him the Love of all.  Visibly
children surrounded Him in the street; secretly Angels surrounded Him in
fear.  Cheerful was He with the little ones as a child; awful was He
with the Angels as a Commander:  He was awful to John for him to loose
His shoe’s latchet:  He was gentle to sinners that kissed His feet!  The
Angels as Angels saw Him; according to the measure of his knowledge each
man beheld Him:  according to the measure of each man’s discernment,
thus he perceived Him that is greater than all.  The Father and Himself
alone are a full measure of knowledge so as know Him as He is!  For
every creature whether above or below obtains each his measure of
knowledge; He the Lord of all gives all to us.  He that enriches all,
requires usury of all.  He gives to all things as wanting nothing, and
yet requires usury of all as if needy.  He gave us herds and flocks as
Creator, and yet asked sacrifices as though in need.  He made the water
wine as Maker:  and yet he drank of it as a poor man.  Of His own He
mingled \[wine\] in the marriage feast, His wine He mingled and gave to
drink when He was a guest.  In His love He multiplied \[the days of\]
the aged Simeon; that he, a mortal, might present Him who quickeneth
all.  By power from Him did Simeon carry Him; he that presented Him, was
by Him presented \[to God\].  He gave imposition of hands to Moses in
the Mount, <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) and received it in
the midst of the river from John.  In the power of His gifts John was
enabled to baptize, though earthy, the heavenly.  By power from Him the
earth supported Him:  it was nigh to being dissolved, and His might
strengthened it.  Martha gave Him to eat:  viands which He had created
she placed before Him.  Of His own all that give have made their vows: 
of His own treasures they placed upon His table.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_399"></span>[230:400](2130229.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p10"></span> [Isa. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)<span id="iii.v.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[230:401](2130229.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p11"></span> (Conum.)

<span id="fn_401"></span>[230:402](2130229.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p12"></span> (Nisan.)

<span id="fn_402"></span>[230:403](2130229.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p13"></span> [Lev. xxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010)<span id="iii.v.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[230:404](2130229.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p14"></span> [Ezek. xlvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#010)<span id="iii.v.iv-p14.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[230:405](2130229.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p15"></span> [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="iii.v.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[230:406](2130229.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p16"></span> St. E. seems to blend here the account
of the withering of the fig-tree and that of Zacchæus climbing into the
*wild fig-tree*, as the Peshitto renders it.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[230:407](2130229.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p17"></span> [John iv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#042)<span id="iii.v.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[230:408](2130229.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p18"></span> [Mat. xiii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)<span id="iii.v.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[230:409](2130229.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p20"></span> [Mat. xviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="iii.v.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[230:410](2130229.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p21"></span> [Luke xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span id="iii.v.iv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[230:411](2130229.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p22"></span> Flowers used at Easter in the Churches
are here alluded to.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[230:412](2130229.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p23"></span> [John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[231:413](2130229.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p24"></span> This was a common name of old for St.
John Baptist, with allusion to St. [John i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023)<span id="iii.v.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[231:414](2130229.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p25"></span> [Luke xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)<span id="iii.v.iv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[231:415](2130229.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p26"></span> It may be well to observe once for all,
that true is often use, as in [John xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span id="iii.v.iv-p26.1"></span>,
for “real,” in opposition to “typical,” as in Scripture, so in the
Fathers.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[231:416](2130229.htm#fr_415) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p27"></span> The same Syriac verb means to *pass*,
and to *transgress*.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[231:417](2130229.htm#fr_416) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p28"></span> It might seem from this that there were
some days kept in their honour in the East.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[231:418](2130229.htm#fr_417) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p29"></span> [Gen. xli.
49](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#049)<span id="iii.v.iv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[231:419](2130229.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p30"></span> [John vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)<span id="iii.v.iv-p30.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[231:420](2130229.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p31"></span> p. 227.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[231:421](2130229.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p32"></span> [Mat. xv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#036)<span id="iii.v.iv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[231:422](2130229.htm#fr_421) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p33"></span> [Mat. xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.iv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[231:423](2130229.htm#fr_422) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p34"></span> [Ps. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.iv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[231:424](2130229.htm#fr_423) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p35"></span> [Prov. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.iv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[231:425](2130229.htm#fr_424) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p36"></span> [John xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)<span id="iii.v.iv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[231:426](2130229.htm#fr_425) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p37"></span> [Mat. xiii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030)<span id="iii.v.iv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[231:427](2130229.htm#fr_426) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p38"></span> [1 Cor. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020)<span id="iii.v.iv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[232:428](2130229.htm#fr_427) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p39"></span> [Prov. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001)<span id="iii.v.iv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[232:429](2130229.htm#fr_428) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p40"></span> [Gen. ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#023)<span id="iii.v.iv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[232:430](2130229.htm#fr_429) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p42"></span> [Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span id="iii.v.iv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[232:431](2130229.htm#fr_430) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p43"></span> [1 Sam. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#004)<span id="iii.v.iv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[232:432](2130229.htm#fr_431) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p44"></span> [Mat. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="iii.v.iv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[232:433](2130229.htm#fr_432) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p45"></span> [Judg. xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#006)<span id="iii.v.iv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[232:434](2130229.htm#fr_433) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p46"></span> [Mat. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="iii.v.iv-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[233:435](2130229.htm#fr_434) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p48"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#016)<span id="iii.v.iv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[233:436](2130229.htm#fr_435) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p49"></span> [Mat. xxvii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)<span id="iii.v.iv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[233:437](2130229.htm#fr_436) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p50"></span> p. 11. n. d.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[233:438](2130229.htm#fr_437) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p51"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022)<span id="iii.v.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[234:439](2130229.htm#fr_438) <span
id="iii.v.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p53"></span> [Exod. xxxiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022)<span id="iii.v.iv-p53.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn IV.](2130230)
