[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130030)  [Next](2130032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLIX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p2"></span>*To Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch* <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) .

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p4"></span>Gregory to Anastasius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p5"></span>I received the letters of thy Fraternity,
rightly holding fast the profession of the faith; and I returned great
thanks to Almighty God, who, when the shepherds of His flock are
changed, still, even after such change, guards the faith which He once
delivered to the holy Fathers.  Now the excellent preacher says, *Other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus* ([1
Cor. iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span
id="ii.v.xxv-p5.1"></span>).  Whosoever, then, with love of God and his
neighbour, holds firmly the faith that is in Christ, he has laid for
himself the same Jesus Christ, the Son of God and man, as a foundation. 
It is to be hoped therefore that, where Christ is the foundation, the
edifice also of good works may follow.  The Truth also in person says,
*He that entereth not by the door into the sheep-fold, but climbeth up
some other way, the same is a thief and a robber; but he that entereth
in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep* ([Joh. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p5.2"></span>). 
And a little after He adds, *I am the door*.  He, then, enters into the
sheep-fold through the door who enters through Christ.  And he enters
through Christ who thinks and preaches what is true concerning the same
Creator and Redeemer of the human race, and holds fast what he preaches;
who takes upon him the topmost place of rule for the office of carrying
a burden, not for the desire of the glory of transitory dignity.  He
also watches wisely over the sheep-fold of which he has taken charge,
lest either perverse men tear the sheep of God by speaking froward
things, <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxv-Page_14"></span>or malignant spirits ravage them by
persuading to vicious delights.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p6"></span>Of a truth we remember how the blessed
Jacob, who had served long for his wives, said, *This twenty years have
I been with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not been barren.  The
rams of thy flock have I not eaten, nor shewn unto thee that which had
been seized by a beast.  I made good every loss; whatever had been lost
by theft, from me didst thou require it.  By day and night I was
consumed by drought and frost; sleep fled from mine eyes* ([Gen. xxxi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#038)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p6.1"></span>). 
If, then, he who feeds the sheep of Laban labours and watches thus, on
what labour, on what watches, should he be intent who feeds the sheep of
God?  But in all this let Him instruct us who for our sake became a man,
who vouchsafed to become what he had made.  May He pour both into my
weakness and into thy charity the spirit of His own love, and in all
carefulness and watchfulness of circumspection open the eye of our
heart.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p7"></span>But for men of a right faith being
advanced to sacred orders thanks are to be paid without cease to the
same Almighty God, and prayer ever made for the life of our most pious
and most Christian lord the Emperor, and for his most tranquil spouse,
and their most gentle offspring, in whose times the mouths of heretics
are silent; since, though their hearts seethe with the madness of
perverse thought, yet in the time of the Catholic Emperor they presume
not to speak out the bad things which they think.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p8"></span>Furthermore, in speaking of your
maintenance of the holy councils, your Fraternity declares that you
maintain the first holy Ephesine synod.  But, seeing that from the
account given in an heretical document which has been sent me from the
royal city, I have found that, according to it, certain Catholic
positions had been censured along with heretical ones, because some
suppose that to have been the first Ephesine synod which was got
together at some time or other by the heretics in the same city, it is
altogether necessary that your Charity should apply to the Churches of
Alexandria and Antioch for the acts of this synod, and find how the
matter really stands.  Or, if you please, we will send you hence what we
have here, preserved from of old in our archives.  For that synod which
was held under pretence of being the first Ephesine asserts that certain
positions submitted to it were approved, which are the declared tenets
of Cœlestius and Pelagius.  And, Cœlestius and Pelagius having been
condemned in that synod, how could those positions be approved, the
authors of which were condemned <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) ?

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p10"></span>Further, since it has come to our ears
that in the Churches of the East no one attains to a sacred order except
by giving of bribes, if your Fraternity finds it to be so, offer your
first oblation to Almighty God by restraining in the Churches subject to
you the error of simoniacal heresy.  For, to pass over other
considerations, what manner of men can they be in sacred orders who are
raised to them not by merit, but by bribes?  May Almighty God guard thy
Love with heavenly grace, and grant to you to carry with you to eternal
joys multiplied fruit and overflowing measure from those who are
committed to your charge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[13:35](2130031.htm#fr_34) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p3"></span> This was the younger Anastasius, who
succeeded the patriarch of the same name to whom previous epistles are
addressed.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[14:36](2130031.htm#fr_35) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p9"></span> Cf. VI. 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LV](2130032)
