[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130098)  [Next](2130100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLVI.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p2"></span>*To Isacius, Bishop of Jerusalem* <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) .

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p4"></span>Gregory to Isacius, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p5"></span>In keeping with the truth of history,
what means the fact that at the time of the flood the human race outside
the ark dies, but within the ark is preserved unto life, but what we see
plainly now, namely that all the unfaithful perish under the wave of
their sin, while the unity of holy Church, like the compactness of the
ark, keeps her faithful ones in faith and in charity?  And this ark in
truth is compacted of incorruptible timber, since it is built of strong
souls, and such as persevere in good.  And, when any single person is
converted from a secular life, timber is, as it were, still cut down
from the mountains.  But when, according to the order of holy Church,
one is assigned to have custody of others, it is as though the ark were
built of timber sawn and put together for preserving the life of men. 
And in truth that ark, when the flood was over, rested on a mountain,
because when the corruption of this life is over, when the billows of
evil works have passed away, holy Church will rest in the heavenly
country, as on a high mountain.  To the building, therefore, of this ark
we rejoice to find, after reading your Fraternity’s epistle, that in the
compactness of a right faith you lend your aid; and we render great
thanks to Almighty God, who, though the pastors of His flock are
changed, keeps the faith which He once delivered to the holy Fathers,
even after them unchangeable.  Now the excellent preacher says, *Other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus* ([1
Cor. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>).  Whosoever, then, with love of God and
his neighbour, holds firmly the faith which is in Christ, he has laid
the same Jesus Christ, Son of God and man, as a foundation for himself
from the Father.  It is to be hoped, then, that, where Christ is the
foundation, the building also of good works may follow.  The Truth
itself also in person says, *He that entereth not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
robber.  But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the
sheep* ([Joh. x. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p5.2"></span>).  And a little afterwards He adds, I am
the door.  He, then, enters into the sheepfold by the door who enters by
Christ.  And he enters by Christ who thinks and preaches what is true
concerning the same Creator and Redeemer of the human race, keeps what
he preaches, and undertakes the topmost place of government with a view
to a burdensome office, not in desire of the glory of transitory
dignity.  He watches also wisely over the charge of the sheepfold which
he has taken in hand, lest either perverse men speaking forwardly tear
<span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xvii-Page_68"></span>the sheep of God, or malignant spirits
waste them by persuading them to vicious delights.

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p6"></span>But in all these things may He instruct
us Who for our sake was made man.  May He Who vouchsafed to become what
He made Himself infuse the spirit of His love both into my infirmity and
thy charity, and open the eye of our heart in all carefulness and
watchful circumspection.

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p7"></span>But that men of a right faith are
advanced to sacred orders, thanks should be given without cease to the
same Almighty God, and prayer should ever be made for the life of our
most pious and Christian lord the Emperor, and for his most tranquil
spouse, and his most gentle offspring, in whose times the mouths of
heretics are silent, since, though their hearts seethe in the madness of
perverse opinion, yet in the time of the orthodox Emperor they presume
not to speak out the wrong opinions which they hold; so that we plainly
see fulfilled what is written, *Gathering the waters of the sea together
as in a bottle* ([Psa. 33.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p7.1"></span> <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159)
).  For the water of the sea is gathered together as in a bottle,
because whatever wrong opinions the bitter science of heretics
entertains at the present day it keeps within the breast, and presumes
not to express them openly.  But thy Fraternity, spiritually taught, has
set forth in all respects the right faith, and has thoroughly declared
the things that should be sought after.  Your faith, therefore, is
ours.  We hold what you say, and say what you hold.

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p9"></span>But, inasmuch as it has come to our
ears that in the Churches of the East no one attains to sacred orders
but by giving of bribes, if your Fraternity finds that this is the case,
you should offer as your first oblation to Almighty God the restraining
of the error of simoniacal heresy in the Churches subject to you.  For,
not to speak of other things, what sort of men can they be when in
sacred orders who are advanced to them not by merit but by bribes?  Now
we know with what animadversion the Prince of the apostles attacked this
heresy, having pronounced the first sentence of condemnation against
Simon, when he said, *Thy money be with thee unto perdition, because
thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money*
([Acts viii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>).  Our Lord God Himself also, the Creator
and Redeemer of the human race, having made a scourge of small cords,
overthrew and cast out of the temple the seats of them that sold doves
([Matth. xxi](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p9.2"></span>.).  For to sell doves in the temple, what
else is it but to give for a price in holy Church that imposition of
hands whereby the Holy Spirit is given?  But the seats of them that sold
doves were overthrown, because the priesthood of such is not accounted
as priesthood.

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p10"></span>Moreover, I have been informed that in
the Church which is called Neas, strifes often arise with your Church in
the city of Jerusalem.  Wherefore your Holiness ought carefully to
consider all things, and to correct some things gently, but bear others
that cannot be corrected with equanimity.  For we see plainly what is
said by holy Church through the voice of the Psalmist, *Sinners have
built upon my back* ([Psa. 130.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p10.1"></span>) <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)
.  For on the back burdens are borne.  Sinners, then, build upon our
back, when we bear with sufferance those whom we cannot correct.  For
the steersman of a ship, when he considers that the wind is against him,
surmounts some billows by steering right over them, but some which he
foresees cannot be surmounted he prudently avoids by turning his course
aside.  So, therefore, let your Holiness mitigate some evils by
repressing them, and others by bearing them, so as in all respects to
conserve the peace of them that dwell together in the holy Church of
Jerusalem.  For it is written, *Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see God* ([Hebr. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p11.1"></span>).  For in quarrels the very light of the
soul, the light of good intent, is blocked.  Whence the Psalmist says,
*Mine eye is troubled because of anger* ([Ps. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008)<span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p11.2"></span>).  And what remains in us of well-doing,
if we lose peace from the heart, without which we cannot see the Lord? 
Do you therefore so act as to gather the gain of your reward even from
those who through strife might have caused it to perish.  May Almighty
God guard your Love with heavenly grace, and grant you to carry with you
from those who are committed to you manifold fruit and measure running
over to eternal joys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[67:159](2130099.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p3"></span> Written in reply to a letter received
from the new patriarch of Jerusalem, announcing, as was usual, his
election, and containing his confession of faith.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[68:160](2130099.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p8"></span> In A.V. xxxiii. 7.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[68:161](2130099.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ii.vii.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xvii-p11"></span> In A.V. cxxix. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anatolius, Deacon at Constantinople.](2130100)
