[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130279)  [Next](2130281) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>The “Demonstrations” of Aphrahat.</span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p2"></span>*<span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p2.1"></span>Demonstration I.</span>*<span
class="c1"><span id="iii.ix.iii-p2.2"></span>—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p2.3"></span>Of</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p2.4"></span>Faith</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p3"></span>1.  I have received thy letter, my
beloved, and when I read it, it greatly gladdened me that thou hast
turned thy thoughts to these investigations.  For this thing that thou
hast asked of me shall be freely granted, <span
id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647) for freely it was received.  And
whosoever has, and desires to withhold from him that seeks, whatsoever
he withholds shall be taken away from him.  Whoever of free grace
receives, of free grace also does it behove him to give.  And so, my
beloved, as to that which thou hast asked of me, so far as my
insignificance has apprehended, I will write to thee.  And also
whatsoever thou hast not sought of me, invoking God, I will explain to
thee.  Hear then, my beloved, and open the inward ears of thy heart unto
me, and the spiritual perceptions of thy mind to that which I say unto
thee.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p5"></span>2.  Faith is compounded of many things,
and by many kinds is it brought to perfection.  For it is like a
building that is built up of many pieces of workmanship and so its
edifice rises to the top.  And know, my beloved, that in the foundations
of the building stones are laid, and so resting upon stones the whole
edifice rises until it is perfected.  Thus also the true Stone, our Lord
<span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="iii.ix.iii-Page_346"></span>Jesus Christ, is the foundation of all
our faith.  And on Him, on \[this\] Stone faith is based.  And resting
on faith all the structure rises until it is completed.  For it is the
foundation that is the beginning of all the building.  For when any one
is brought nigh unto faith, it is laid for him upon the Stone, that is
our Lord Jesus Christ.  And his building cannot be shaken by the waves,
nor can it be injured by the winds.  By the stormy blasts it does not
fall, because its structure is reared upon the rock of the true Stone. 
And in this that I have called Christ the Stone, I have not spoken of my
own thought, but the Prophets beforehand called Him the Stone.  And this
I shall make clear to thee.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p6"></span>3.  And now hear concerning faith that
is based upon the Stone, and concerning the structure that is reared up
upon the Stone.  For first a man believes, and when he believes, he
loves.  When he loves, he hopes.  When he hopes, he is justified.  When
he is justified, he is perfected.  When he is perfected, he is
consummated.  And when his whole structure is raised up, consummated,
and perfected, then he becomes a house and a temple for a dwelling-place
of Christ, as Jeremiah the Prophet said:—*The temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are ye, if ye amend your ways
and your works*. <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648)   And again He
said through the Prophet:—*I will dwell in them and walk in them*. <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649)   And also the Blessed Apostle thus
said:—*Ye are the temple of God and the spirit of Christ dwelleth in
you*. <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650)   And also our Lord again
thus said to His disciples:—*Ye are in Me and I am in you*. <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p11"></span>4.  And when the house has become a
dwelling-place, then the man begins to be anxious as to that which is
required for Him Who dwells in the building.  Just as if a king or an
honourable man, to whom a royal name is given, should lodge in the
house, there would be required for the King all the appurtenances of
royalty and all the service that is needed for the King’s honour.  For
in a house that is void of all good things, the King will not lodge, nor
will he dwell in the midst of it; but all that is choicest in the house
is required for the King and that nothing in it be deficient.  And if
anything be deficient there in the house in which the King lodges, the
keeper of the house is delivered over to death, because he did not make
ready the service for the King.  So also let the man, who becomes a
house, yea a dwelling-place, for Christ, take heed to what is needed for
the service of Christ, Who lodges in him, and with what things he may
please Him.  For first he builds his building on the Stone, which is
Christ.  On Him, on the Stone, is faith based, and on faith is reared up
all the structure.  For the habitation of the house is required pure
fasting, and it is made firm by faith.  There is also needed for it pure
prayer, and through faith is it accepted.  Necessary for it too is love,
and with faith is it compounded.  Furthermore alms are needed, and
through faith are they given.  He demands also meekness, and by faith is
it adorned.  He chooses too virginity, and by faith is it loved.  He
joins with himself holiness, and in faith is it planted.  He cares also
for wisdom, and through faith is it acquired.  He desires also
hospitality, and by faith does it abound.  Requisite for Him also is
simplicity, and with faith is it commingled.  He demands patience also,
and by faith is it perfected.  He has respect also to long-suffering,
and through faith is it acquired.  He loves mourning also, and through
faith is it manifested.  He seeks also for purity, and by faith is it
preserved.  All these things does the faith demand that is based on the
rock of the true Stone, that is Christ.  These works are required for
Christ the King, Who dwells in men that are built up in these works.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p12"></span>5.  And if perchance thou shouldest
say:—If Christ is set for the foundation, how does Christ also dwell in
the building when it is completed?  For both these things did the
blessed Apostle say.  For he said:—*I* <span id="page_347">p. 347</span>
<span id="iii.ix.iii-Page_347"></span>*as a wise architect have laid the
foundation*. <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652)   And there he
defined the foundation and made it clear, for he said as follows:—*No
man can lay other foundation than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ*. <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653)   And that Christ
furthermore dwells in that building is the word that was written
above—that of Jeremiah who called men temples and said of God that He
dwelt in them.  And the Apostle said:—*The Spirit of Christ dwelleth in
you*. <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654)   And our Lord said:—*I
and My Father are one*. <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655)   And
therefore that word is accomplished, that Christ dwells in men, namely,
in those who believe on Him, and He is the foundation on which is reared
up the whole building.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p17"></span>6.  But I must proceed to my former
statement that Christ is called the Stone in the Prophets.  For in
ancient times David said concerning Him:—*The stone which the builders
rejected has become the head of the building*. <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656)   And how did the builders reject this
Stone which is Christ? <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657)   How
else than that they so rejected Him before Pilate and said—*This man
shall not be King over us*. <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658)  
And again in that parable that our Lord spake that a certain nobleman
went to receive kingly power and to return and rule over them; and they
sent after Him envoys saying:—*This man shall not be King over
us*. <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659)   By these things they
rejected the Stone which is Christ.  And how did it become the head of
the building?  How else than that it was set up over the building of the
Gentiles and upon it is reared up all their building.  And who are the
builders?  Who but the priests and Pharisees who did not build a sure
building, but were overthrowing everything that he was building, as is
written in Ezekiel the Prophet:—*He was building a wall of partition,
but they were shaking it, that it might fall*. <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660)   And again it is written:—*I sought
amongst them a man who was closing the fence and standing in the breach
over the face of the land, that I might not destroy it and I did not
find*. <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661)  And furthermore Isaiah
also prophesied beforehand with regard to this stone.  For he
said:—*Thus saith the Lord, Behold I lay in Zion a chosen stone in the
precious corner, the heart of the wall of the foundation*. <span
id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662)   And he said again there:—*Every one
that believeth on it shall not fear*. <span
id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663)   And *whosoever falleth on that stone
shall be broken, and every one on whom it shall fall, it will
crush*. <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664)  For the people of the
house of Israel fell upon Him, and He became their destruction for
ever.  And again *it shall fall on the image and crush it*. <span
id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665)   And the Gentiles believed on it and
do not fear.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p28"></span>7.  And He shows thus with regard to
that stone that it was laid as head of the wall and as foundation.  But
if that stone was laid as the foundation, how did it also become the
head of the wall?  How but that when our Lord came, He laid His faith in
the earth like a foundation, and it rose above all the heavens like the
head of the wall and all the building was finished with the stones, from
the bottom to the top.  And with regard to the faith about which I said
that He laid His faith in the earth, this David proclaimed beforehand
about Christ.  For He said:—*Faith shall spring up from the
earth*. <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666)   And that again, it is
above, he said:—*Righteousness looked down from the heavens.*

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p30"></span>8.  And again Daniel also spoke
concerning this stone which is Christ.  For he said:—*The stone was cut
out from the mountain, not by hands, and it smote the image, and the
whole earth was filled with it*. <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667)
  This he showed beforehand with regard to Christ that the whole earth
shall be filled with Him.  For lo! by the faith of Christ are all the
ends of the earth filled, as David said:—*The sound of the Gospel of
Christ has gone forth into all the earth*. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668)   And again when He sent forth His
apostles He spake thus to them:—*Go forth, make disciples of all nations
and they will believe on Me*. <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669)  
And again the Prophet Zechariah also prophesied about that stone <span
id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span id="iii.ix.iii-Page_348"></span>which
is Christ.  For he said:—*I saw a chief stone of equality and of
love*. <span id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670)   And why did he say
“*chief*”?  Surely because from the beginning <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671) He was with His Father.  And again
that he spoke of love, it was because when He came into the world, He
said thus to His disciples:—*This is My commandment, that ye love one
another*. <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672)   And again He
said:—*I have called you My friends* (lovers). <span
id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673)   And the blessed Apostle said
thus:—*God loved as in the love of His Son.* <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674)   Of a truth *Christ loved us and gave
Himself for us*. <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p40"></span>9.  And definitely did He show
concerning this stone:—*Lo! on this stone will I open seven eyes*. <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676)   And what then are the seven eyes
that were opened on the stone?  Clearly the Spirit of God that abode on
Christ with seven operations, as Isaiah the Prophet said:—*The Spirit of
God shall rest and dwell upon Him,* (a spirit) *of wisdom and
understanding, of counsel and of courage, of knowledge and of the fear
of the Lord*. <span id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677)   These were the
seven eyes that were opened upon the Stone, and *these are the seven
eyes of the Lord which look upon all the earth*. <span
id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p44"></span>10.  And also with reference to Christ
was this (which follows) said.  For he said that He was given as a light
to all the Gentiles as the Prophet Isaiah said:—*I have given Thee as a
light to all the Gentiles, that Thou shouldest be My redemption to the
ends of the earth*. <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679)   And
furthermore David also said;—*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a
light unto my paths*. <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680)   And also
the word and discourse of the Lord is Christ, as is written in the
beginning of the Gospel of our Saviour:—*In the beginning was the
Word*. <span id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681)   And with regard to the
light there again he bore witness:—*The light was shining in the
darkness and the darkness comprehended it not*. <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682)   What then is this:—*The light was
shining in the darkness and the darkness comprehended it not?*  Clearly
Christ, Whose light shone in the midst of the people of the house of
Israel, and the people of the house of Israel did not comprehend the
light of Christ, in that they did not believe on Him, as it is
written:—*He came unto His own, and His own received Him not.* <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) * *And also our Lord Jesus called them
darkness, for He said to His disciples;—*Whatsoever I say unto you in
the darkness, that speak ye in the light*, <span
id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) namely, *let your light shine among
the Gentiles;* <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685) because they
received the light of Christ, Who is the Light of the Gentiles.  And He
said again to His Apostles:—*Ye are the light of the world*. <span
id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686)   And again He said unto them;—*Let
your light shine before men, that they may see your good works and
glorify your Father which is in heaven*. <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687)   And again He showed with regard to
Himself that He is the light, for He said to His disciples:—*Walk while
the light is with you, ere the darkness overtake you*. <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688)   And again He said to them:—*Believe
on the light that ye may be children of light*. <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689)   And again He said:—*I am the light
of the world*. <span id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690)   And again He
said:—*No man lighteth a lamp and putteth it under a bushel or under a
bed, or putteth it in a hidden place, but putteth it upon the lamp-stand
that every one may see the light of the lamp*. <span
id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691)   And the shining lamp is Christ, as
David said;—*Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light to my
paths*. <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p59"></span>11.  And furthermore the Prophet Hosea
also said:—*Light you a lamp and seek ye the Lord*. <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693)   And our Lord Jesus Christ
said:—*What woman is there who has ten drachmos and shall lose one of
them, and will not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek her drachma
that she lost*? <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694)   What then does
this woman signify?  Clearly the congregation of the house of Israel, to
which the ten commandments were given.  They lost the first
commandment—that in which He warned <span id="page_349">p. 349</span>
<span id="iii.ix.iii-Page_349"></span>them saying:—*I am the Lord your
God, Who brought you up from the land of Egypt.* <span
id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695)   And when they had lost this first
commandment, also the nine which are after it they could not keep,
because on the first depend the nine.  For it was an impossibility that
while worshipping Baal, they should keep the nine commandments.  For
they lost the first commandment, like that woman who lost one drachma
from the ten.  So the Prophet cried unto them:—*Light you a lamp and
seek ye the Lord*. <span id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696)   And
furthermore the Prophet Isaiah also said:—*Seek ye the Lord and when ye
shall have found Him, call upon Him; and when He is near let the sinner
abandon his way and the wicked man his thought*. <span
id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697)   For that lamp shone and they did not
by it seek the Lord their God.  And its light shone in the darkness and
the darkness did not comprehend it.  And the lamp was set up on the
lamp-stand and those who were in the house did not see its light.  And
what then means this, that the lamp was set up on the lamp-stand? 
Clearly His being raised up upon the cross.  And by this all the house
was made dark over them.  For when they crucified Him, the light was
darkened from them, and shone amongst the Gentiles, because that from
the time of the sixth hour (of the day) on which they crucified Him even
unto the ninth hour there was darkness in all the land of Israel.  And
the sun set in midday and the land was darkened in the shining daytime,
as is written in Zechariah the Prophet:—*It shall come to pass in that
day, saith the Lord, I will cause the sun to set in midday, and will
make dark the land in the shining daytime*. <span
id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p66"></span>12.  Now I must proceed to my former
subject of faith, that on it are reared up all the good works of the
building.  And again, in what I said with regard to the building, it was
in no strange fashion that I spoke, but the blessed Apostle wrote in the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, saying;—*I as a wise master-builder
have laid the foundation, but every one buildeth on it*. <span
id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699)   One builds silver and gold and
goodly stones; another builds reed and straw and stubble.  In the last
day that building shall be tried by fire; for the gold and silver and
goodly stones shall be preserved in the midst of the fire, because they
are a firm building.  But as for the straw and reed and stubble, the
fire shall have power upon them and they shall <span id="page_350">p.
350</span> <span id="iii.ix.iii-Page_350"></span>be burned.  And what is
the gold and silver and goodly stones by which the building is raised
up?  Clearly the good deeds of faith, which shall be preserved in the
midst of the fire; because Christ dwells in that secure building, and He
is its preserver from the fire.  And let us consider and understand
(this) from the example that God has given us also in the former
dispensation, because the promises of that dispensation will abide sure
for us.  Let us then understand from (the case of) those three righteous
men who were cast into the midst of the fire and were not burned,
namely, Hananiah, Azariah and Misael, over whom the fire had no power,
because they built a secure building and rejected the commandment of
Nebuchadnezzar the king and did not worship the image that he made.  And
as for those who transgressed the commandment of God, the fire at once
prevailed over them and burned them, and they were burned without
mercy.  For the Sodomites were burned like straw and reed and stubble. 
Furthermore, Nadab and Abihu were burned, who transgressed the
commandment of God.  Again, two hundred and fifty men were burned, who
were offering incense.  Again, two princes and a hundred who were with
them were burned, because they approached the mountain on which Elijah
was sitting, who ascended in a chariot of fire to heaven.  The
calumniators also were burned because they dug a pit for righteous men. 
Accordingly, beloved, the righteous shall be tried by the fire, like
gold and silver and goodly stones, and the wicked shall be burned in the
fire like straw and reed and stubble, and the fire shall have power upon
them and they shall be burned; even as the Prophet Isaiah said:—*By fire
shall the Lord judge and by it shall He try all flesh*. <span
id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700)   And again he said:—*Ye shall go out
and see the carcases of the men who offended against Me, whose worm
shall not die, nor shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an
astonishment to all flesh*. <span id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p70"></span>13.  And again the Apostle has
commented for us upon this building and upon this foundation; for he
said thus;—*No man can lay another foundation than that which is laid,
which is Jesus Christ.* <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702)   Again
the Apostle said about faith that it is conjoined with hope and love,
for he said thus:—*These are three which shall abide, faith and hope and
love*. <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703)   And he showed with
regard to faith that first it is laid on a sure foundation. <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p75"></span>14.  For Abel, because of his faith his
offering was accepted.  And Enoch, because he was well-pleasing through
his faith, was removed from death.  Noah, because he believed, was
preserved from the deluge.  Abraham, through his faith, obtained
blessing, and it was accounted to him for righteousness.  Isaac, because
he believed, was loved.  Jacob, because of his faith, was preserved. 
Joseph, because of his faith, was tried in the waters of contention, and
was delivered from his trial, and his Lord established a witness in him,
as David said:—*Witness hath he established in Joseph*. <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705)   Moses also by his faith performed
many wonderful works of power.  By his faith he destroyed the Egyptians
with ten plagues.  Again, by faith he divided the sea, and caused his
people to cross over and sank the Egyptians in the midst of it.  By
faith he cast the wood into the bitter waters and they became sweet.  By
faith he brought down manna and satisfied his people.  By faith he
spread out his hands and conquered Amalek, as is written:—*His hands
continued in faith till the setting of the sun.* <span
id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706)   Also by faith he went up to Mount
Sinai, when he twice fasted for the space of forty days.  Again by faith
he conquered Sihon and Og, the Kings of the Amorites.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p78"></span>15.  This is wonderful, my beloved, and
a great prodigy that Moses did in the Red Sea, when the waters were
divided by faith, and stood up on high like mountains or like mighty
cliffs.  They were checked and stood still at the commandment; they were
closed up as in vessels, and fast bound in the height as in the depth. 
Their fluidity did not overflow the boundary, but rather they changed
the nature of their creation.  Irrational creatures became obedient. 
The billows became rigid and were awaiting the vengeance, when the
people should have passed over.  Wonderful was it how the waves stood
still and expected the commandment and the vengeance.  The foundations
(hidden) from the ages of the world were revealed, and that which from
the beginning had been liquid suddenly became dry.  *The gates lifted up
their heads and the everlasting gates were lifted up.* <span
id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707)   The pillar of fire entered and
illuminated the entire camp.  The people passed over by faith.  And the
judgment of righteousness was wrought upon Pharaoh and upon his host and
upon his chariots.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p80"></span>16.  Thus also Joshua the son of Nun
divided Jordan by his faith, and the children of Israel crossed over as
in the days of Moses.  But know, my beloved, that this passage of the
Jordan was three times laid open by its being divided.  First through
Joshua the Son of Nun, and secondly through Elijah, and then through
Elisha.  For the word of the Book makes known that over against this
passage of Jericho, there Elijah was taken up to heaven; for when Elisha
turned back from following him and divided the Jordan and passed over,
the children of the Prophets of Jericho came out to meet Elisha and
said:—*The spirit of Elijah rests upon Elisha*. <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708)   Furthermore when <span
id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span id="iii.ix.iii-Page_351"></span>the
people crossed over in the days of Joshua the son of Nun (it was there),
for thus it is written:—*The people passed over, over against
Jericho*. <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709)   Also Joshua the son
of Nun by faith cast down the walls of Jericho, and they fell without
difficulty.  Again by faith he destroyed thirty-one kings and made the
children of Israel to inherit the land.  Furthermore by his faith he
spread out his hands towards heaven and stayed the sun in Gibeon and the
moon in the valley of Ajalon. <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710)  
And they were stayed and stood still from their courses.  But enough! 
All the righteous, our fathers, in all that they did were victorious
through faith, as also the blessed Apostle testified with regard to all
of them:—*By faith they prevailed*. <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711)   Again Solomon said:—*Many men are
called merciful, but a faithful man who can find*? <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712)   Also Job thus said:—*My integrity,
shall not pass from me, and in my righteousness will persist.* <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p87"></span>17.  Also our Saviour used thus to say
to every one who drew near to Him to be healed:—*According to thy faith
be unto thee*. <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714)   And when the
blind man approached Him, He said to him:—*Dost thou believe that I am
able to heal thee?*  That blind man said to Him:—*Yea, Lord, I
believe*. <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715)   And his faith opened
his eyes.  And to him whose son was sick, He said:—*Believe and thy son
shall live.*  He said to Him:—*I believe, Lord; help thou my feeble
faith*. <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716)   And by his faith his
son was healed.  And also when the nobleman <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) came near to Him, by his faith was his
boy healed, when he said to our Lord:—*Speak the word and my servant
will be cured*. <span id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718)   And our Lord
was astonished at his faith, and according to his faith it happened to
him.  And also when the chief of the Synagogue requested Him concerning
his daughter, He said thus to him:—*Only firmly believe and thy daughter
shall live*. <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719)   So he believed
and his daughter lived and arose.  And when Lazarus died, our Lord said
to Martha:—*If thou believest, thy brother shall rise.*  Martha saith
unto Him;—*Yea, Lord, I believe*. <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720)   And He raised him after four days. 
And also Simon who was called Cephas because of his faith was called the
firm rock. <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721)   And again when our
Lord gave the Sacrament of Baptism to His apostles, He said thus to
them:—*Whosoever believeth and is baptized shall live, and whosoever
believeth not shall be condemned*. <span
id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722)   Again He said to his Apostles:—*If
ye believe and doubt not, there is nothing ye shall not be able to
do*. <span id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723)   For when our Lord walked
on the billows of the sea, Simon also by his faith walked with Him; but
when in respect of his faith he doubted, and began to sink, our Lord
called him, *thou of little faith*. <span
id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724)   And when the Apostles asked of our
Lord, they begged nothing at His hands but this, saying to
Him:—*Increase our faith*.  He said to them:—*If there were in you
faith, even a mountain would remove from before you*. <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725)   And He said to them:—*Doubt ye not,
lest ye sink down in the midst of the world, even as Simon when he
doubted began to sink in the midst of the sea*. <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726)   And again He said thus;—*This shall
be the sign for those that believe; they shall speak with new tongues
and shall cast out demons, and they shall lay their hands on the sick
and they shall be made whole.* <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727)

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p102"></span>18.  Let us draw near then, my
beloved, to faith, since its powers are so many.  For faith raised up to
the heavens (Enoch), and conquered the Deluge.  It caused the barren to
bring forth.  It delivered from the sword.  It raised up from the pit. 
It enriched the poor.  It released the captives.  It delivered the
persecuted.  It brought down the fire.  It divided the sea.  It cleft
the rock, and gave to the thirsty water to drink.  It satisfied the
hungry.  It raised the dead, and brought them up from Sheol.  It stilled
the billows.  It healed the sick.  It conquered <span id="page_352">p.
352</span> <span id="iii.ix.iii-Page_352"></span>hosts.  It overthrew
walls.  It stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the flame of fire. 
It humiliated the proud, and brought the humble to honour.  All these
mighty works were wrought by faith.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p103"></span>19.  Now thus is faith; when a man
believes in God the Lord of all, Who made the heavens and the earth and
the seas and all that is in them; and He made Adam in His image; and He
gave the Law to Moses; He sent of His Spirit upon the prophets; He sent
moreover His Christ into the world.  Furthermore that a man should
believe in the resurrection of the dead; and should furthermore also
believe in the sacrament of baptism.  This is the faith of the Church of
God.  And (it is necessary) that a man should separate himself from the
observance of hours and Sabbaths and moons and seasons, and divinations
and sorceries and Chaldæan arts and magic, from fornication and from
festive music, from vain doctrines, which are instruments of the Evil
One, from the blandishment of honeyed words, from blasphemy and from
adultery.  And that a man should not bear false witness, and that a man
should not speak with double tongue.  These then are the works of the
faith which is based on the true Stone which is Christ, on Whom the
whole building is reared up.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p104"></span>20.  Furthermore, my beloved, there is
much besides in the Holy Books about faith.  But these few things out of
the much have I written to recall them to thy love that thou mayest know
and make known and believe and also be believed.  And when thou hast
read and learned the works of faith, thou mayest be made like unto that
tilled land upon which the good seed fell, and produced fruit a
hundred-fold and sixty-fold and thirty-fold.  And when thou comest to
thy Lord, He may call thee a good servant and prudent and faithful, who
on account of His faith, that abounded, is to enter into the Kingdom of
his Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_647"></span>[345:648](2130280.htm#fr_647) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p4"></span> S. [Matt x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[346:649](2130280.htm#fr_648) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p7"></span> [Jer.
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[346:650](2130280.htm#fr_649) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p8"></span> [Levit. xxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[346:651](2130280.htm#fr_650) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p9"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p9.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[346:652](2130280.htm#fr_651) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p10"></span> [John xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[347:653](2130280.htm#fr_652) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p13"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[347:654](2130280.htm#fr_653) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p14"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[347:655](2130280.htm#fr_654) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p15"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[347:656](2130280.htm#fr_655) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p16"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[347:657](2130280.htm#fr_656) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p18"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[347:658](2130280.htm#fr_657) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p19"></span> [Luke xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[347:659](2130280.htm#fr_658) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p20"></span> [John xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[347:660](2130280.htm#fr_659) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p21"></span> [Luke
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[347:661](2130280.htm#fr_660) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p22"></span> [Ez. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[347:662](2130280.htm#fr_661) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p23"></span> [Ez. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#030)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[347:663](2130280.htm#fr_662) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p24"></span> [Is. xxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[347:664](2130280.htm#fr_663) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p25"></span> [Is. xxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[347:665](2130280.htm#fr_664) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p26"></span> [Matt. xxi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[347:666](2130280.htm#fr_665) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p27"></span> [Dan. ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[347:667](2130280.htm#fr_666) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p29"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[347:668](2130280.htm#fr_667) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p31"></span> [Dan.
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[347:669](2130280.htm#fr_668) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p32"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[347:670](2130280.htm#fr_669) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p33"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[348:671](2130280.htm#fr_670) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p34"></span> <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p34.1"></span>Zach. iv. 2.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[348:672](2130280.htm#fr_671) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p35"></span> The words for *chief* and for
*beginning* are almost identical in the Syriac.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[348:673](2130280.htm#fr_672) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p36"></span> [John xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[348:674](2130280.htm#fr_673) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p37"></span> [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[348:675](2130280.htm#fr_674) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p38"></span> Cf. [Eph.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004), [Eph.
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[348:676](2130280.htm#fr_675) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p39"></span> Cf. [Eph. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[348:677](2130280.htm#fr_676) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p41"></span> [Zech. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[348:678](2130280.htm#fr_677) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p42"></span> [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[348:679](2130280.htm#fr_678) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p43"></span> [Zech. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[348:680](2130280.htm#fr_679) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p45"></span> [Is. xlix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[348:681](2130280.htm#fr_680) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p46"></span> [Ps. cxix.
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#105)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[348:682](2130280.htm#fr_681) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p47"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[348:683](2130280.htm#fr_682) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p48"></span> [John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[348:684](2130280.htm#fr_683) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p49"></span> [John i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[348:685](2130280.htm#fr_684) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p50"></span> [Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[348:686](2130280.htm#fr_685) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p51"></span> Cf. [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[348:687](2130280.htm#fr_686) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p52"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[348:688](2130280.htm#fr_687) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p53"></span> [Matt. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[348:689](2130280.htm#fr_688) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p54"></span> [John xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[348:690](2130280.htm#fr_689) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p55"></span> [John xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#036)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[348:691](2130280.htm#fr_690) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p56"></span> [John viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[348:692](2130280.htm#fr_691) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p57"></span> [Matt.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015), [Mark
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021), [Luke
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[348:693](2130280.htm#fr_692) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p58"></span> [Ps. cxix.
105](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#105)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[348:694](2130280.htm#fr_693) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p60"></span> [Hos. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[348:695](2130280.htm#fr_694) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p61"></span> [Luke xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[349:696](2130280.htm#fr_695) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p62"></span> [Ex. xx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[349:697](2130280.htm#fr_696) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p63"></span> [Hos. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[349:698](2130280.htm#fr_697) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p64"></span> [Isa.
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[349:699](2130280.htm#fr_698) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p65"></span> [Am. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p65.1"></span>. 
(Cf. the commentary ascribed to Ephrem in loco.)  Cf. [Zech.
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p65.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[349:700](2130280.htm#fr_699) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p67"></span> [1 Cor.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p67.1"></span>, sqq.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[350:701](2130280.htm#fr_700) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p68"></span> [Is. lxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[350:702](2130280.htm#fr_701) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p69"></span> [Is. lxvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[350:703](2130280.htm#fr_702) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p71"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[350:704](2130280.htm#fr_703) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p72"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[350:705](2130280.htm#fr_704) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p73"></span> The allusion is to [Heb.
xi](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p74"></span>This sentence, connecting sections 13
(which relates to [1 Cor. 3:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#000), [1 Cor.
13:0](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p74.1"></span>.) and 14 (which echoes [Hebrews
xi](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p74.2"></span>.), seems to imply (“*he* showed”) that
they are written by the same author,—in other words, to ascribe Hebrews
to St. Paul.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[350:706](2130280.htm#fr_705) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p76"></span> [Ps. lxxxi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[350:707](2130280.htm#fr_706) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p77"></span> [Ex. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p77.1"></span>.
(Pesh.)

<span id="fn_707"></span>[350:708](2130280.htm#fr_707) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p79"></span> [Ps.
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[350:709](2130280.htm#fr_708) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p81"></span> [2 Kings ii.
8-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[351:710](2130280.htm#fr_709) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p82"></span> [Jos. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[351:711](2130280.htm#fr_710) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p83"></span> [Jos. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[351:712](2130280.htm#fr_711) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p84"></span> [Heb. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#033)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[351:713](2130280.htm#fr_712) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p85"></span> [Prov. xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[351:714](2130280.htm#fr_713) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p86"></span> [Job
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[351:715](2130280.htm#fr_714) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p88"></span> e. q. [Matt. ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[351:716](2130280.htm#fr_715) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p89"></span> [Matt. ix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[351:717](2130280.htm#fr_716) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p90"></span> [Mark
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#022),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#026)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[351:718](2130280.htm#fr_717) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p91"></span> Lit. “king’s servant,” [John iv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p91.1"></span>,
which is here confused with [Matt. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p91.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[351:719](2130280.htm#fr_718) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p91.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p92"></span> [Matt.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[351:720](2130280.htm#fr_719) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p93"></span> [Mark v.
23-36](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#023)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[351:721](2130280.htm#fr_720) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p94"></span> [John xi.
23-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#023)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[351:722](2130280.htm#fr_721) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p95"></span> Kipha—rock.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[351:723](2130280.htm#fr_722) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p96"></span> [Mark xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p96.1"></span>.  Note that Aphrahat here cites the
disputed conclusion of St. Mark’s Gospel.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[351:724](2130280.htm#fr_723) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p97"></span> [Matt. xxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#022)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[351:725](2130280.htm#fr_724) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p97.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p98"></span> [Matt. xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#031)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[351:726](2130280.htm#fr_725) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p99"></span> [Luke
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005), [Matt.
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#019), [Matt.
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#021)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[351:727](2130280.htm#fr_726) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p100"></span> (Apocryphal.)

<span id="fn_727"></span>[351:728](2130280.htm#fr_727) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p101"></span> [Mark
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p101.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Demonstration V](2130281)
