[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130255)  [Next](2130257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.x"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.x-p1"></span> <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="iii.vi.x-Page_279"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.x-p1.1"></span>Hymn IX.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.x-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.x-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>., *Blessed is He Who came down,
and sanctified water for the remission of the sins of the children of
Adam!*)

<span id="iii.vi.x-p3"></span>1.  O John, who sawest the Spirit,—that
abode on the head of the Son,—to show how the Head of the Highest—went
down and was baptized—and came up to be Head on earth!—Children of the
Spirit ye have thus become,—and Christ has become for you the Head:—ye
also have become His members.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p4"></span>2.  Consider and see how exalted ye
are;—how instead of the river Jordan—ye have glorious Baptism, wherein
is peace;—spreading her wings to shade your bodies.—In the wilderness
John baptized:—in Her pure flood of Baptism,—purely are ye baptized
therein.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p5"></span>3.  Infants think when they see its
glory,—that by its pomp its might is enhanced.—But it is the same, and
within itself—is not divided.—But the might which never waxes less or
greater—in us is little or again great;—and he in whom is great
understanding,—great in him is Baptism.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p6"></span>4.  A man’s knowledge, if it be
exalted,—exalted also is his degree above his brethren;—and he whose
faith is great,—*so* also is his promise;—and as *is* his wisdom, so
also his crowning.—As is the light, which though *it be* all goodly—and
equal all of it with itself,—*yet* goodlier is one eye than another.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p7"></span>5.  Jesus mingled His might in the
water:—put ye Him on my brethren as discerning *men!*—For there are that
in the water merely—perceive that they are washed.  With our body be our
soul washed!—The manifest water let the body perceive,—and the soul the
secret might;—that both to the manifest and to the secret ye may be made
like!

<span id="iii.vi.x-p8"></span>6.  How beautiful is Baptism—in the eye of
the heart; come, let us gaze on it!—Like as by a seal ye have been
moulded;—receive ye its image,—that nought may be lacking to us of our
image!—For the sheep that are white of heart—gaze on the glory that is
in the water:—in your souls reflect ye it!

<span id="iii.vi.x-p9"></span>7.  Water is by nature as a mirror,—for
one who in it examines *himself*.—Stir up thy soul, thou that
discernest,—and be like unto it!—For it in its midst reflects thy
image;—from it, on it, find an example;—gaze in it on Baptism,—and put
on the beauty that is hidden therein!

<span id="iii.vi.x-p10"></span>8.  What profits it him that hears—a
voice and knows not its significance?—Whoso hears a voice and is
devoid—of the understanding thereof,—his ear is filled but his soul is
empty.—Lo! since the gift is abundant,—with discernment receive ye it.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p11"></span>9.  Baptism that *is* with
understanding—is the conjunction of two lights,—and rich are the
fountains of its rays.—……—And the darkness that is on the mind
departs,—and the soul beholds Him in beauty,—the hidden Christ of
glory,—and grieves when *the glory* fails.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p12"></span>10.  Baptism without understanding—is a
treasure full yet empty;—since he that receives it is poor in it,—for he
understands not—how great are its riches into which he enters and
dwells.—For great is the gift within it,—though the mean man perceives
not—that he is exalted even as it.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p13"></span>11.  Open wide your minds and see, my
brethren,—the secret column in the air, whose base is fixed from the
midst of the water—unto the door of the Highest Place, like the ladder
that Jacob saw.—Lo! by it came down the light unto Baptism,—and *by it*
the soul goes up to Heaven,—that in one love we may be mingled.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p14"></span><span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span
id="iii.vi.x-Page_280"></span>12.  Our Lord when he was baptized by
John—sent forth twelve fountains;—and they issued forth and cleansed by
their streams—the defilement of the peoples.—His worshippers are made
white like His garments,—the garments in Tabor and the body in the
water.—Instead of the garments the peoples are made white,—and have
become for Him a clothing of glory.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p15"></span>13.  From your garments learn, my
brethren,—how your members should be kept.—For if the garment, which
ever so many times—may be made clean,—is duly kept for the sake of its
comeliness,—the body which has *but* one baptism—manifold more exceeding
is *the care of* its keeping,—for manifold are its dangers.

<span id="iii.vi.x-p16"></span>14.  Again the sun in a house that is
strait,—is straitened therein though he be great:—but in a house that is
goodly and large,—when he rises thereon—far and wide in it he spreads
his rays;—and though the sun is one and the same in his nature,—in
*divers* houses he undergoes changes:—Even so our Lord in *divers* men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn X.](2130257)
