[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130063)  [Next](2130065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lviii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXXIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lviii-p2"></span>*To Venantius and Italica* <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) .

<span id="ii.v.lviii-p4"></span>Gregory to the lord Venantius,
Patrician, and Italica his wife.

<span id="ii.v.lviii-p5"></span>I have taken care, with due affection,
to enquire of certain persons who have come from Sicily about your
Excellency’s health.  But they have given me a sad report of the
frequency of your ailments.  Now, when I say this, neither do I find
anything to tell you about myself, except that, for my sins, lo it is
now eleven months since it has been a very rare case with me if I have
been able now and then to rise from my bed.  For I am afflicted by so
great sufferings from gout, and so great from troubles, that my life is
to me most grievous pain.  For every day I faint under my sufferings,
and sigh in expectation of the relief of death.  Indeed among the clergy
and people of this city there has been such an invasion of feverous
sicknesses that hardly any freeman, hardly any slave, remains fit for
any office or ministry.  Moreover, from the neighbouring cities we have
news daily of havocs and of mortality.  Then, how Africa is being wasted
by mortality and sickness I believe that you know more accurately than
we do, insomuch as you are nearer to it.  But of the East those who come
from thence report still more grievous desolations.  In the midst of all
these things, therefore, since you perceive that there is a general
smiting as the end of the world draws near, you ought not to be too much
afflicted for your own troubles.  But, as becomes wise nobles, bring ye
back your whole heart to the care of your souls, and fear the strict
judgment all the more as it is so much nearer at hand.  Devote
yourselves to piety, of which it is written that *It hath promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come* ([1 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.lviii-p5.1"></span>). 
But Almighty God is powerful both to preserve the life of your
Excellency for a long time here, and to bring you after many courses of
years to eternal joys.  I beg my most sweet daughters, the lady Barbara
and the lady Antonina, to be greeted in my name; whom I pray that
heavenly grace may protect, and grant them to be prospered in all
things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[37:86](2130064.htm#fr_85) <span
id="ii.v.lviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lviii-p3"></span> See I. 34, note 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle CXXV](2130065)
