[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130173)  [Next](2130175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>X.—Probable Dates of His Works.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x-p2"></span>Of the compositions contained in this
volume, none yields internal evidence of its date, except the Nisibene
Hymns of the first division.  Hymns XXXV.–XLII. (not included here),
apparently belong to the later (or Edessene) period of Ephraim’s life,
and to the reign of Valens,—*i.e*., they are later than the year 363. 
The 21 Hymns which stand first in our collection may confidently be
assigned to the year of the third siege (350) and the thirteen following
years.  Hymn I. was indubitably composed while the siege was still
urgent; Hymns I. and III. immediately after the deliverance; Hymns
IV.–XII. deal with the fortunes of the city and country in a troubled
time of invasion that succeeded; the rest (XIII.–XXI.) treat of the four
successive Bishops of Nisibis under whom Ephraim lived—Jacob, Babu,
Valgesh, and Abraham.  The last-named is not elsewhere recorded except
by Elias of Nisibis, but the death of Valgesh is known to have occurred
in 361. <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316)   The Hymns therefore
which celebrate the accession of Abraham to the See (XVII.–XXI.) must be
placed in the interval, 361–363, the latter being the year when Ephraim
with all the Christian population of the city was driven out by Sapor. 
Hymns XIII.–XVI., being written while Valgesh was Bishop—for they
compare him with his two predecessors—fall into the interval between the
year of the siege (350) which they speak of as past,—and the year of the
death of Valgesh (361).  Bickell assigns IV.–XII. to the months of
Sapor’s invasion in 359; XIII.-XVI. to 358 and 359; XVII.–XXI. to 363,
in the short space between Julian’s death and the surrender of Nisibis.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x-p4"></span>It is probable that most of his Hymns
that are definitely controversial belong, like most of his controversial
writings, to the years of his later life, at Edessa.  And as we have
seen, the earliest of them that can be confidently dated, is not earlier
than 350.  But it would be hasty to conclude that he had composed no
Hymns before that date, <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.x-Page_152"></span>and that in the Nisibene Hymns of the
siege we have the first fruits of the vine of his vision.  In 350 he
must have been over forty—perhaps over fifty years of age; and it is
highly improbable that a fertility which proved to be so abundant, did
not begin to manifest itself at a much earlier age; or that a literary
offspring of such bulk and importance was all produced in the last five
and twenty years of a long life.  The earlier authorities concerning his
life give no definite information on this head; and the Syriac *Life* is
vague in its statements and untrustworthy in its chronology.  The
account given of Barhebræus, a well-informed but very late writer
(thirteenth century), can hardly be accepted as embodying any genuine
tradition, but has probability in its favor:—“From the time of the
Nicene Council (he writes <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) ),
Ephraim began to write canticles and hymns against the heresies of his
time,”—for few of his hymns are without a polemic spirit, though (as has
been said) those that are purely controversial seem to be of a later
period.  A much later author indeed, Georgius “Bishop of the Arabians”
(writing in 714) warns us that there is no evidence to assign any of
Ephraim’s writings to the twenty years’ interval between the Nicene
Council and the year 345—“especially (he adds) to the years before
337.” <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)   This writer, however, is
here arguing in support of the claim of Aphrahat to be an independent
author, against those who regarded him as a disciple of Ephraim; and he
rests his case on the ground that whereas the *Demonstrations* of
Aphrahat are (as we shall see presently) dated from 337 to 345, no
composition of Ephraim’s can be shown to have been written so early. 
And it must be admitted that the earliest date (as above noted) that can
be fixed with certainty for any of Ephraim’s innumerable productions in
350,—thirteen years later than Aphrahat’s earlier *Demonstrations*. 
Against this is to be set the tradition of Ephraim’s presence at Nicæa,
implying as it does that even in 325 he had made himself a notable
person,—and the probability that one who has left such ample proof of
the copiousness of his literary gift, must have begun to exercise it
before a date at which he would have passed his thirtieth year
(supposing his birth to have been in 306), or even have entered middle
life (if we place it at the beginning of the century).  The two writers
were unquestionably contemporary, and as yet no sufficient data have
been discovered to determine to which of them seniority belongs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[151:317](2130174.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x-p3"></span> *Chron. Edess*., as above; *Chronol.
of Elias Nisib.*

<span id="fn_317"></span>[152:318](2130174.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x-p5"></span> *Ap*<span
id="iii.iii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>. Assemani, *B. O.* I. 116.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[152:319](2130174.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.x-p6"></span> *Ap*. Forget, *De Vita Aphraatis,
lntroductio*, p. 22; see also pp. 121–126 of Forget’s *Dissertation*
which follows; also p. 5 of *Introd*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](2130175)
