[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130204)  [Next](2130206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>Hymn XL.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p2"></span>1.  The Evil One perceived his great
humiliation, and boasted himself in the presence of his servants:  he
spoke great words to persuade them and said:  “The knowledge which I
possess, little of it is by nature; and much of it, yea all of it, is by
learning.  I to myself have been master, and have exer<span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span id="iii.iv.xxix-Page_203"></span>cised
my understanding.  Without a teacher I have learnt all; I have armed
myself with every weapon, and have won by it the crown which I desired
among mankind.”  *R., Blessed is He that has come and undone the snares
of sin!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p3"></span>2.  Among the Pharisees I clothed
myself in hatred, that I might contend with Him, even the Son of Mary. 
Wrath like a bow rained shafts; boldness railed upon Him; fury rebelled
against Him; ingratitude slandered Him; envy and jealousy in *their*
wrath, strove with Him; and blasphemy took up stones.  The Healer came
in and stood among the sick, and I stirred up the diseased in contention
against Him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p4"></span>3.  Because He fell not under reproach,
it was in questions that I took refuge.  Many times did I stir up
occasions, but I saw that my falsehood was rebuked, and my impudence was
made known, and my vain babbling was despised.  To the windings of
contention I betook myself.  Everywhere that I disputed with Him, all my
labor was as chaff, and the word of truth scattered it on every side.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p5"></span>4.  I saw that there is a warrior and a
mighty lord, in cunning within man:  \[and the snake that *is* without
makes it fear.\]  His lusts within him is coiled continually; his
jealousy hisses like a serpent.  Deadly desires he begets, and of a
fever he is in dread.  Command as a drug, is able to quell derision,
which smites unto destruction.  It is love that avails to break the
sting secret and bitter of the tongue.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p6"></span>5.  Who is more foolish than men, who
rather than for himself cares for his dwelling!  The garments that *are*
in his chest he examines daily, and a worm is lurking in his members. 
The rents that are in his clothes he mends, but a rent is made in his
soul.  His house is lighted up but his heart is dark.  He shuts up his
senses but opens his windows.  He closes his door and guards his money;
his mouth is open and the treasure of his thought *is* stolen.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p7"></span>6.  The fool makes more of his beasts
than of himself, for he cares for his possessions rather than for his
soul.  Good seed he sows in his ground; in his heart he sows tares.  His
understanding is thrown open and cast down; but at the fences of his
vineyard he labours.  He chooses and plants vine-plants; while his mind
is a vine of the vines of Sodom.  He keeps off the wild ass from his
sowing; but the wild boar of the wood devours his thoughts.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p8"></span>7.  I am a furnace to the sons of men,
and in me are tried their counsels.  Therefore is it lawful to me to
weave deceit.  I teach the Chaldean art:  by reason of the true things
that befall, the false things are believed.  In the midst of Egypt I
closed *men’s* eyes; I showed insects, *men* thought they were though
they were not.  By closing *men’s* eyes I teach the signs of the Zodiac,
though they are not in the heavens.

<span id="iii.iv.xxix-p9"></span>8.  By reason of my swiftness I fly and
see, and I show beforehand to the soothsayer; they who err concerning me
count me a prophet.  But sometimes I make bold; and I ask that for an
hour, secret things be revealed to me, that true men may be proved by me
even as Job, likewise deceivers as Saul.  For the one I revealed his
sorcery; and for the other I purged his truth and he was praised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XLI.](2130206)
