[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130256)  [Next](2130258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Hymn X.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Glory to Him Who came and
restored it!*)

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p3"></span>1.  Adam sinned and earned all
sorrows;—likewise the world after His example, all guilt.—And instead of
considering how it should be restored,—*considered* how its fall should
be pleasant for it.—Glory to Him Who came and restored it!

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p4"></span>2.  This cause summoned Him that is
pure,—that He should come and be baptized, even He with the
defiled,—Heaven for His glory was rent asunder.—That the purifier of all
might be baptized with all,—He came down and sanctified the water for
our baptism.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p5"></span>3.  For that cause for which He entered
into the womb,—for the same cause He went down into the river.—For that
cause for which He entered into the grave,—for the same cause He makes
*us* enter into His chamber.—He perfected mankind for every cause.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p6"></span>4.  His Conception is the store of our
blessings;—His Birth is the treasury of our joys;—His Baptism is the
cause of our pardon;—His Death is the cause of our life.—Death He alone
has overcome in His Resurrection.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p7"></span>5.  At His Birth a star of light shone in
the air;—when He was baptized light flashed from the water;—at His Death
the sun was darkened in the firmament;—at His Passion the luminaries set
along with Him;—at His Epiphany the luminaries arose with Him.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p8"></span>6.  Revealed was His Glory because of His
Majesty;—revealed was His Passion because of His Manhood;—revealed was
His Love because of His Graciousness;—revealed was His Judgment because
of His Justice.—He has poured forth His attributes, on them that were
His.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p9"></span>7.  That whoso has looked on His Glory
and despised Him,—may look again on His Glory and worship Him;—and whoso
has scorned to taste of His Graciousness,—may fear lest he be made to
feel His justice;—He has poured forth His helps on His worshippers.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p10"></span>8.  Lo! the East in the morning was made
light!—lo! the South at noonday was made dark!—The West again in turn at
eventide was made light.—The three quarters represent the one Birth;—His
Death and His Life they declare.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p11"></span>9.  His Birth flowed on and was joined
to His Baptism;—and His Baptism again flowed on even to His Death;—His
Death led and reached to His Resurrection,—a fourfold bridge unto His
Kingdom; and lo! His sheep pass over in His footsteps.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p12"></span>10.  And like as, save by the door of
birth,—none can enter into creation;—so, save <span id="page_281">p.
281</span> <span id="iii.vi.xi-Page_281"></span>by the door of
resurrection,—none can enter into the Kingdom,—and whoso has cut off his
bridge, has brought to nought his hope.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p13"></span>11.  He put on His armour and conquered
and was crowned;—He left His armour on earth and ascended,—that if any
man desires the crown,—he may resort to the armour and win by it—the
crown of victory which he yearns after.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p14"></span>12.  He fulfilled righteousness on
earth, and ascended.—But if He, the All-cleanser, was baptized,—What man
is there that shall not be baptized?—for grace has come to baptism—to
wash away the foulness of our wound.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p15"></span>13.  The compulsion of God is an
all-prevailing force;—\[but that is not pleasing to Him which is of
compulsion,\] <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) —as that which
*is* of discerning will.—Therefore in our fruits He calls us—who live
not *as* under compulsion, by persuasion.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p17"></span>14.  Good is He, for lo! He labours in
these two things;—He wills not to constrain our freedom—nor again does
He suffer us to abuse it.—For had he constrained it, He had taken away
its power;—and had He let it go, He had deprived it of help.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p18"></span>15.  He knows that if He constrains He
deprives us;—He knows that if He casts off He destroys us;—He knows that
if He teaches He wins us.—He has not constrained and He has not cast
off, as the Evil One *does*:—He has taught, chastened, and won us, as
being the good *God*.

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p19"></span>16.  He knows that His treasuries
abound:—the keys of His treasuries He has put into our hands.—He has
made the Cross our treasurer—to open for us the gates of Paradise,—as
Adam opened the gate of Gehenna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_516"></span>[281:517](2130257.htm#fr_516) <span
id="iii.vi.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xi-p16"></span> The rendering of this line is very
conjectural.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XI.](2130258)
