[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130113)  [Next](2130115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p2"></span>To Edilbert, King of the Angli.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p3"></span>Gregory to Edilbert, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p4"></span>On this account Almighty God advances
good men to the government of peoples, that through them He may bestow
the gifts of His loving-kindness on all over whom they are preferred. 
This we have found to be the case in the nation of the Angli, which your
Glory has been put over to the intent that through the good things
granted to you, heavenly benefits might be conferred on the nation
subject to you.  And so, glorious son, keep guard with anxious mind over
the grace which thou hast received from above.  Make haste to extend the
Christian faith among the peoples under thy sway, redouble the zeal of
thy rectitude in their conversion, put down the worship of idols,
overturn the edifices of their temples <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) , build up the manners of thy <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxxii-Page_82"></span>subjects in great purity of life by
exhorting, by terrifying, by enticing, by correcting, by shewing
examples of well-doing; that so you may find Him your recompenser in
heaven Whose name and knowledge you shall have spread abroad on earth. 
For He Himself will make the name of your glory even more glorious to
posterity, if you seek and maintain His honour among the nations.  For
so Constantine, the once most pious Emperor, recalling the Roman
republic from perverse worshippings of idols, subjected it with himself
to our Almighty Lord God Jesus Christ, and turned himself with his
subject peoples with all his heart to Him.  Hence it came to pass that
that man surpassed in praise the name of ancient princes, and excelled
his predecessors as much in renown as in well-doing.  And now,
therefore, let your Glory make haste to infuse into the kings and
peoples subject to you the knowledge of God, Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, that you may both surpass the ancient kings of your race in
renown and in deserts, and the more you shall have wiped away the sins
of others among your subjects, the more secure you may become with
regard to your own sins before the terrible scrutiny of Almighty God.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p6"></span>Moreover, you have with you our most
reverend brother, Augustine the bishop, learned in monastic rule,
replete with knowledge of holy Scripture, endowed by the grace of God
with good works.  Listen gladly to his admonitions, follow them
devoutly, keep them studiously in remembrance:  for, if you listen to
him in what he speaks in behalf of Almighty God, the same Almighty God
will the sooner listen to him when he prays for you.  For, if (which God
forbid) you disregard his words, when will it be possible for Almighty
God to hear him for you, whom you neglect to hear for God?  With all
your heart, therefore, bind ye yourselves in fervour of faith to him,
and aid his endeavours by the power which he gives you from above, that
He Whose faith you cause to be received and kept in your kingdom may
Himself make you partakers of His own Kingdom.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p7"></span>Furthermore, we would have your Glory
know that, as we learn from the words of the Almighty Lord in holy
Scripture, the end of the present world is already close at hand, and
the reign of the saints is coming, which can have no end.  And, now that
this end of the world is approaching, many things are at hand which
previously have not been; to wit, changes of the air, terrors from
heaven, and seasons contrary to the accustomed order of times, wars,
famine, pestilences, earthquakes in divers places.  Yet these things
will not come in our days, but after our days they will all ensue.  You
therefore, if you observe any of these things occurring in your land, by
no means let your mind be troubled, since these signs of the end of the
world are sent beforehand for this purpose, that we should be solicitous
about our souls, suspectful of the hour of death, and in our good deeds
be found prepared for the coming Judge.  These things, glorious son, we
have now briefly spoken of, that, when the Christian faith shall have
been extended in your kingdom, our speech to you may also extend itself
to greater length, and that we may be pleased to speak so much the more
fully as joy multiplies itself in our heart for the perfected conversion
of your nation.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p8"></span>I have sent you some small presents,
which to you will not be small, when received by you as of the
benediction of the blessed Apostle Peter.  And so may Almighty God guard
and perfect in you the grace which He has begun, and extend your life
here through courses of many years, and after a long life receive you in
the congregation of the heavenly country.  May heavenly grace keep your
Excellency safe, sir son (*domine fili*).  Given this 10th day of the
Kalends of July, the 19th year of the empire of our most pious lord
Mauricius Tiberius Augustus, the 18th year after the consulship of the
same our lord, Indiction 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[81:182](2130114.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxii-p5"></span> This direction was modified in a
subsequent letter to Mellitus (XI. 76).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Quiricus, Bishop, &c.](2130115)
