[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130056)  [Next](2130058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.li"></span>

<span id="ii.v.li-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.li-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.li-p2"></span>To Virgilius and Syagrius, Bishops.

<span id="ii.v.li-p3"></span>Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate
(*Arles*), and Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodunum (*Autun*).

<span id="ii.v.li-p4"></span>The nature of the office committed to me,
dearest brethren, drives me to break out into a cry of grief, and to
sharpen your love with the anxiety of charity, for that it is said that
you in your parts have been too negligent and remiss, where the
rectitude of justice and zeal for chastity ought to have inflamed your
earnestness.  Now it has come to our ears that a certain Syagria had
entered on a religious life, having even changed her dress, and was
afterwards united by force to a husband (a thing iniquitous to be told),
and that you have been moved by no sorrow to interfere in her defence. 
If this is so, I groan for it the more heavily for fear lest with the
Almighty Lord (which God forbid) you should have the office of
hirelings, and not the merit of shepherds, as having left without a
struggle a sheep in the mouth of the wolf to be torn.  For what will ye
say, or what account will ye give of yourselves to the future judge; you
whom the lewdness of ravishment has not moved, whom regard to the
religious habit has in no wise excited to stand up in defence, whom
priestly consideration has not roused to protect the purity of virgin
modesty?  Even now, then, let your neglect return to your memory; let
remembrance of this fault stir you, and consideration of your office
impel you to exhortation of the aforesaid woman.  And, lest haply in
course of time constraint should have passed into willing consent, let
your tongue be her cure, and through your exhortations let her give
herself diligently to prayer; let not the lamentations of penitence
depart from her memory; let her exhibit a penitent heart to our
Redeemer; and let her make amends with weeping for the loss of chastity,
which in her body it was not allowed her to preserve.

<span id="ii.v.li-p5"></span>Wherefore, inasmuch as the aforesaid woman
desires, as it is said, even now to devote her property to pious uses,
we exhort you that she experience the favour and enjoy the support of
your Fraternity in this thing, and that it be lawful for her, a
competent portion being reserved for her children, to decide as she will
about her substance.  For without doubt you do good yourselves, if you
render aid to those who wish to do good.  Consider, therefore, most
beloved brethren, from how great love these things which we speak
proceed, and take them all in the same spirit of charity that inspires
them.  For, we being one body in Christ, I burn with you in <span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="ii.v.li-Page_32"></span>this which I
feel to be to your hurt.  And with what earnestness, and what affection
I send you this epistle, may the Author of truth disclose to your
hearts.  And so let not this brotherly admonition distress you, since
even a bitter cup is taken gladly, when offered with a view to health. 
Finally, dearest brethren, let us with united prayers implore the mercy
of our God, that He would favourably order our life in His fear, to the
end that we may both serve Him here as priests should do, and be able to
stand in His sight hereafter secure and without fear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodunum (Autun).](2130058)
