[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130099)  [Next](2130101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLVII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p2"></span>To Anatolius, Deacon at
Constantinople.

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p3"></span>Gregory to Anatolius, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p4"></span>Thy Love has written to me that our
most pious lord orders a successor to be appointed to my most reverend
brother John, bishop of Prima Justiniana, on account of the ailment of
the head from which he suffers, lest perchance that city, while without
the jurisdiction of a bishop, should be ruined by its enemies, which God
forbid.  And yet the canons nowhere enjoin that a bishop should be
superseded on account of sickness.  And it is <span id="page_69">p.
69</span> <span id="ii.vii.xviii-Page_69"></span>altogether unjust that,
if bodily ailments come on, the sick person should be deprived of his
dignity <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) .  Accordingly this
thing can by no means be done through us, lest sin should come upon my
soul from his deposition.  But it is to be suggested that, if he who
bears rule is sick, an administrator may be found, to undertake all his
charge, and maintain and fill his place, without his being deposed, in
the government of the Church and custody of the city; so that neither
may Almighty God be offended nor the city be found to be neglected.  If,
however, the same most reverend John should haply on account of his
ailments request to be relieved from the dignity of the episcopate, it
should be conceded on his presenting a petition in writing.  But
otherwise we are altogether unable, with due regard to the fear of
Almighty God, to do this thing.  But, if he should be unwilling thus to
make petition, what pleases the most pious Emperor, whatever he commands
to be done, is in his power.  As he determines, so let him provide. 
Only let him not cause us to be mixed up in the deposition of one so
situated.  Still, what he does, if it is canonical, we will follow. 
But, if it is not canonical, we will bear it, so far as we can without
sin of our own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[69:162](2130100.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ii.vii.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xviii-p5"></span> Cf. XIII. 5 for a similar assertion
of the unlawfulness of superseding a bishop, except at his own request,
when incapacitated by illness.  See also VII. 19.  In this epistle may
be observed Gregory’s habitual deference to the Emperors, whose subject
he ever declared himself to be, even in matters of ecclesiastical
import, together with his avoidance of giving his own sanction to
anything he regarded as irreligious or uncanonical.  Similarly in the
case of an imperial prohibition of soldiers becoming monks.  See III.
65; VIII. 5; X. 24.  Cf. also IV. 47, in the case of Maximus of Salona. 
We find him, however, in a letter to the empress, in which this case of
Maximus is referred to (V. 21), making a respectful protest against
imperial interference in matters of ecclesiastical cognizance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle L](2130101)
