[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130241)  [Next](2130243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Hymn XVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.xvii-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Glory to all of Thee from all
of us!*  (bis.)

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p3"></span>1.  Who then that is mortal man, can
declare concerning the All-Life giver,—Who quitted the height of His
Majesty, and abased Himself to humility?—*Thou* Who exaltest all in Thy
Birth, exalt my weak mind,—to declare of Thy Birth; not that I should
search out Thy Majesty,—but that I should proclaim Thy grace.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p4"></span>R., Blessed be He Who conceals and
reveals in His discourses!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p5"></span>2.  It is a great marvel that the Son,
dwelt wholly in a body;—abode therein wholly and it sufficed for Him;
dwelt therein though not bounded *thereby*.—His Will was wholly therein;
His bounds reached wholly to His Father.—Who is sufficient to tell, how
though He dwelt wholly in a body.—He likewise dwelt wholly in all?

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p6"></span>R., Blessed is He Who though without
bounds was bounded!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p7"></span>3.  Thy Majesty is concealed from us;
Thy Grace is revealed before us.—I will be silent, O Lord of Thy
Majesty; and I will tell of Thy grace.—Thy grace clove to Thee, and
bowed Thee down to our vileness:—Thy grace made Thee a babe; Thy grace
made Thee man:—it straitened, it enlarged, Thy Majesty.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p8"></span>R., Blessed be the might that became
little and became great!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p9"></span>4.  Glory to Him Who became lowly,
though lofty He was by His nature!—He became in His love the firstborn
of Mary, Firstborn though He be of Godhead.—He became in name the
offspring of Joseph, offspring though He be of the Most High.—<span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span id="iii.v.xvii-Page_256"></span>He
became by His own Will man, God though He be by His Nature.—Glorified
*be* Thy Will and Thy Nature!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p10"></span>R., Blessed be Thy Glory which put on
our image!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p11"></span>5.  Yea, O Lord, Thy Birth, has become
mother of *all* creatures; for it travailed anew and gave birth, to
mankind which gave birth to Thee.  Thou wast born of it bodily; it was
born of Thee spiritually.—All that Thou camest *for* to birth, *was*
that man might be born in Thy likeness.—Thy Birth became the author of
birth to all.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p12"></span>R., Blessed be He Who became a youth
and to all gave youth!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p13"></span>6.  When man’s hope had broken down,
hope was increased by Thy Birth.—Good tidings of hope they bore, the
Heavenly Ones to men.—Satan who cut off our hope, his own hope by his
own hands had cut off.—when he saw that hope was increased:  Thy Birth
became to the hopeless,—a fountain teaming with hope.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p14"></span>R., Blessed be He Who bore the tidings
of hope!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p15"></span>7.  The day of Thy Birth is like Thee,
for it is desired and loved as Thou.—We who saw not Thy Birth, and its
flame as in its own time,—in this Thy day we see Thee, even as Thou wast
a babe;—beloved by all men, lo! in Thee the Churches rejoice;—Thy day
adorns and is adorned.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p16"></span>R., Blessed be Thy day which was
ordained for us!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p17"></span>8.  Thy day has given us a gift, to
which the Father has none other like;—It was not Seraphim He sent us,
nor yet did Cherubim come down among us;—there came not Watchers *or*
Ministers, but the Firstborn to Whom they minister.—Who can suffice to
give thanks, that the Majesty which is beyond measure—is laid in the
lowly manger!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p18"></span>R., Blessed be He Who gave us what He
had won!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p19"></span>9.  That generation Thy Birth made
glad, and our generation Thy day makes glad:  twofold *was* the
happiness of that generation, for they saw Thy Birth and also Thy
day:—less *is* the happiness of them that come after, for the day of Thy
Birth they see only.—Yet because they that then were, doubted, greater
is the happiness of them that come after,—who though they have not seen
Thee have believed in Thee.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p20"></span>R., Blessed be Thy happiness that is
added to us!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p21"></span>10.  The Magi exalted from afar; the
Scribes murmured near at hand;—the prophet showed his message, and Herod
his wrath;—the scribes showed their doctrine, the Magi showed their
offerings.  It is a marvel that to Him, the Babe, they of His own house
hasted with their swords, and they that were strangers with their
offerings.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p22"></span>R., Blessed be Thy Birth which has
stirred up all!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p23"></span>11.  The bosom of Mary amazes me, that
it sufficed for Thee, Lord, and embraced Thee.—All creation were too
small, to conceal Thy Majesty;—Heaven and earth too narrow, to be in the
likeness of wings, <span id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) to cover Thy
Godhead.—Too small for Thee was the bosom of earth; great enough for
Thee was the bosom of Mary.—He dwelt in the bosom and healed in her
bosom.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p25"></span>R.,

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p26"></span>12.  He was wrapped meanly in swaddling
clothes, and offerings were offered Him.—He put on garments in youth,
and from them there came forth helps:  He put on the waters of baptism,
and from them there shone forth beams:—He put on linen cloths in death,
and in them were shown forth triumphs; with His humiliations, His
exaltations.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p27"></span>R., Blessed be He Who joined His Glory
to His Passion!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p28"></span>13.  All these *are* the changes of
raiment, which Mercy put off and put on,—when He strove to put on Adam,
the glory which he had put off.—He was wrapped in swaddling-clothes as
*Adam* with leaves; and clad in garments instead of skins.—He was
baptized for *Adam’s* sin, and buried for *Adam’s* death:—He rose and
raised *Adam* into Glory.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p29"></span>R., Blessed be He Who came down and
clothed him and went up!

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p30"></span><span id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span
id="iii.v.xvii-Page_257"></span>14.  Though Thy Birth had sufficed, for
Adam’s sons as for Adam;—O Mighty One Who didst become a babe, in Thy
Birth anew hast Thou begotten me!—O pure One Who wast baptized, let Thy
Washing wash away our filth—O Living One who wast buried, may we gain
life in Thy death!—I will praise all of Thee in Him that fills all.

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p31"></span>*R., Glory to all of Thee from all of
us!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_505"></span>[256:506](2130242.htm#fr_505) <span
id="iii.v.xvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xvii-p24"></span> The word used for “bosom” in this
stanza, also means “wing.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XVII.](2130243)
