[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130222)  [Next](2130224) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Hymn LXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlvii-p2"></span>1. Come ye, let us hear how Death
convicts the People:  that harsher than Death was their sword, against
the just.—2. *R., To Thee be glory, Who by Thy sacrifice, hast redeemed
our disgrace:  and Whose death was instead of all deaths, that Thou
mightst raise all!*—3. It was not Death indeed that crucified Jesus, but
*it was* the People:  how hateful then the People, that are yet more
hateful than I!—4. Into the pit they cast Jeremiah, the miry *pit*:  but
I in Sheol allotted, honour to his bones.—5. Naboth they bruised *to
death* with stones, as though *he were* a dog:  how good am I who have
never stoned, even a dog!—6. The Hebrew women in famine, ate their
children:  Sheol *is* good who delivers and gives them up, without
difficulty.—7. To the widow I gave her son, by the hand of Elijah:  to
the Shunamite her beloved, by the hand of Elisha.—8. The Hebrew women in
greed, ate their children:  Sheol gave up the dead and learned, to fast
soberly.—9. Sheol was not indeed Sheol, but *its* semblance:  Jezebel
was the true Sheol, who devoured the just.—10. The sons of the prophets
and the prophets, she slew and cast down:  to heaven Elijah escaped,
from her fury.—11. How many deaths instead of one Death, were among the
People! and how many Sheols instead of one, were there also!—12. Samaria
and Jezrael her daughters, in Israel:  and Zion and Jerusalem her
sister, in Judea.—13. Prophets and just men in Judea, and in Israel:  in
these two abysses, they were drowned.—14. Why then is Sheol hated, and
she alone:  though there be many that are hateful, rather than she?—15.
The dead of the men of Judah, to me are right hateful:  yea, abhorred by
me are their bones, in the midst of Sheol.—16. Would that then I had a
way to cast them out:  *to cast* their bones thence from Sheol, for they
cause her to rot.—17. I wonder at the Holy Spirit, that He thus dwelt: 
in the midst of a People whose savour stank, as their conversation.—18.
Onions and garlic *are* the heralds of their doings:  as is the food so
is the understanding, of this defiled people.—19. Through the
supplication of all that bow, and worship Thy Father:  have mercy on Thy
worshipper, who is thankless for Thy love.—20. From Hebrews and
Aramæans, and also from the Watchers:  to Thee *be* praise and through
Thee to Thy Father, be also glory!—21. For that I have a mouth to Death,
who is without mouth:  may the Son Who is all mouths, hold back my
offence from His Father!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LXVIII.](2130224)
