[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130207)  [Next](2130209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Hymn LII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxii-p2.1"></span>Concerning</span> Satan and Death.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxii-p3"></span>1. I heard Death and Satan, as they
disputed, which was the more powerful, among men.  *R., To Thee be
glory, Son of the Shepherd of All, Who deliveredst His flock from the
secret wolves that devoured it*, the Evil One and Death!—2. Death showed
his power, that he conquers all; Satan showed his guile, that he makes
all to sin.—3. *Death*, To thee, O Evil One, none hearkens save he that
wills:  to me he that wills and he that wills not, even to me they
come.—4. *Satan*, Thine, O Death, is but the force of tyranny:  mine are
snares and nets of subtlety.—5. *D*., Hear, O Evil One, that who so is
subtle breaks off thy yoke:  but none is there that is able to escape my
yoke.—6. *S*., Thou, Death, on him that is sick provest thy might:  but
I over them that are whole, am exceeding powerful.—7. *D*., The Evil One
prevails not over all those that revile him:  but for me he that has
cursed me and he that curses me, come into my hands.—8. *S*., Thou,
Death, from God, hast gotten thy might:  I alone by none am I helped,
when I lead *men* to sin.—9. *D*., Thou, O Evil-One, like a weakling: 
while like a king I exercise my dominion.—10. *S*., Thou art a fool, O
Death, not to know how great am I:  who suffice to capture free will,
the sovereign power.—11. *D*., Thou, O Evil One, like a thief, lo! thou
goest round:  I like a lion break in pieces and <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> <span id="iii.iv.xxxii-Page_207"></span>fear not.—12. *S*.,
To thee, O Death, none does service or worship:  to me kings do service
of sacrifice as to God.—13. *D*., On Death there are many that call, as
on a kind Power:  on thee, O Evil One, none has called or calls.—14.
*S*., Markest thou not this, O Death, how many there are:  who in sundry
fashions call on me and make oblation?—15. *D*. Hated is thy name, O
Satan, nor canst thou clear it:  thy name every one curses, hide thy
reproach.—16. *S*., Thine ear, O Death, has waxed dull, that thou
hearest not:  how against thee all men groan, conceal thyself.—17. *D*.,
My face is shown to the world, for I am guileless:  not like thee who
without guile canst not abide.—18. *S*., Thou hast not in aught
surpassed me for it is true:  that thou art hateful as I to the sons of
men.—19. *D*., Of me all men are afraid as of a lord:  but as for thee
they hate thee as the Evil One.—20. *S*., For thee, O Death, they hate
thy name, and also thy work:  my name they hate but my delights they
greatly love.—21. *D*., To bitterness of teeth is turned, this thy
sweetness:  penitence of soul cleaves ever unto thy lusts.—22. *S*.,
Sheol is hated because in her is no repentance:  a pit that swallows and
closes on all movements.—23. *D*., Sheol is a gulf wherein whoso falls
shall rise again:  sin is hated because it cuts off the hope of man.—24.
*S*., Though I mislike penitents, I give place *for repentance*:  thou
cuttest off hope from the sinner who dies in his sin.—25. *D*., It was
of thee that at first his hope was cut off:  for he whom thou hast not
caused to sin dies happily.—26. Blessed *is* He who raised against each
other those cursed servants:  that we might see them as they have seen
us and mocked at us.—27. This that we have seen of them is a pledge, my
brethren:  of what we shall see of them hereafter when we rise again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LIII.](2130209)
