[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130039)  [Next](2130041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv-p2"></span>To Eusebius of Thessalonica.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv-p3"></span>Gregory to Eusebius of Thessalonica,
Urbicus of Dyrrachium, Andrew of Nicopolis, John of Corinth, John of
Prima Justiniana, John of Crete, John of Larissa and Scodra, and many
other bishops.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv-p4"></span>We are constrained by the care of
government which we have undertaken to extend vigilantly the solicitude
of our office, and to instruct the minds of our brethren by addresses of
admonition, that no wrongful presumption may avail to deceive the
ignorant, nor any dissimulation to excuse those who know.  Be it known
then to your Fraternity that John, formerly bishop of the city of
Constantinople, against God, against the peace of the Church, to the
contempt and injury of all priests, exceeded the bounds of modesty and
of his own measure, and unlawfully usurped in synod the proud and
pestiferous title of œcumenical, that is to say, universal.  When our
predecessor Pelagius of blessed memory became aware of this, he annulled
by a fully valid censure all the proceedings of that same synod, except
what had therein been done in the cause of Gregory, bishop of Antioch,
of venerable memory; taking him to task with most severe rebuke, and
warning him to abstain from that new and temerarious name of
superstition; even so as to forbid his deacon to go in procession <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) with him, unless he should amend so great
a wickedness.  And we, adhering in all respects to the zeal of his
rectitude, observe <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxiv-Page_19"></span>his ordinances, under the protection of
God, irrefragably, since it is fitting that he should walk without
stumbling along the straight way of his predecessor, whom the tribunal
of the eternal Judge awaits for rendering an account of the same place
of government.  In which matter, lest we should seem to omit anything
that pertains to the peace of the Church, we once and again addressed
the same most holy John by letter, bidding him relinquish that name of
pride, and incline the elation of his heart to the humility which our
Master and Lord has taught us.  And having found that he paid no regard,
we have not desisted, in our desire of concord, from addressing the like
admonitions to our most blessed brother and fellow-priest Cyriacus, his
successor.  But since it is the case, as we see, now that the end of
this world is near at hand, that the enemy of the human race has already
appeared in his harbingers, so as to have as his precursors, through
this title of pride, the very priests who ought to have opposed him by
living well and humbly, I exhort and entreat that not one of you ever
accept this name, that not one consent to it, that not one write it,
that not one admit it wherever it may have been written, or add his
subscription to it; but, as becomes ministers of Almighty God, that each
keep himself from this kind of poisoned infection, and give no place to
the cunning lier-in-wait, since this thing is being done to the injury
and rendering asunder of the whole Church, and, as we have said, to the
contemning of all of you.  For if one, as he supposes, is universal
bishop, it remains that you are not bishops.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv-p6"></span>Furthermore, it has come to our
knowledge that your Fraternity has been convened to Constantinople.  And
although our most pious Emperor allows nothing unlawful to be done
there, yet, lest perverse men, taking occasion of your assembly, should
seek opportunity of cajoling you in favouring this name of superstition,
or should think of holding a synod about some other matter, with the
view of introducing it therein by cunning contrivances,—though without
the authority and consent of the Apostolic See nothing that might be
passed would have any force, nevertheless, before Almighty God I conjure
and warn you, that the assent of none of you be obtained by any
blandishments, any bribes, any threats whatever; but, having regard to
the eternal judgment, acquit ye yourselves salubriously and unanimously
in opposition to wrongful aims; and, supported by pastoral constancy and
apostolical authority, keep out the robber and the wolf that would rush
in, and give no way to him that rages for the tearing of the Church
asunder; nor allow, through any cajolery, a synod to be held on this
subject, which indeed would not be a legitimate one, nor to be called a
synod.  We also at the same time admonish you, that if haply nothing
should be done with mention of this preposterous name, but a synod be by
any chance assembled on another matter, ye be in all respects cautious,
circumspect, watchful, and careful, lest anything should therein be
decreed against any place or person prejudicially, or unlawfully, or in
opposition to the canons.  But, if any question arises to be treated
with advantage, let the question in hand take such a form that it may
not upset any ancient ordinances.  Wherefore we once more admonish you
before God and His Saints, that you observe all these things with the
utmost attention, and with the entire bent of your minds.  For if any
one, as we do not believe will be the case, should disregard in any part
this present writing, let him know that he is segregated from the peace
of the blessed Peter, the Prince of the Apostles.  Let, then, your
Fraternity so act that when the Shepherd of shepherds comes in judgment,
you may not be found guilty with respect to the place of government
which you have received.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[18:47](2130040.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiv-p5"></span> *Procedere*; i.e. proceed to the Holy
Table for celebration.  Cf. VII. 34, note 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXXVIII](2130041)
