[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130062)  [Next](2130064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="ii.v.lvii-Page_35"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXXII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p2"></span>*To Rechared, King of the
Visigoths* <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) .

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p4"></span>Gregory to Rechared, &c.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p5"></span>I cannot express in words, most excellent
son, how much I am delighted with thy work and thy life.  For on hearing
of the power of a new miracle in our days, to wit that the whole nation
of the Goths has through thy Excellency been brought over from the error
of Arian heresy to the firmness of a right faith, one is disposed to
exclaim with the prophet, *This is the change wrought by the right hand
of the Most High* ([Psa. 77.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p5.1"></span> <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) ).  For
whose breast, even though stony, would not, on hearing of so great a
work, soften in praises of Almighty God and love of thy Excellency?  As
for me, I declare that it delights me often to tell these things that
have been done through you to my sons who resort to me and often
together with them to admire.  These things also for the most part stir
me up against myself, in that I languish sluggish and unprofitable in
listless ease, while kings are labouring in the gathering together of
souls for the gains of the heavenly country.  What then shall I say to
the coming Judge in that tremendous assize, if I shall then come thither
empty, where thy Excellency shall bring after thee flocks of faithful
ones, whom thou hast now drawn to the grace of a true faith by assiduous
and continual preaching?  But this, good man, by the gift of God,
affords me great comfort, that the holy work which I have not in myself
I love in thee.  And, when I rejoice with great exultation for thy
doings, the results of thy labour become mine through charity.  With
regard, therefore, to the conversion of the Goths, both for your work
and for our exultation, we may well exclaim with the angels, *Glory to
God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of goodwill* ([Luk. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.lvii-p6.1"></span>). 
For we, as I think, owe the more thanks to Almighty God for that,
although we have done nothing with you, we are nevertheless partakers in
your work by rejoicing with you.  Further, how gladly the blessed Peter,
Prince of the Apostles, has accepted the gifts of your Excellency your
very life witnesses evidently to all.  For it is written, *The vows of
the righteous are his delight* ([Prov. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.lvii-p6.2"></span>). 
For indeed in the judgment of Almighty God it is not what is given, but
by whom it is given, that is regarded.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p7"></span>For hence it is that it is written, *The
Lord had respect unto Abel and to his gifts, but unto Cain and to his
gifts he had not respect* ([Gen. 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.lvii-p7.1"></span>). 
To wit, being about to say that the Lord had respect to the gifts, he
was careful to premise that He had respect unto Abel.  Thus it is
plainly shewn that the offerer was not acceptable by reason of the
gifts, but the gifts were so by reason of the offerer.  You shew,
therefore, how acceptable your offering is, seeing that, being about to
give gold, you have first given gifts of souls by the conversion of the
nation subject to you.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p8"></span>With regard to your telling us that the
abbots who were sent to us to bring your offering to the blessed Apostle
Peter had been wearied by the violence of the sea and returned to Spain
without accomplishing their voyage <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)
, your gifts were not kept back, for they reached us afterwards; but the
constancy of those who had been sent has been tried, as to whether they
knew how with holy desire to overcome dangers in their way, and, though
fatigued in body, by no means to be wearied in mind.  For adversity
which comes in the way of good purposes is a trial of virtue, not a
judgment of reprobation.  For who can be ignorant how prosperous an
event it was that the blessed Apostle Paul came to Italy to preach, and
yet in coming suffered shipwreck?  But the ship of the heart stood
unharmed among the billows of the sea.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p10"></span>Furthermore, I must tell you that I have
been led to praise God the more for your work by what I have learnt from
the report of my most beloved son Probinus the presbyter; namely that,
your Excellency having issued a certain ordinance against the perfidy of
the Jews, those to whom it related attempted to bend the rectitude of
your mind by offering a sum of money; which your Excellency scorned,
and, seeking to satisfy the judgment of Almighty God, preferred
innocence to gold.  With regard to this what was done by King David
recurs to my mind, who, when the longed for water from the cistern of
Bethlehem, which was wedged in by the enemy, had been brought him by
obedient soldiers, said, *God forbid that I should drink the blood of
righteous men* ([1 Chron. xi. 19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p10.1"></span>).  And, because he <span id="page_36">p.
36</span> <span id="ii.v.lvii-Page_36"></span>poured it out and would
not drink it, it is written, *He offered it a libation to the Lord.* 
If, then, water was scorned by the armed king, and turned into a
sacrifice to God, we may estimate what manner of sacrifice to Almighty
God has been offered by the king who for His love has scorned to
receive, not water, but gold.  Wherefore, most excellent son, I will
confidently say that thou hast offered as a libation to the Lord the
gold which thou wouldest not have in opposition to Him.  These are great
things, and redound to the praise of Almighty God.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p11"></span>But in the midst of all these things we
must guard with vigilant attention against the snares of the ancient
foe, who, the greater gifts he sees among men, with the more subtle
snares seeks to take them away.  For robbers too do not look out for
empty travellers to seize them on their road, but such as carry vessels
of gold and silver.  For indeed the present life is a road.  And every
one must needs be the more on his guard against ambushed spirits in
proportion as the gifts are greater which he carries.  It is the duty,
then, of your Excellency, with regard to this so great gift which you
have received in the conversion of the nation subject to you, to keep
with all your might, first humility of heart, and secondly cleanness of
body.  For where it is written, *Every one that exalteth himself shall
be humbled, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted* ([Luke
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011), [Luke
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p11.1"></span>), it is assuredly evident that he truly
loves what is lofty who does not cut off his soul from the root of
humility.  For often the malignant spirit, in order to destroy the good
that previously he had not power to oppose, comes into the mind of the
worker after accomplishment of his work, and agitates it with silent
thoughts of self-praise, so that the deluded mind admires itself for the
great things that it has done.  And, being exalted in its own sight
through hidden tumour, it is deprived of the grace of Him Who bestowed
the gift.  For hence it is that it is said through the voice of the
prophet to the soul that waxes proud, *Having trust in thy beauty thou
playedst the harlot because of thy renown* ([Ezek. xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p11.2"></span>).  For indeed a soul’s having trust in its
beauty is its presuming within itself on its righteous doings.  And it
plays the harlot because of its renown, when in what it has done aright
it desires not the praise of its Maker to be spread abroad, but seeks
the glory of its own reputation.  Hence again it is written through the
prophet, *In that thou art more beautiful, go down* ([Ezek. xxxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p11.3"></span>).  For the soul goes down because of being
more beautiful when, owing to the comeliness of virtue whereby it ought
to have been exalted before God, it falls from His grace through
elation.  What then is to be done in this case but that, when the
malignant spirit employs the good things that we have done to exalt the
mind, we should ever recall to memory our evil deeds, to the end that we
may acknowledge that what we have done sinfully is our own, but that it
is of the gift of Almighty God alone when we avoid sins.  Cleanness also
of body is to be guarded in our strivings after well-doing, since,
according to the voice of the apostolic preacher, *The temple of God is
holy, which temple ye are* ([1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p11.4"></span>).  And again he says, *For this is the will
of God, even your sanctification* ([1 Thess. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.lvii-p11.5"></span>). 
As to which sanctification, what he means by it he shews by straightway
adding, *That ye should abstain from fornication, that every one of you
should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour, not
in the lusts of concupiscence.*

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p12"></span>The very government also of your kingdom
in relation to your subjects ought to be tempered with moderation, lest
power steal upon your mind.  For a kingdom is ruled well when the glory
of reigning does not dominate the disposition.  Care also is to be taken
that wrath creep not in, lest whatever is lawful to be done be done too
hastily.  For wrath, even when it prosecutes the faults of delinquents,
ought not to go before the mind as a mistress, but attend as a handmaid
behind the back of reason, that it may come to the front when bidden. 
For, if once it begins to have possession of the mind, it accounts as
just what it does cruelly.  For hence it is written, *The wrath of man
worketh not the righteousness of God* ([Jam. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p12.1"></span>).  Hence again it is said, *Let every man
be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to wrath* ([Jam.
1.19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v.lvii-p12.2"></span>).  However I doubt not that under the
guidance of God you observe all these things.  Still, now that an
opportunity of admonition has arisen, I join myself furtively to your
good deeds, so that what you do though not admonished you may not do
alone, having an admonisher to boot.  Now may Almighty God protect you
in all your doings by the stretching out of His heavenly arm, and grant
you prosperity in the present life, and after a course of many years
eternal joys.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p13"></span>We have sent you a small key from the
most sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter to convey his blessing,
containing iron from his chains, that what had bound his neck for
martyrdom may loose yours from all sins.  We have given also to the
bearer of these presents, to be offered to you, a cross in which there
is some of the wood of the Lord’s cross, and hairs of the blessed John
the Baptist, from <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="ii.v.lvii-Page_37"></span>which you may ever have the succour of our
Saviour through the intercession of His forerunner.

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p14"></span>Moreover we have sent to our most
reverend brother and fellow-bishop Leander a pallium from the See of the
blessed Apostle Peter, which we owe both to ancient custom, and to your
character, and to his goodness and gravity <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) .

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p16"></span> —————————————

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p17"></span>A long time ago, when a certain
Neapolitan youth came hither, your to me most sweet Excellency had
thought fit to charge me to write to the most pious Emperor to the end
that he might search in the record office for the treaties that had
formerly been concluded with the prince Justinian of pious memory as to
the claims of your kingdom, so as to gather from them what he should
observe with regard to you.  But there were two things seriously in the
way of my doing this.  One was that the record-office in the time of the
aforesaid prince Justinian of pious memory had been so burnt by a fire
which had crept in suddenly that hardly any paper of his times
remained.  The other was that, as no one need be told, thou oughtest to
look in thy own archives for the documents that are against thee, and
produce these instead of my doing so.  Wherefore I exhort your
Excellency to arrange matters suitably to your character, and carefully
to carry out whatever makes for peace, that the times of your reign may
be memorable with great praise through many courses of years. 
Furthermore, we have sent you another key from the most sacred body of
the blessed apostle Peter, which, being laid up with due honour, may
multiply with blessing whatever it may find you enjoying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[35:82](2130063.htm#fr_81) <span
id="ii.v.lvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p3"></span> Reccared, the Visigoth king of Spain,
previously an Arian, had declared himself a Catholic <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.lvii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 587, and had
formally adopted Catholicism as the creed of the Spanish Church at the
council of Toledo, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lvii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 589.  See I. 43, note 9.  This is
the only extant letter addressed to the king himself by Gregory, its
date, if rightly placed, being <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lvii-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9, and thus as much as ten
years after the council of Toledo.  Gregory had been long informed of
what had been done at Toledo, as appears in his epistle to Leander (I.
43), written, if correctly placed, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lvii-p3.4"></span>a.d.</span> 590–1; and it may appear strange
that his letter to the king himself had been so long delayed.  He may
have waited for a letter to himself from Reccared; and, if Ep. LXI. in
this book (see note thereon) be genuine, it would be in reply to it that
the letter before us was written.  But in Ep. LXI. only three years are
said to have elapsed since Reccared’s conversion, and gifts spoken of
sent at that time to Rome are acknowledged in the Epistle before us. 
Hence the dates assigned to the Epistles by the Benedictine Editors are
open to suspicion.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[35:83](2130063.htm#fr_82) <span
id="ii.v.lvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p6"></span> In *English Bible*, lxxvii. 10,
differently.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[35:84](2130063.htm#fr_83) <span
id="ii.v.lvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p9"></span> See IX. 61.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[37:85](2130063.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ii.v.lvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvii-p15"></span> What follows is preceded by “Item in
anagnostico.”  (The word is thus explained in D’Arnis’ *Lexicon
Manuale*; “Græcis id omne est quod legitur aut recitatur.  Unde
Gregorius Magnus pro epistola aut quovis scripto vocem hanc usurpat.”) 
The whole is absent from many <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lvii-p15.1"></span>mss.</span>, and in one of those preserved
in *Bibliotheca Colbertina* it is given, without the heading *Item in
anognostico*, as a separate epistle, entitled “Secunda ad Recharedum,”
and concludes thus:  “Furthermore we have received the gifts of your
Excellency, which have been sent for the poor of the blessed apostle
Peter, namely three hundred *cocullæ* (*cowls*):  and, as much as we
can, we earnestly pray that you may have as your protector in the
tremendous day of judgment Him whose poor you have protected by
abundance of clothes.  Our not sending at once a man of ours to your
Excellency has been owing to the want of a ship:  for none can be found
that can proceed from these parts to the shores of Spain.”  The fact of
a second key containing filings of St. Peter’s chains being referred to
as sent to Reccared in this concluding portion of the epistle confirms
the probability of its having been part of a subsequent letter.  For two
such keys were not likely to be sent at the same time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Venantius and Italica.](2130064)
