[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130074)  [Next](2130076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXV.</span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p4"></span>In the past year I received the letters
of your most sweet Holiness; but on account of the extreme severity of
my sickness have been unable to reply to them until now.  For lo, it is
now almost full two years that I have been confined to my bed, afflicted
with such pains of gout that I have hardly been able to rise on
feast-days for as much as three hours space to solemnize mass.  And I am
soon compelled by severe pain to lie down, that I may be able to bear my
torment with intervening groans.  This pain of mine is sometimes
moderate, and sometimes excessive:  but neither so moderate as to
depart, nor so excessive as to kill me.  Hence it comes to pass that,
being daily in death, I am daily debarred from death.  Nor it is
surprising that, grievous sinner as I am, I am long kept confined in the
prison of such corruption.  Whence I am compelled to exclaim, *Bring my
soul out of prison, that I may confess thy name* ([Ps. cxli.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>). 
But, since I am not yet worthy to obtain this by my prayers, I beg that
the prayer of your Holiness may afford me the aid of its intercession,
and deliver me from the weight of sin and corruption into that liberty,
which you know well, of the glory of the children of God.

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p5"></span>Your to me most sweet and ever to be
honoured Blessedness has informed me in your letter that our common son
Anatolius, deacon of the city of Constantinople, had written to you to
say that certain monks from the parts about Jerusalem had come to me to
make some enquiry concerning the error of the *Agnoitæ* <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) , and you say that he begged your
Holiness to write to me to express your opinion with respect to this
enquiry.  But neither have monks come to me from the parts about
Jerusalem to make any enquiry, nor do I think that the said our common
son <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="ii.vi.viii-Page_46"></span>can have told you in his letters what was
not the case; but I suspect that the interpreter has mistaken the
meaning of his letters.  For the same deacon, now more than two years
ago, wrote to me that monks had come from the aforesaid parts to the
city of Constantinople making such enquiries, and he desired to ask me
what I thought.  To him, long before I received your letters, I made the
very same reply against that same heresy as I found afterwards in the
epistle of your Holiness:  and I returned great thanks to Almighty God
that concerning all questions the Fathers of the Romans and of the
Greeks, whose followers we are, have spoken with one spirit.  For in
many parts I found this your epistle to be as though I had been reading
the writings of the Latin Fathers against the aforesaid heresy.  And
consider how much I must love and praise the excellence of my most holy
brother, in whose mouth I recognised the venerable Fathers, whom I love
so much.  Praise therefore be to Him, to Him be glory in the highest, of
whose gift the voice of Mark still cries aloud in the See of Peter <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) ; from the effusion of whose spirit,
when the priest enters into the Holy of Holies for searching into
mysteries, spiritual bells resound in holy Church, as in the tabernacle,
from the words of preaching.  Right, then, and highly to be praised is
your preaching.  But we implore the Almighty Lord to keep you long even
in this life, that from the organ of God, which you are, the voice of
truth may in this world sound more widely.  And for me, I pray you,
intercede, that the way of this pilgrimage, which has become too rough
for me, may with speed be finished, to the end that I, who cannot by my
own merits, may by yours be able to attain to the promises of the
eternal country, and to rejoice with the citizens of heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[45:111](2130075.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p6"></span> The *Agnoetæ* or *Themistiani* arose in
connexion with the Monophysite controversy in the sixth century, being
led by Themistius, a deacon of Alexandria, who taught the limitation of
the human knowledge of Christ, referring especially to [Mark
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032), [John
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p6.1"></span>.  The majority of the Monophysites rejected
his view, which was condemned also by the orthodox.  Eulogius of
Alexandria, to whom the letter before us is addressed, wrote a treatise
against the Agnoetæ, from which extracts are given by Photius. 
Sophronius, patriarch of Jerusalem, pronounced the anathema against
Themistius.  On the same subject, cf. Ep. XXXIX. below.  Gregory’s
arguments in Ep. XXXIX. against the views of the Agnoetæ are interesting
to English readers at the present day, when similar views have been
lately put forward and discussed.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[46:112](2130075.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p7"></span> See Lib. VII. 40.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Maximus, Bishop of Salona.](2130076)
