[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130015)  [Next](2130017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.x"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.x-p1.1"></span>Epistle X.</span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p2"></span>To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

<span id="ii.v.x-p3"></span>Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.x-p4"></span>The bearers of these presents, the most
distinguished men, Vicedominus and Defensor <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) , came to us asserting that a certain
bishop, by name John, coming from Pannonia, had been constituted in the
castle which is called Novæ, to which castle their island, which is
called Capritana, had been appended as a diocese <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) .  They add that, the bishop having been
violently withdrawn and expelled from this same castle, another had been
ordained there; concerning whom, however, <span id="page_6">p. 6</span>
<span id="ii.v.x-Page_6"></span>they allege that it has been resolved
that he ought not to have lived in the aforesaid castle, but in his own
island.  They say further that, while he abode with them there, he was
unwilling to remain in schismatical error, and together with all his
people presented a petition to our most excellent son Callinicus the
Exarch, desiring to be united, with all those that were with him, to the
Catholic Church, as we have already said.  But they say that, being
persuaded by the schismatics, he afterwards recanted, and that now all
the population of the aforesaid island are deprived of the protection of
a Bishop, since, while desiring to be united to holy Church, they cannot
now receive him who has turned to the error of the schismatics; and they
desire to have another ordained for them.  But we, inasmuch as it is
necessary to investigate all things strictly and thoroughly, have taken
the precaution of ordering as follows; namely that thy Fraternity should
send to the said Bishop, and admonish him to return to the unity of the
Catholic Church and to his own people.  If, after admonition, he should
scorn to return, the flock of God ought not to be deluded in the error
of its pastor; and therefore let thy Holiness in that case ordain a
Bishop there, and let him have the said island for his diocese, till
such time as the Histrian Bishops shall return to the Catholic Faith; so
that each Church may have the rights of its own diocese preserved to it,
and that a population destitute of a pastor may not be without the
protection and oversight of government.  In all these things, however,
it becomes thy Fraternity to take vigilant heed that this same people
which comes back to the Church be very studiously admonished, to the end
that it may be firmly fixed in its return, lest through wavering
thoughts it fall back into the pit of error.  But take care to request
the most excellent Exarch, in his despatches, to notify these same
things to the most pious ears of the Emperors, since, although the order
which has been conveyed to him appears to have been elicited from them,
yet he is not forbidden in that order to allow such as wish it to return
to the Church, but only, at the present time, to compel the unwilling. 
Let, then, our aforesaid son take into his charge the management of this
affair, to the end that he may so frame his reports, that whatever he
may ordain may not be dubious.  We have, however, ourselves also written
to our common son Anatolius <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) ,
bidding him notify these things fully to the most pious princes.

<span id="ii.v.x-p8"></span>I have received repeated and pressing
letters from my most excellent son, the lord Exarch Callinicus, in
behalf of Maximus <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) .  Overcome by
his importunity, I see nothing further to be done but to commit the
cause of Maximus to thy Fraternity.  If, therefore, this same Maximus
should come to thy Fraternity, let Honoratus, archdeacon of his Church,
appear also; that thy Holiness may ascertain if he was rightly ordained,
if he fell into no simoniacal heresy, if there was nothing against him
in respect of bodily transgressions, if he did not know himself to be
excommunicated when he presumed to celebrate mass; and whatever may seem
right to thee in the fear of God do thou determine, that we, under God,
may give our assent to thy ordering.  But, if our aforesaid son should
hold thy Fraternity in suspicion, let our most reverend brother
Constantius, bishop of Milan, come also to Ravenna, and sit with thee;
and do you decide together on the said cause:  and whatever may seem
good to both of you, hold it for certain that it will seem good to me. 
For, as we ought not to be obstinate towards the humble, so we ought to
shew ourselves strict towards the proud.  Let, then, your Fraternity, as
you have learnt in the pages of holy Scripture, decide in this business
whatever you may consider just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[5:15](2130016.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.v.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p5"></span> So, with initial capitals as proper names,
in the Benedictine Edition.  Perhaps rather, “the steward
(*vicedominus*) and the guardian (*defensor*).”

<span id="fn_15"></span>[5:16](2130016.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.v.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p6"></span> *Erat quasi per diocesim conjuncta*.  The
meaning is, that the *castellum Novæ* on the main land had been made the
episcopal see of a diocese of the island of Capritana, though not
properly within its limits.  Cf. IX. 9, note 3.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[6:17](2130016.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.v.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p7"></span> At this time Gregory’s *apocrisiarius* at
Constantinople.  Cf. VII. 30.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[6:18](2130016.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.v.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.x-p9"></span> See III. 47, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Brunichild, Queen.](2130017)
