[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130194)  [Next](2130196) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Hymn XVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p2"></span>1.  O thou who art made priest after thy
master, the illustrious after the excellent, the chaste after the grave,
the watchful after the abstinent, thy master from thee has not departed;
in the living we see the deceased:  for lo! in thee is his likeness
painted; and impressed upon thee are his footprints, and all of him
shines from all of thee.  *R., Blessed be He Who in His stead has given
us thee!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p3"></span>2.  The fruit wherein its tree is
painted, bears witness concerning the root.  Hitherto there has not
failed us, the savour of his sweetness.  His words thou showest forth in
bodily act, for thou hast fulfilled them in deed.  In thy conversation
is painted his doctrine, in thy conduct his exposition, in thy
fulfilment his interpretation.  *R., Blessed be He Who has made thy
lustre to excel!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p4"></span>3.  The last pastor who was exalted, and
became head unto the members, the younger who obtained the birthright,
not for price like Jacob, not in jealousy like Aaron, whose brethren the
Levites envied him, *but* by love obtained he it like Moses, though he
was older than Aaron.  In thee thy brethren rejoiced as in him.  *R.,
Blessed be He Who chose thee in unanimity!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p5"></span>4.  There is no envy or jealousy, among
the members of the body; for in love they <span id="page_188">p.
188</span> <span id="iii.iv.xix-Page_188"></span>give ear unto him, with
tenderness they are visited by him.  A watch tower is the head unto the
members, for on every side he looks forth.  Exalted is he yet meek in
his graciousness, even to the feet he humbleth himself, that he may turn
away harm from them.  *R., Blessed be He Who instilled thy love into
us!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p6"></span>5.  A small thing verily had this been,
if by an old man apostasy were overcome.  Old age in its prudence
submitted; youth in its season conquered; for a youthful combatant
endured, the hateful conflict waged, by force that was full of apostacy,
which like smoke waxed and passed:  with its beginning was its end. 
*R., Blessed be He Who blew upon it that it vanished!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p7"></span>6.  The voice of the cornet on a sudden
amazed and called Thee to battle.  Thou wentest up like a new David, by
Thee was subdued a second Goliath.  Thou wast not untried in combat, for
a secret warfare day by day, *Thou art waging against the Evil One*. 
Exercise in secret is wont to attain the crown openly.  *R., Blessed be
He Who chose Thee for our glory!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p8"></span>7.  In face of trial Job trained his
body and his mind, and in temptation he was victorious.  And Joseph
conquered in the chamber; Ananias and his company in the furnace, and in
the midst of the den Daniel.  Satan did foolishly, when in tempting, he
confirmed their victory openly.  *R., Blessed be He Who has multiplied
shame on him!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p9"></span>8.  And the husbandman who apostatized
and was urgent, to sow thorns with his left hand; zealous against him
was the righteous husbandman, stopped and cut off his left hand.  He
filled His own right hand and sowed in the heart the words of life; and
lo! our understanding is tilled, by His prophets and His apostles.  By
Thee may our souls be tilled!  *R., Blessed be He Who chose Thee for our
husbandman!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p10"></span>9.  And if so be Thy words are too
little, till Thou our land with deeds, that amid much tillage, stock and
root may be strengthened.  Better is a goodly deed, than the hearing of
ten thousand words.  Thy seed shall yield an hundredfold, and the after
crop sixtyfold, yea that which grows of itself thirtyfold.  *R., Blessed
be He Who multiplied Thy increase!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p11"></span>10.  That light should be darkened it
is not meet, that salt should lose its savour it is not right;
defilement for the head is not seemly, nor yet foulness for the mirror. 
Nor if medicines have lost their savour sicknesses also are not cured;
and if so be the torch is quenched, the stumbling also are many.  Thy
light shall chase away our darkness.  *R., Blessed be He Who hath made
Thee our lamp!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p12"></span>11.  Appoint for thee scribes and
judges, exactors also and dispensers, overseers also and officers:  to
each assign his work, lest haply by care should be rusted, or by anxiety
should be distracted, the mind and the tongue, wherewith thou offerest
supplication, for the expiation of all the people.  *R., Blessed be He
Who makes illustrious Thy ministry!*

<span id="iii.iv.xix-p13"></span>12.  That he should purge his mind, and
cleanse also his tongue; that he should purify his hands, and make his
whole body to shine; this is too little for the priest and his title,
who offers the Living Body.  Let him cleanse all himself at all hours;
for he stands as mediator, between God and mankind.  *R., Blessed be He
Who has cleansed His ministers!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XIX.](2130196)
