[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130089)  [Next](2130091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p2"></span>To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p3"></span>Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p4"></span>When the bearer of these presents,
Candidus the abbot, came hither to ask for relics (which have also been
granted), as much as I rejoiced in thy Fraternity’s nursing aid, thy
Fraternity’s care for me being therein apparent, so much was I
distressed that I could not enjoy his presence as I wished to do, seeing
that he found me sick, and, when he departed, left me still in a state
of weakness.  For it is now a long time since I have been able to rise
from bed.  For at one time the pain of gout torments me, at another a
fire, I know not of what kind, spreads itself with pain through my whole
body; and it is generally the case that at one and the same time burning
pain racks me, and body and mind fail me.  Further, what other great
distresses of sickness beside what I have mentioned I am affected by, I
am unable to recount.  This however I may briefly say, that the
infection of a noxious humour so drinks me up that it is pain to me to
live, and I anxiously look for death, which alone I can hope for to
relieve my groans.  Accordingly, most holy brother, implore for me the
compassion of divine loving-kindness, that it would mercifully mitigate
towards me the scourges of its smiting, and grant me patience to endure,
lest (which God forbid) my heart break out into impatience from
excessive weariness, and the guilt which might have been well cured
through stripes be increased by murmuring.  Given in the month of
February, Indiction 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.](2130091)
