[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130060)  [Next](2130062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lv-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lv-p2"></span>*To Claudius in Spain* <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) .

<span id="ii.v.lv-p4"></span>Gregory to Claudius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.lv-p5"></span>The renown of good deeds being fragrant
after the manner of ointment, the odour of your glory has extended from
the Western parts as far as here.  Besprinkled by the sweetness of which
breath of air, I declare that I greatly loved one whom I knew not, and
within the bosom of my heart seized thee with the hand of love; nor did
I love without already knowing him to be one whose good qualities I had
learnt.  For of him who is known to me by great intenseness of feeling,
but remains unknown by bodily vision, I undoubtedly can say truly that I
know his person, though I know not his home.  Now herein is a great
assertion of your good repute, that your Glory is said to cleave
sedulously to the excellent king of the Goths; since, while good men
always displease bad ones, it is certain that you are good, who have
pleased one that is good.  For this reason, addressing you with the
greeting that is due to you, I hope that you are being exercised in
these things which you have begun, so that that true sentence of Solomon
may be fulfilled in you—*The path of the just is as a shining light, and
groweth unto the perfect day* ([Prov. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.lv-p5.1"></span>). 
For, now that the light of truth shines upon us, and the sweetness of
the heavenly kingdom discloses itself to our minds, it is indeed already
day, but not yet perfect day.  But it will then be perfect day, when
there shall be no longer anything of the night of sin in our souls.  But
do you grow unto the perfect day, that, until such time as the heavenly
country shall appear, there may be spreading increase of good works
here; to the end that in the retribution hereafter the fruit of reward
may be by so much the greater as earnestness in labour has been
increasing now.  Wherefore we commend to your Glory our most beloved son
Cyriacus, the Father of our monastery, that, after he has accomplished
what has been enjoined him, there be no hindrance to delay his return. 
May Almighty God guard you by the protection of His heavenly arm, and
grant unto <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="ii.v.lv-Page_34"></span>you to be glorious both now among men and
after long courses of years among the angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[33:78](2130061.htm#fr_77) <span
id="ii.v.lv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lv-p3"></span> This Claudius appears to have been a
person of influence in the court of King Reccared, and no doubt a good
Catholic, of whose virtues Gregory may have heard from his friend
Leander of Seville.  The object of this very complimentary letter to him
was to commend to his favour the abbot Cyriacus, who, as appears from
preceding epistles, had been sent into Gaul to bring about the
assembling of a synod there, and who appears from this epistle to have
been sent on into Spain, though for what particular purpose does not
appear.  Cf. *Proleg*., p. xi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Leander, Bishop of Hispalis (Seville).](2130062)
