[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130286)  [Next](2130288) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.x"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p1"></span> *<span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ix.x-p1.1"></span>Demonstration XXII.</span>*<span
class="c1"><span id="iii.ix.x-p1.2"></span>—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.x-p1.3"></span>Of</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.x-p1.4"></span>Death and the Latter Times</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p2"></span>1.  The upright and righteous and good and
wise fear not nor tremble at death, because of the great hope that is
before them.  And they at every time are mindful of death, their exodus,
and of the last day in which the children of Adam shall be judged.  They
know that by the sentence of judgment death has held sway, because Adam
transgressed the commandment; as the Apostle said:—*Death ruled from
Adam unto Moses even over those who sinned not, so that also upon all
the children of Adam it passed*, <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) even as it passed upon Adam.  And
how did death rule from Adam unto Moses?  Clearly, when God laid down
the commandment for Adam, He warned him, and said:—*On the day that thou
shalt eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt die
the death.* <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) * *So when he
transgressed the commandment and ate of the tree, death ruled over him
and over all his progeny.  Even over those who had not sinned, even over
them did death rule through Adam’s transgression of the commandment.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p5"></span>2.  And why did he say:—*From Adam unto
Moses did Death rule? * And who is so ill-furnished with knowledge as to
imagine that only from Adam to Moses has death had dominion?  Yet let
him understand from this that he said:—*Upon all men it passed.*  Thus,
upon all men it passed from Moses until the world shall end.  Yet Moses
preached that its kingdom is made void.  For when Adam transgressed the
commandment whereby the sentence of death was passed upon his progeny,
Death hoped that he would bind fast all the sons of man and would be
king over them for ever.  But when Moses came, he proclaimed the
resurrection, and Death knew that his kingdom is to be made void.  For
Moses said:—*Reuben shall live and not die, and shall be in
number*. <span id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166)   And when the Holy
One called Moses from the bush he said thus to him:—*I am the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob*. <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167)  When Death heard this utterance,
he trembled and feared and was terrified and was perturbed, and knew
that he had not become king for ever over the children of Adam.  From
the hour that he heard God saying to Moses:—*I am the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob*, Death smote his hands together, for he learned
that God is King of the dead and of the living, and that it is appointed
to the children of Adam to come forth from his darkness, and arise with
their bodies.  And observe that our Redeemer Jesus also, when He
repeated this utterance to the Sadducees, when they were disputing with
Him about the Resurrection of the dead, thus said:—*God is not (God) of
the dead, for all are alive unto Him.* <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p9"></span>3.  And that God might make known to Death
that his authority is not for ever over all the progeny of the world, He
translated Enoch to Himself, because he was well-pleasing, and made him
deathless.  And again He took up Elijah to heaven, and Death had no
dominion over him.  And Hannah said:—*The Lord maketh to die and causeth
to live; He bringeth down to Sheol and raiseth up*. <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169)   Furthermore Moses said as from
the mouth of God:—*I make to die and I cause to live*. <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170)   Again the Prophet Isaiah also
said:—*Thy dead shall live, and their dead bodies shall rise again; and
the sleepers of the dust shall be awakened, and shall glorify
Thee*. <span id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171)   When Death heard all
these things, amaze<span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_403"></span>ment seized him, and he sat him down in
mourning.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p13"></span>4.  And when Jesus, the slayer of Death,
came, and clothed Himself in a Body from the seed of Adam, and was
crucified in His Body, and tasted death; and when (Death) perceived
thereby that He had come down unto him, he was shaken from his place and
was agitated when he saw Jesus; and he closed his gates and was not
willing to receive Him.  Then He burst his gates, and entered into him,
and began to despoil all his possessions.  But when the dead saw light
in the darkness, they lifted up their heads from the bondage of death,
and looked forth, and saw the splendour of the King Messiah.  Then the
powers of the darkness of Death sat in mourning, for he was degraded
from his authority.  Death tasted the medicine that was deadly to him,
and his hands dropped down, and he learned that the dead shall live and
escape from his sway.  And when He had afflicted Death by the despoiling
of his possessions, he wailed and cried aloud in bitterness and said,
“Go forth from my realm and enter it not.  Who then is this that comes
in alive into my realm?”  And while Death was crying out in terror (for
he saw that his darkness was beginning to be done away, and some of the
righteous who were sleeping arose to ascend with Him), then He made
known to him that when He shall come in the fulness of time, He will
bring forth all the prisoners from his power, and they shall go forth to
see the light.  Then when Jesus had fulfilled His ministry amongst the
dead, Death sent Him forth from his realm, and suffered Him not to
remain there.  And to devour Him like all the dead, he counted it not
pleasure.  He had no power over the Holy One, nor was He given over to
corruption.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p14"></span>5.  And when he had eagerly sent Him
forth and He had come forth from his realm, He left with him, as a
poison, the promise of life; that by little and little his power should
be done away.  Even as when a man has taken a poison in the food which
is given for (the support of) life, when he perceives in himself that he
has received poison in the food, then he casts up again from his belly
the food in which poison was mingled; but the drug leaves its power in
his limbs, so that by little and little the structure of his body is
dissolved and corrupted.  So Jesus dead was the bringer to nought of
Death; for through Him life is made to reign, and through Him Death is
abolished, to whom it is said:—*O Death, where is thy victory?* <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p16"></span>6.  Therefore, ye children of Adam, all
ye over whom Death has ruled, be mindful of Death and remember life; and
transgress not the commandment as your first father did.  O Kings,
crowned with the diadem, remember Death, which will take away the
diadems that are set upon your heads, and he shall be king over you till
the time, when ye shall rise again for the judgment.  O ye haughty and
uplifted and proud, remember Death, which shall destroy your
haughtiness, and dissolve the limbs, and separate the joints, and the
body and its forms shall be given over to corruption.  The lofty ones
shall be brought low by Death, and the fierce and stern ones shall be
buried away in his darkness.  He shall take away all the pride, and they
shall corrupt away and become dust, until the judgment.  O ye rich,
remember Death; for when the time shall come and ye shall draw nigh to
him there, ye shall not use your wealth and possessions.  He will not
place dainty viands before you, nor will he prepare for you a rich
banquet.  There the body of the gluttons who used to live delicately
shall be corrupted.  They shall cease from their luxury and shall not
remember it.  There the worm shall consume their bodies, and they shall
clothe themselves in darkness over their fair apparel.  They remember
not the ending of this world, that Death shall confound them when they
descend to him.  So they shall sit in oppression and in the shadow of
death, and shall not remember this world, until the end shall be and
they shall rise again for the judgment.  O ye rapacious and extortioners
<span id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_404"></span>and plunderers of your fellows, remember
Death, and multiply not your sins; for in that place sinners repent not;
and he who has plundered his fellows’ goods shall not possess his own,
but shall go to the place where man shall make no use of wealth.  And he
shall come to nought and pass away from his honour, but his sins shall
be laid up against the day of judgment.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p17"></span>7.  O ye that trust in this world, let
this world be despised in your eyes; for ye are sojourners and aliens in
the midst of it, and ye know not the day that ye shall be taken out of
it.  For suddenly shall Death come, and separate and lead away the loved
children from their parents, and the parents from their darling
children.  He leads away for himself the precious only-begotten
children, and their parents shall be deprived of them and shall come
into contempt.  He separates precious friends unto himself, and their
beloved weep for them lamentably.  He leads away and takes prisoners
unto himself them that are desired for their beauty, that he may put to
shame their forms and corrupt them.  And those that are glorious in
aspect he leads away to himself, and they become dust until the
judgment.  He leads away betrothed maidens from their spouses, and binds
them captive in his bridal-chamber, in his place of gloom.  He leads
away and separates betrothed husbands from the virgins who were designed
for them and betrothed in their name; and these shall sit in bitter
mourning over them.  He leads away and separates unto himself all the
beautiful youths who supposed that even unto old age they would not see
death.  He leads away and gathers unto himself the loved infants of
days, with whom their parents were not satiated.  He leads away to
himself the wealthy, the sons of luxury; And *they leave their
possessions as the waves of the sea*. <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173)   He leads away to himself the
skilful artificers, who were raising up the world by their wonderful
works.  He leads away to himself the subtle and the wise, and they
become simple, not distinguishing good from evil.  He leads away to
himself the richly endowed of this world, and their endowments are
destroyed and shall not be established for ever.  He leads away to
himself the mighty and the great ones, and their might is brought low
and weakened, and comes to an end.  Them that were confident that their
might would not be brought lower, in the day of death, men that are of
lower degree than theirs gather together their bodies.  They that trust
that in their death they shall be buried with honour, it befalls them
that the dogs devour them.  And they that trust that they shall be
buried in the place wherein they were born, know not but that in the
land of their captivity they shall even be gathered (to the grave) with
insult.  They that trusted in their possessions, that they should give
them in inheritance to their children, from them it is hidden that they
shall be plundered by their enemies.  Death leads away to himself the
brave and the warriors. who thought to lay waste the great world.  Death
leads away them that adorn themselves with all pleasant things, and the
burial of an ass befalls them when they are buried.  Death rules over
the unborn, and takes them captive to himself before they are born. 
Death leads away to himself them that are honoured with pomps, and they
come into contempt when they descend to him, to the realm of darkness,
where there is no light.  He is not ashamed before Kings (that are)
crowned with the diadem.  He is not abashed before the lofty and the
fierce ones who lay waste the lands.  Death respects not the persons of
the honourable, nor does he receive a bribe from the rich.  Death
despises not the poor, nor does his soul scorn him that has nothing. 
Death honours not them that live in magnificence, nor with him are the
good distinguished from the bad.  He takes no account of the aged,
rather than of children in respect of honour.  The lords of prudence he
makes without understanding, and them that used to make haste and vex
themselves, in acquiring possessions <span id="page_405">p. 405</span>
<span id="iii.ix.x-Page_405"></span>there with him, these are stripped
of their gains.  He leads away to himself slaves and their masters; and
there the masters are not honoured more than their servants.  *Small and
great are there, and they hear not the voice of the oppressor.  The
slave who is freed from his master* <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) there pays no regard to him who
used to oppress him.  Death binds and makes captive to himself the
keepers of prisoners, and the prisoners who were shut up.  By means of
Death the prisoners are released, and fear not again because of their
oppressors.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p20"></span>8.  They that live daintily fear death;
but the afflicted look forward with hope that they shall be speedily
taken away.  All the rich tremble because of death; but the poor desire
it, that they may rest from their labour.  Death terrifies the mighty
when they remember him; but the sick look forward with hope to him that
through him they may forget their pains.  Again the young children are
afraid of death, for when it comes upon them they shall leave their
pleasures; but the old men advanced in years pray for it, they that are
in need of daily bread.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p21"></span>9.  The sons of peace remember death; and
they forsake and remove from them wrath and enmity.  As sojourners they
dwell in this world, and prepare for themselves a provision for the
journey before them.  On that which is above they set their thoughts, on
that which is above they meditate; and those things which are beneath
their eyes they despise.  They send away their treasures to the place
where there is no peril, the place where there is no moth, nor are there
thieves.  They abide in the world as aliens, sons of a far land; and
look forward to be sent out of this world and to come to the city, the
place of the righteous.  They afflict themselves in the place of their
sojourning; and they are not entangled or occupied in the house of their
exile.  Ever day by day their faces are set upwards, to go to the repose
of their fathers.  As prisoners are they in this world, and as hostages
of the King are they kept.  To the end they have no rest in this world,
nor is (their) hope in it, that it will continue for ever.  They that
acquire possessions, rejoice not in them, and they that beget children,
death fills them with sorrow.  They that build cities, shall not be left
in them; and those that hasten and toil for anything, are in no wise to
be distinguished from fools.  O man without sense, whosoever he be whose
trust is in this world!

<span id="iii.ix.x-p22"></span>10.  Remember, my beloved, and compare
and consider in thy mind, who is there of former generations who has
been left in this world so as to continue for ever?  Death has led away
the former generations, the great ones and the mighty and the subtle. 
Who is there that acquired great possessions, and at the time when he
departed took them with him?  That which was gathered together from the
earth returns back into its bosom; and naked does a man depart from his
possessions.  The wise, when they acquire goods, send some of them
before them, as Job said:—*My witnesses are heaven;* and again:—*My
brethren and my lovers are with God*. <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175)   And our Lord commanded them that
acquire possessions to *make for themselves friends* in heaven, and also
to *lay up treasures* there. <span id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p25"></span>11.  Do thou also remember death, O wise
scribe, that thy heart be not lifted up, so that thou shouldest forget
the sentence of judgment.  Death leaves not aside the wise, nor respects
the persons of the subtle.  Death leads away to himself the wise
scribes, so that they forget that which they have learned, until the
time comes in which all the righteous shall rise again.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p26"></span>12.  In that place they shall forget this
world.  There they have no want; and they shall love one another with an
abundant love.  In their bodies there shall be no heaviness, and lightly
shall they fly *as* <span id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_406"></span>*doves to their windows*. <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177)   In their thoughts they shall not
there remember wickedness at all, nor shall anything of uncleanness
arise in their heart.  In that place there shall be no natural desire,
for there they shall be weaned from all appetites.  There shall not
arise in their heart anger or lasciviousness; also they shall remove
from them all things that gender sins.  Fervent in their heart will be
the love of each other; and hatred will not be fixed within them at
all.  They shall have no need there to build houses, for they shall
abide in light, in the mansions of the saints.  They shall have no need
of woven raiment, for they shall be clothed in eternal light.  They
shall have no need of food, for they shall recline at His table and be
nurtured for ever.  The air of that region is pleasant and glorious, and
its light shines out, and is goodly and gladsome.  Planted there are
beautiful trees, whose fruits fail not, and whose leaves fall not. 
Their boughs are glorious, their perfume delightful, and of their taste
no soul shall grow weary for ever.  Spacious is the region, nor is it
limited; yet its inhabitants shall see its distance even as that which
is near.  There the inheritance shall not be divided, and no man shall
say to his fellow:—“This is mine and that is thine.”  They shall not be
bound there in the desire of covetousness, nor shall they go astray
there concerning remembrance.  There a man shall not love his neighbour
with especial reverence, but abundantly shall they all love one another
after one fashion.  They shall not marry wives there, nor shall they
beget children; nor shall there the male be distinguished from the
female; but all shall be sons of their Father Who is in heaven; as the
Prophet said:—*Is there not one Father of us all; is there not one God
Who created us?* <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p29"></span>13.  And as regards that which I said;
that there they shall not take wives, nor is male distinguished from
female, our Lord and His Apostles have taught us.  For our Lord
said:—*They that are worthy of that world, and of that resurrection from
the abode of the dead, shall not take wives, nor shall (women) become
wives to men; for they cannot die; but they are as the angels in heaven,
and are the children of God*. <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179)
  And the apostle said:—*There is neither male nor female, neither bond
nor free; but ye are all one in Jesus Christ*. <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180)   For, as for Eve, to spread abroad
generation, God took her out from Adam, that she might become the mother
of all living; but yet in that world there is no female; even as in
heaven also there is no female, nor generation, nor use of
concupiscence.  In that place there is no deficiency, but fulness and
perfection.  The aged shall not die and the young shall not grow old. 
And it is in expectation of growing old and dying that young men take
wives and beget children, that when the fathers shall have died the
children may rise up in their stead.  Now all these things have their
use only in this world, for in that place there is no want, nor any
deficiency, nor concupiscence, nor generation, nor ending, nor failure,
nor death, nor termination, nor old age.  There is neither hatred, nor
wrath, nor envy, nor weariness, nor toil, nor darkness, nor night, nor
falsehood.  There is not in that place any want at all; but it is full
of light, and life, and grace, and fulness, and satisfaction and
renewal, and love, and all the good promises that are written but not
yet *sealed*.  For there is there that *which eye hath not seen and ear
hath not heard, and which hath not come up into the heart of man*, <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181) that which is unspeakable and which
a man cannot utter.  And the Apostle said:—*That which God hath prepared
for them that love Him*. <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182)  
Though men shall say much, they shall not be able to express it.  That
which eye hath not seen, they are unable to relate; and that which ear
hath not heard, it is not right to speak of in such wise as to compare
it with anything that the ear has heard and the eye has seen.  And that
which has not come up unto the heart, who is there dares to speak <span
id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span id="iii.ix.x-Page_407"></span>of it,
as though it was like anything that has come up into the heart?  But
this is right for a speaker, to liken and call that place the abode of
God, and the place of life, the perfect place, the place of light, the
place of glory, the Sabbath of God, the day of rest, the repose of the
righteous, the joy of the just, the abode and dwelling-place of the
righteous and the holy, the place of our hope, the sure abode of our
trust, the place of our treasure, the place that shall assuage our
weariness and remove our afflictions, and soothe our sighs.  To these
things it is right for us to liken, and thus to call, that place.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p34"></span>14.  Again, Death leads away to himself
kings, the founders of cities, who strengthen themselves in splendour. 
And he does not leave aside the Lords of the countries.  Death leads
away and takes captive to himself the avaricious who are not satisfied
nor say “Enough”; and he is greedy for them with a greater greed than
theirs.  Death leads away to himself the despoilers who were not by
their grace restrained from despoiling their fellows.  Death leads away
to himself the oppressors, and through death are they restrained from
iniquity.  Death leads away to himself the persecutors, and the
persecuted have rest till they go to him.  Death leads away to himself
them that swallow up their fellows, and the down-trodden and oppressed
have rest for a little until they themselves also are led away and go
thither.  Death leads away them that abound in meditations, and all they
have thought upon is dissolved and brought to nought.  Men meditate upon
many matters, and death comes upon them suddenly, and they are led away;
and thereafter they remember nothing that they have thought upon.  There
is one that makes plans for many years, and (the knowledge) is withheld
from him that he shall not survive to-morrow.  Some son of Adam is
uplifted and vaunts himself over his fellow; and death comes upon him
and brings to nought his vaunting.  The rich man plans to add to his
possessions, and he knows not that he shall not continue to possess even
that which he has acquired.  Death leads away to himself all the
children of men, and binds them fast in his abode until the judgment. 
Also over those that have not sinned is he king, because of the sentence
of judgment that Adam received for his sins.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p35"></span>15.  And the Life-giver shall come, the
Destroyer of Death, and shall bring to nought his power, from over the
just and from over the wicked.  And the dead shall arise with a mighty
shout, and Death shall be emptied and stripped of all the captivity. 
And for judgment shall all the children of Adam be gathered together,
and each shall go to the place prepared for him.  The risen of the
righteous shall go unto life, and the risen of the sinners shall be
delivered unto death.  The righteous who kept the commandment shall go,
and shall not come nigh unto judgment in the day that they shall rise;
as David asked, *And bring not thy servant into judgment*; <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) nor will their Lord terrify them in
that day.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p37"></span>16.  Remember that the Apostle also said,
*We shall judge angels*. <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184)  
And our Lord said to His disciples, *Ye shall sit on twelve thrones, and
judge twelve tribes of the house of Israel*. <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185)   And Ezekiel said concerning
righteous men, <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) that they
shall judge Ahola and Aholibah.  Since, then, the righteous are to judge
the wicked, He has made clear concerning them that they shall not come
into judgment.  And as to what the apostles say, that *We shall judge
angels,* hear, and I will instruct thee.  The angels who shall be judged
by the apostles are the priests who have violated the law; as the
Prophet said, *The lips of the priest shall guard knowledge, and the law
shall they inquire of his mouth; because he is the angel of the Lord,
the most mighty*. <span id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187) * The
angels* who are *the priests, of whose mouth the law is inquired,* when
they transgress the law, shall be judged at the <span id="page_408">p.
408</span> <span id="iii.ix.x-Page_408"></span>last by the apostles, and
the priests who observe the law.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p42"></span>17.  *And the wicked shall not arise in
the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous*. <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188)   And even as the righteous who are
perfected in good works shall not come into the judgment to be judged,
so of the wicked also whose sins are many, and the measure of whose
offences is overflowing, it shall not be required that they should draw
nigh unto the judgment, but when they have risen again they shall turn
back to Sheol, as David said, *The wicked shall turn back to Sheol, and
all the nations that forget God.* <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189)   And Isaiah said, *All the nations
are as a drop from the bucket, and as the turning of the balance.  And
the isles as a grain of sand shall be cast away, and all the nations are
esteemed as nothingness by Him.  For destruction and the sword are they
esteemed by Him*. <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190)   Therefore
learn and be persuaded, that all the nations that know not God their
Maker, are esteemed by God as nothingness, and shall not come nigh to
judgment, but as soon as they have risen shall turn back to Sheol.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p46"></span>18.  But all the rest of the world who
are called sinners shall stand in the judgment and be rebuked.  Those in
whom there is a little shortcoming will the judge rebuke, and make known
to them that they have offended.  And He will give them the inheritance
of life after the judgment.  And understand that our Lord has made known
to us in His Gospel, that every man according to his work shall receive
his reward.  He that received money, showed the increase on it.  He
whose pound or talent produced tenfold, received life, perfect, in
nothing lacking.  He whose pound or talent produced fivefold, received
the half of ten.  One was given a tenfold authority and one a fivefold. 
Now consider and see, that the increase of five is less than that of
ten; and the labourers who demand the reward excel them that received it
in silence.  They who toiled all the day, with bold face receive the
reward and demand it, in confidence that He will add more to them. 
While they who worked one hour receive it in silence, and know that
through grace they receive mercy and life.  The sinners whose sins are
many shall be condemned by the place of judgment, and shall go into
torments.  And from that time and onwards, judgment shall rule over
them.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p47"></span>19.  Furthermore, hearken unto the
Apostle who said, *Every man according his work shall receive his
reward*. <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191)   He that toiled
little, shall receive according to his remissness; and he that made much
speed, shall be rewarded according to his speed.  And Job also said,
*Far be it from God to do iniquity; and far be it from Him to do sin. 
For according to a man’s works will He reward him, and a man shall
receive according his ways.* <span id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192)
  And also the Apostle said, *Star excels star in brightness.  So also
is the resurrection of the dead*. <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193)   Therefore know that, even when
men shall enter into life, yet reward shall excel reward, and glory
shall excel glory, and recompense shall excel recompense.  Degree is
higher than degree; and light is more goodly than light in aspect.  The
sun excels the moon, and the moon is greater than the stars that are
with her.  And observe that the moon and the stars are also under the
power of the sun, and their light is swallowed up in the splendour of
the sun.  And the sun has power along with the moon and the stars, that
he may not abolish the night which has been separated from the day.  And
when the sun was created, he was called a luminary.  And observe that
the sun and the moon and the stars are all called luminaries; but
luminary excels luminary.  The sun obscures the light of the moon, and
the moon likewise darkens the light of the stars; and star excels star
in its light.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p51"></span>20.  And understand (this) also, from
that which is of this world, those who labour with toil, and from the
hired men <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_409"></span>who work with their fellows.  There are
some who hire their fellow-men by day-wages, and (these) receive the
wage of their toil; and there are some who are hired for the month, and
compute and receive the wage for the time, at the time agreed.  And the
day-wage is distinguished from the monthly wage; and yearly exceeds
monthly wage.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p52"></span>21.  And also again, understand it from
the authority that is in this world.  There are some who please the king
by their activity, and receive honour from those in authority.  One
receives a crown from the king, to become governor in one of the
countries.  And under the authority of another, the king places towns;
and also he excels his inferiors in his attire.  Some receive presents
and gifts, and one honour is distinguished from another.  There is one
to whom the king gives the honour of being steward over all the
treasury.  Another, according to his lower condition, serves the king,
and his authority is only to provide the daily food.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p53"></span>22.  Also in respect of penalty, I say
that all men are not equal.  He that has done great wickedness is
greatly tormented.  And he that has offended not so much is less
tormented.  Some *shall go into outer darkness, where there is weeping
and gnashing of teeth*. <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194)  
Others shall be cast into the fire, according as they deserve; for it is
not written that they shall gnash their teeth, nor that there is
darkness there.  Some shall be cast into another place, a place where
*their worm shall not die, and their fire shall not be quenched, and
they shall became an astonishment to all flesh*. <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195)   In the faces of others the door
shall be closed and the Judge will say to them:—*I know you not*. <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196)   And consider that, as the reward
for good deeds is not equal for all men, so it is also for evil deeds. 
Not in one fashion shall men be judged, but every man according to his
works shall receive his requital, because the Judge is clothed in
righteousness and regards not the persons of men.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p57"></span>23.  And even as I have showed thee
concerning the world, how one honour excels another, of those that kings
and rulers of this world give to those beneath them; also concerning
this I have showed thee, that even as kings have good gifts to give to
those honoured by them, so also they have prisons and chains and
fetters, which are various kinds of bonds.  One man offends the king
with a grievous offence, and without inquiry he is delivered over to
death.  Another offends, yet is not deserving of death; he is put in
bonds until he is judged; and is chastised, and the king remits his
offence.  There is another whom the king has held in regard; and outside
the prison house he is kept in freedom, without chains and without
bonds.  He that is put to death is distinguished from him that is bound;
and the punishment of one exceeds that of another, according to the
desert of his offence.  But come thou to our Redeemer, Who said:—*Many
are the mansions in My Father’s house.* <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p59"></span>24.  My beloved, men who are inferior in
understanding, dispute about this that I write to thee, and say:—“What
is the place in which the righteous shall receive a good reward; and
what is the place in which are torments, in which the wicked shall
receive the punishments of their works?”  O man that thinkest thus, I
will ask thee, and tell thou me, why is death called death, and why is
Sheol called Sheol?  For it is written that when Korah and his
companions made a schism against Moses, *the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed them up, and they went down alive into Sheol*. <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198)   Therefore that was the mouth of
Sheol that was opened in the wilderness.  David also said, The wicked
shall turn back to Sheol. <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199)  
We say that to Sheol, in which Korah and his companions were swallowed
up, thither shall the wicked be turned back.  For God has power, if He
chooses, to give inheritance of <span id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_410"></span>life in heaven, and if it please Him, in
the earth.  Jesus our Lord said, *Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven*. <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200)   And to one of those who were
crucified with Him, who believed on him He swore:—*Thou shalt be with Me
to-day in the garden Eden*. <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201)  
And the Apostle said, *When the righteous shall rise again, they shall
fly upwards to meet our Redeemer*. <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202)   But, however, we say thus:  That
which our Redeemer said to us is true:—*Heaven and earth shall pass
away*. <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203)   And the Apostle
said, *Hope which is seen is not hope*. <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204)   And the Prophet said, *The
heavens shall pass away as smoke, and the earth as a garment shall wear
away; and its inhabitants shall become like it*. <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205)   And Job said concerning those
that sleep, *Till the heavens wear out, they shall not be aroused, nor
shall they wake out of their sleep*. <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206)   From these things be thou
persuaded that this earth, in which the children of Adam are sown, and
the firmament that is over men, (even) that firmament which is set to
divide the upper heavens from the earth and this life, shall pass away,
and wear out, and be destroyed.  And God will make a new thing for the
children of Adam, and they shall inherit inheritances in the Kingdom of
Heaven.  If He shall give them inheritance in the earth, it shall be
called the kingdom of heaven.  And if in Heaven, it is easy for Him to
do.  For with the kings of the earth also, although each one of them
abides in his own place, yet every place to which their authority
extends, is called their kingdom.  So the sun is a luminary set in the
heaven, yet for every place to which its rays extend, its authority
suffices, whether on sea or on land.  And observe that the princes of
the world also have banquetings and delights, and in every place or
state into which they go, their banquetings are with them; and in
whatever place pleases them, they make a prison-house.  For the sun in
twelve hours circles round, from the east unto the west; and when he has
accomplished his course, his light is hidden in the night-time, and the
night is not disturbed by his power.  And in the hours of the night the
sun turns round in his rapid course, and turning round begins to run in
his accustomed path.  As for the sun that is with thee, thou wise man,
from thy childhood till the completion of thy old age, thou knowest not
where he runs in the night-time, so as to circle round to the place of
its course.  Is it necessary for thee to inquire into those things that
are hidden from thee?

<span id="iii.ix.x-p69"></span>25.  These memorials I have written for
our brethren and beloved, the children of the Church of God, that when
these come into their hands in various places, and when they read in
them, they may also remember my insignificance in their prayers, and may
know that I am a sinner also, and fall short; but that this is my faith,
that I have set forth from the beginning and written, in these chapters
written (by me).  *Faith* is the foundation, and upon faith (rest) the
works that become it.  And after Faith (I wrote) that there are two
commandments of *Love*.  And after Love, I have written of *Fasting*, in
its demonstration also along with its works.  And after Fasting, I wrote
of *Prayer* in its fruit and in its works.  And after Prayer, have
written about *War* and about whatever Daniel wrote concerning the
kingdoms.  And after War, I have written of the exhortation for
*Monks*.  And after the Monks, I have written about *Repentance*.  And
after Repentance, I have written about the *Resurrection of the dead*. 
And after the Resurrection of the dead, I have written about
*Humility*.  And after Humility, I have written of the *Pastors*, the
teachers.  And after the Pastors, I have written about the
*Circumcision* in which the people of the Jews pride themselves.  And
after the Circumcision, I have written about the *Passover*, and about
the fourteenth day.  And after the Passover, I have written about the
*Sabbath*, in which the Jews are puffed up.  And after the Sabbath, I
have written an <span id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_411"></span>*Exhortation*, on account of the
dissension which happened in our days.  And after the Exhortation, I
have written about *Meats*, those that the Jews deem unclean.  And after
the Meats, I have written about the *Gentiles*, that they have entered
in and become heirs instead of the original people.  And after the
Gentiles, I have written and proved that *God has a Son*.  And after the
*Son of God*, I have written against the Jews, who speak injuriously
about *Virginity*.  And after the apology about Virginity, I have
written again *Against the Jews*, who say:—“It is appointed for us to be
gathered together.”  And after that defence, I have written about
*Almsgiving to the Poor*.  And after the Poor, I have written a
demonstration about *The Persecuted*.  And after the Persecuted, I have
written at the end about *Death and the Last Times*.  These twenty-two
discourses have I written according to the twenty-two letters of the
alphabet.  The first ten I wrote in the six hundred and forty-eighth
year of the kingdom of Alexander the son of Philip the Macedonian, as is
written in the end of them.  And these twelve last I wrote in the six
hundred and fifty-fifth year of the kingdom of the Greeks and of the
Romans, which is the kingdom of Alexander, and in the thirty-fifth year
of the Persian King. <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p71"></span>26.  These things I have written
according to what I have attained to.  But if anyone shall read these
discourses, and find words that do not agree with his thought, he ought
not to scorn them; because whatsoever is written in these chapters was
not written according to the thought of one man, nor for the persuasion
of one reader; but according to the thought of all the Church, and for
the persuasion of all faith.  If he shall read and hear with persuasion,
it is well; and if not, it is meet for me to say that I wrote for those
open to persuasion and not for mockers.  And if again any reader should
find words that are spoken by us in one fashion, and by another sage in
another fashion, let him not be disturbed at this; for every man speaks
to his hearers according to what he can attain to.  So I, who have
written these things, even if some of the words do not agree with what
other speakers have said, yet say this; that those sages have spoken
well, yet it seemed good to me to speak thus.  And if any man shall
speak and demonstrate to me about any matter, I will receive instruction
from him without contention.  Everyone who reads the sacred scriptures,
both former and latter, in both covenants, and reads with persuasion,
will learn and teach.  But if he strives about anything that he does not
understand, his mind does not receive teaching.  But if he finds words
that are too difficult for him, and he does not understand their force,
let him say thus, “Whatsoever is written is written well, but I have not
attained to the understanding of it.”  And if he shall ask about the
matters that are too hard for him of wise and discerning men who inquire
into doctrine, then, when ten wise men shall speak to him in ten
different ways about one matter, let him accept that which pleases him;
and if any please not him, let him not scorn the sages; for the word of
God is like a pearl, that has a beautiful appearance on whatever side
you turn it.  And remember, O disciple, what David said, *From all my
teachers have I learned*. <span id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208)  
And the Apostle said:—*Thou readest every Scripture that is in the
Spirit of God.  And prove everything; hold fast that which is good; and
flee from every evil thing*. <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209)
  For if the days of a man should be many as all the days of the world
from Adam to the end of the ages, and he should sit and meditate upon
the Holy Scriptures, he would not comprehend all the force of the depth
of the words.  And man cannot rise up to the wisdom of God; as I have
written in the tenth discourse.  But, however, the words of all speakers
who do not take from the great treasure, are accursed and to be
despised.  For the image of the king (on his coin) is received
wherever<span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_412"></span> it goes; but (the coin) in which there is
base metal, is rejected and is not received.  And if any one should say,
“These discourses were spoken by such an one;” let him carefully learn
that to be careful to inquire about the speaker is not commanded him.  I
also according to my insignificance have written these things, a man
sprung from Adam, and fashioned by the hands of God, a disciple of the
Holy Scriptures.  For our Lord said:—*Every one that asketh receiveth,
and he that seeketh findeth, and for him that knocketh it shall be
opened*. <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210)   And the prophet
said:—*I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh in the last days, and
they shall prophesy*. <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211)  
Therefore whoever shall read anything that I have written above, let him
read with persuasion, and pray for the author as a brother of the Body;
that through the petition of all the Church of God; his sins may be
forgiven.  And let whoever reads understand what is written:—*Let him
that hears the word, communicate to him that causes him to hear, in all
good things*. <span id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212)   And again it
is written, *The sower and the reaper shall rejoice together*. <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213)   And *Every man according to his
labours shall receive his reward*. <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214)   And *There is nothing hidden that
shall not be revealed to every man*. <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[402:1165](2130287.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p3"></span> [Rom.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.x-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[402:1166](2130287.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p4"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.x-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[402:1167](2130287.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p6"></span> [Deut. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.x-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[402:1168](2130287.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p7"></span> [Ex. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[402:1169](2130287.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p8"></span> [Luke xx.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#038)<span id="iii.ix.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[402:1170](2130287.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p10"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.x-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[402:1171](2130287.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p11"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="iii.ix.x-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[402:1172](2130287.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p12"></span> [Is. xxvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.x-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[403:1173](2130287.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p15"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span id="iii.ix.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[404:1174](2130287.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p18"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
29.18](../../../bib/apo/sir029.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ix.x-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[405:1175](2130287.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p19"></span> [Job
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[405:1176](2130287.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p23"></span> [Job
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#020)<span id="iii.ix.x-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[405:1177](2130287.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p24"></span> [Matt.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#020), [Luke
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.x-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[406:1178](2130287.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p27"></span> [Is. lx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.x-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[406:1179](2130287.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p28"></span> [Mal. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix.x-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[406:1180](2130287.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p30"></span> [Luke
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span id="iii.ix.x-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[406:1181](2130287.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p31"></span> [Gal. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix.x-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[406:1182](2130287.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p32"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.x-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[406:1183](2130287.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p33"></span> [1 Cor.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.x-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[407:1184](2130287.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p36"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix.x-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[407:1185](2130287.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p38"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix.x-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[407:1186](2130287.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p39"></span> [Matt.
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), [Luke
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030)<span
id="iii.ix.x-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[407:1187](2130287.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p40"></span> [Ezek.
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#025)<span id="iii.ix.x-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[407:1188](2130287.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p41"></span> [Mal. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix.x-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[408:1189](2130287.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p43"></span> [Ps. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix.x-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[408:1190](2130287.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p44"></span> [Ps. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.x-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[408:1191](2130287.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p45"></span> [Isa.
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.x-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[408:1192](2130287.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p48"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.x-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[408:1193](2130287.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p49"></span> [Job
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.x-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[408:1194](2130287.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p50"></span> [1 Cor.
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)<span id="iii.ix.x-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[409:1195](2130287.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p54"></span> [Matt. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.x-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[409:1196](2130287.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p55"></span> [Is. lxvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix.x-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[409:1197](2130287.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p56"></span> [Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.x-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[409:1198](2130287.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p58"></span> [John xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix.x-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[409:1199](2130287.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p60"></span> [Num.
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#033)<span id="iii.ix.x-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[409:1200](2130287.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p61"></span> [Ps. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.x-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[410:1201](2130287.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p62"></span> [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix.x-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[410:1202](2130287.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p63"></span> [Luke xxiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043)<span id="iii.ix.x-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[410:1203](2130287.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p64"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.x-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[410:1204](2130287.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p65"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="iii.ix.x-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[410:1205](2130287.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p66"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix.x-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[410:1206](2130287.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p67"></span> [Is. li.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.x-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[410:1207](2130287.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p68"></span> [Job xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.x-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[411:1208](2130287.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p70"></span> *Sc*., in the years 337 and 344, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.ix.x-p70.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[411:1209](2130287.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p72"></span> [Ps. cxix.
99](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#099)<span id="iii.ix.x-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[411:1210](2130287.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p73"></span> [1 Thess.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022), [2 Tim.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.x-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[412:1211](2130287.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p74"></span> [Matt. vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.x-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[412:1212](2130287.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p75"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix.x-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[412:1213](2130287.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p76"></span> [Gal. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.x-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[412:1214](2130287.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p77"></span> [John iv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#036)<span id="iii.ix.x-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[412:1215](2130287.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p78"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.x-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[412:1216](2130287.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p79"></span> [Matt. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)<span id="iii.ix.x-p79.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](2130288)
