[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130061)  [Next](2130063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXXI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p2"></span>To Leander, Bishop of Hispalis (Seville).

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Leander, Bishop of Spain.

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p4"></span>I have the epistle of thy Holiness,
written with the pen of charity alone.  For what the tongue transferred
to the paper had got its tincture from the heart.  Good and wise men
were present when it was read, and at once their bowels were stirred
with emotion.  Everyone began to seize thee in his heart with the hand
of love, for that in that epistle the sweetness of thy disposition was
not to be heard, but seen.  All severally were inflamed, and all
admired, and the very fire of the hearers shewed what had been the
ardour of the speaker.  For, unless torches burn themselves, they will
not kindle others.  We saw, then, with how great charity thy mind was
aflame, seeing that it so kindled others also.  Your life indeed, which
I always remember with great reverence, they did not know; but the
loftiness of your heart was manifest to them from the lowliness of your
language.  As to my life, this your epistle speaks of it as worthy of
imitation by all:  but may that which is not as it is said to be become
so because it is said to be so, lest one should lie who is not wont to
lie.  In reply to this, however, I speak shortly the words of a certain
good woman, *Call me not Noemi, that is, fair; but call me Mara, for I
am full of bitterness* ([Ruth i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#020)<span id="ii.v.lvi-p4.1"></span>). 
For indeed, good man, I am not to-day the man you knew.  For I confess
that in advancing outwardly I have fallen much inwardly, and I fear that
I am of the number of those of whom it is written, *Thou didst cast them
down while they were lifted up* ([Psa.
73.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018)<span
id="ii.v.lvi-p4.2"></span> <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) ).  For
he is cast down when he is lifted up who advances in honours, and falls
in manners.  For I, following the ways of my Head, had determined to be
the scorn of men and the outcast of the people, and to run in the lot of
him of whom again it is said by the Psalmist, *The ascents in his heart
he hath disposed in the valley of tears* ([Ps.
74:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006)<span
id="ii.v.lvi-p5.1"></span> <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) ); that
is, that I should ascend inwardly all the more truly as I lay outwardly
the more humbly in the valley of tears.  But now burdensome honour much
depresses me, innumerable cares din me, and, when my mind collects
itself for God, they cleave it with their assaults as if with a kind of
swords.  My heart has no rest.  It lies prostrate in the lowest place,
depressed by the weight of its cogitation.  Either very rarely or not at
all does the wing of contemplation raise it aloft.  My sluggish soul is
torpid, and, with temporal cares barking round it, already almost
reduced to stupor, is forced now to deal with earthly things, and now
even to dispense things that are carnal; nay sometimes, by force of
disgust, is compelled to dispose of some things with accompanying
guilt.  Why should I say more?  Overcome by its own weight, it sweats
blood.  For, unless sin were reckoned under the name of blood, the
Psalmist would not say, *Deliver me from blood guiltiness* ([Psa.
51.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)<span
id="ii.v.lvi-p6.1"></span> <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) ).  But,
when we add sin to sins, we fulfil this also which is said by another
prophet, *Blood hath touched blood* ([Hos. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.lvi-p7.1"></span>.) 
For blood is said to touch blood when sin is joined to sin, so as to
multiply the load of iniquity.  But in the midst of all this I implore
thee by Almighty God to hold me who am fallen into the billows of
perturbation with the hand of thy prayer.  For I sailed as it were with
a prosperous breeze when I led a tranquil life in a monastery:  but a
storm, rising suddenly with gusty surges, caught me in its commotion,
and I lost the prosperity of my voyage; for in loss of rest I suffered
shipwreck.  Lo, now I am tossed in the waves, and I seek for the plank
of thy intercession, that, not being counted worthy to reach port rich
with my ship entire, I may at least after losses be brought to shore by
the aid of a plank.

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p8"></span>Your Holiness writes of being afflicted
with the pains of gout, by continual suffering from which I too am
grievously worn down.  But comfort will be readily at hand, if amid the
scourges under which we suffer we recall to mind whatever faults we have
committed; and then we shall see that they are not scourges, but gifts,
if by pain of the flesh we purge the sins which we did for delight of
the flesh.

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p9"></span>Furthermore we have sent you, with the
blessing of the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, a pallium, to be
used only in celebration of Mass.  In sending it to you I ought to
admonish you much as to how you ought to live:  but I suppress speech,
since in your manner of life you anticipate my words.  May Almighty God
keep you under His protection, and bring you to the rewards of the
heavenly country with multiplied fruits of souls.  As to me, with what
amount of business and with what weakness I am weighed down this short
letter bears witness, in which I say little to one whom I greatly love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[34:79](2130062.htm#fr_78) <span
id="ii.v.lvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p5"></span> In *English Bible*, lxxiii. 18.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[34:80](2130062.htm#fr_79) <span
id="ii.v.lvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p6"></span> In *English Bible,* lxxiv. 5, 6,
differently.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[34:81](2130062.htm#fr_80) <span
id="ii.v.lvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lvi-p7"></span> li. 14, in *English Bible*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Rechared, King of the Visigoths.](2130063)
