[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130126)  [Next](2130128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p2"></span>*To Victor, Bishop* <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) .

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p4"></span>Gregory to Victor, &c.

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p5"></span>While on the one hand it is a joy to us
to learn that our brethren are solicitous about their children in
fatherly charity, on the other we count it no less a matter for sadness
when neither regard for other brethren nor consideration of their
priestly office avails to restrain them from unlawful doings.  How
serious, then, and how harsh is the complaint against our brother
Paulinus, bishop of the city of Tegessis, made by his clerics and by
those who are in sacred orders, I have no doubt is well known to thy
Fraternity, since what has reached us from a distance cannot have been
hidden from thee who art near at hand.  And, since there is need of
great caution lest this bodily injury which they complain of at his
hands in excess of his powers should be ventured on with allowance, or
should grow worse by being connived at, manifest excesses should ever be
so suppressed by canonical control that one proceeding may serve as a
reproof of what is past and a rule for the future.  Accordingly it
becomes thee, together with our most beloved common brother the bishop
Columbus, and with other priests whom you may think fit to call on, to
sift the case between our above-named brother and his clergy by means of
a thorough investigation.  And, if the complaint of the petitioners
stands with truth, so correct ye this thing by a regular reformation,
that he may both be made aware what evil thing he has done and learn for
the future not to exceed the limits of his office.  And suffer him not,
as is said to be the case, to disregard the rank of thy position, lest
his contempt be to his risk and to thy blame.  For whatever is committed
by an inferior, unless it be carefully corrected, reflects on the person
who occupies the superior place.

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p6"></span>That other matter also, namely that the
same our brother Paulinus is said to confer ecclesiastical orders for
money, you should fully and very strictly enquire into.  And, if it
should clearly appear to be so, as we hope will not be the case, let
your zeal for God so kindle itself to avenge this wrong that both the
avarice of the ordainer may be turned into a penalty, and, the unlawful
ordination being void of effect, the person ordained may not enjoy the
longed-for object of his ambition.  Herein we exhort you and before all
things admonish you, that your Fraternity study to be so solicitous
that, before the iniquity of simoniacal heresy shall gain strength in
your parts from the offence of one, it may be cut off from the root by
the pruning-hook of your sentence after a council diligently held.  For
whosoever does not, in consideration of his office, burn vehemently to
correct this atrocity, let him not doubt that he will have his portion
with him from whom this peculiar enormity took its beginning.  And so,
as we have said, you must act vigilantly and earnestly, that your
council, which up to this time, under God’s keeping, has been preserved
from any bad repute of this kind, may not by any possibility be polluted
and ruined by the poison of this wickedness.

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p7"></span>Furthermore, we have given orders to
Hilarus our Chartularius, that, if the case should require it, he defer
not to join you.  Wherefore, should it be necessary, inform him by your
letters of the need of his coming <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="ii.viii.vi-Page_91"></span>to you, to the end that you, together
with him, may be able, God helping you, to determine all these things in
a salutary way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[90:200](2130127.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ii.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.vi-p3"></span> At this time primate of Numidia.  See
preceding epistle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXII](2130128)
