[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130044)  [Next](2130046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXXII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p2"></span>*To Anatolius, Constantinopolitan
Deacon* <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) .

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p4"></span>Gregory to Anatolius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p5"></span>To good and devoted sons it is worth our
labour so to respond as to double, because we are paying a debt, what it
would befit us of our own mere motion to bestow upon them.  Seeing,
then, that the bearer of these presents, our son the magnificent
Marcellinus <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) , has demeaned himself
as he has in the cause of our brother and fellow-bishop Maximus and in
that of the Istrians, and is anxious to employ himself for the advantage
of our Church, therefore, that he may be able more and more to shew his
sincere affection not only in words but also in deeds, we hereby exhort
thy Love to co-operate with him when he comes to the royal city with
entire zeal and earnestness, and to be at pains so to assist him with
all the succour in thy power, that, supported by the aid of Almighty God
and thine, he may have the less difficulty to contend with there.  Thou
wilt also study so to attend to him as to one who is in very truth our
own, and so to bestow on him the efficiency of thy charity, that he may
both recognise a return made to him for the past, and also be able to
entertain a great hope of retribution in the future for his devotion
which he promises to exhibit in the service of the Church.  But inasmuch
as, so far as we have learnt, the most serene lord the Emperor had
commanded our aforesaid magnificent son to hasten to wait upon him
immediately, it is fitting for thee to seek an opportunity of intimating
that it was no faulty disobedience, but the cause of our brother and
fellow-bishop Maximus, that has detained him:  which cause, though late,
has nevertheless through his exertions been brought to a conclusion. 
But this we desire thy Love to attend to carefully; not to allow thyself
to be mixed up in any cause whatever where there is oppression of the
poor; lest haply, under pressure to some extent from persons in power,
thou shouldest be driven to do what could not be of advantage to thy
soul.  Dealing, then, with all matters in the fear of God, consider
especially the eternal reward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[21:55](2130045.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p3"></span> Gregory’s *apocrisiarius* at
Constantinople.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[21:56](2130045.htm#fr_55) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p6"></span> Supposed to be identical with
Marcellus, Proconsul of Dalmatia, who, having originally and for some
time afterwards supported Maximus as bishop of Salona against Gregory,
had apparently made overtures for reconciliation with the latter.  See
IX. 5, and on the whole subject III. 47, note 2.  He seems to have now
fully satisfied Gregory, whose laudation of him in this letter is in
marked contrast to the tone of IX. 5, addressed to Marcellus himself
previously.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XCI](2130046)
