[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130096)  [Next](2130098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLIV.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p2"></span>*To Rusticiana, Patrician* <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) .

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p4"></span>Gregory to Rusticiana, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p5"></span>I have received the letters of your
Excellency, which altogether relieved me, while I was in a state of most
grievous sickness, with regard to your health, your devotion, and your
sweetness.  One thing however I took amiss, namely that in the same
epistles to me what might have been said once was said repeatedly; “Your
handmaiden,” and “your handmaiden.”  For, I having been made the servant
of all through the burdens of episcopacy, with what reason does she call
herself my handmaid whose own I was before I undertook the episcopate? 
And so I beseech you by Almighty God, that I may never find this word in
what you write to me.  Further, the gifts which out of a most pure and
sincere heart you sent to the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles,
have been received and hung up there <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) in the presence of all the clergy. 
But my son, the magnificent lord Symmachus, finding me ill from pains of
gout and almost despaired of, deferred giving me your letters, and gave
them long after the veils had been received:  and I found afterwards in
your Excellence’s letters that they were to have been borne to the
Church of the blessed Peter with a litany.  And so this was not done,
because, as I have already said, we received the veils before the
letters.  Nevertheless the aforesaid Symmachus did with your whole
household what you wished us to do with the clergy.  But, even if the
voices of men were wanting, your offering itself has its own voice
before Almighty God.  In His loving-kindness I trust that the
intercession of him whose body you have covered on earth may protect you
in heaven from all sins, and in his provision rule your house, and in
his watchfulness guard it.

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p7"></span>With regard to the affliction of gout
which you signify to us has come upon you, I am both distressed and
rejoiced exceedingly:  rejoiced, because the noxious humour, attacking
the lower parts of your body, has entirely left the higher ones; but
distressed, because I fear you suffer excessive pain in so very slender
a body.  For where there is a deficiency of flesh, what strength can
there be to resist pain?  For as to myself, you know what I used to be: 
but now bitterness of soul and continual exasperation, and besides this
the affliction of gout so affects me that my body is dried up even as if
in burial.  Hence it comes to pass that I can rarely now rise from bed. 
If, then, the pain of gout has reduced the mass of my body to such
dryness, what must I think of your body, which was too dry before the
pains came on?

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p8"></span>As to the alms which you have bestowed on
the monastery of the blessed Apostle Andrew, there is no need for me to
say anything, since it is written, *Hide thine alms in the bosom of a
poor man, and it shall pray for thee* ([Ecclesiasticus
29.15](../../../bib/apo/sir029.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vii.xv-p8.1"></span>).  If then the good deed itself has its
voice in the secret ears of God, whether we cry aloud or keep silence,
this very thing which you have well done cries aloud.  Moreover I
declare that there are so great miracles, there is so great care and
custody of the monks in this same monastery of the said apostle that it
is as if he himself were specially the abbot of the monastery.  For, to
speak of a few things out of many which I have learnt from the narration
of the abbot and the prior of the monastery, two brethren were one day
sent out thence to buy something for the use of the monastery, one a
junior who seemed to be distinguished for prudence, the other a senior,
sent to be the guardian of the junior.  Both went forth, and from the
money they received as the price of what they were to purchase, he who
had been sent as the guardian of the junior purloined something without
the knowledge of the other.  Having both of them presently returned to
the monastery, and come to the threshold of the oratory, he who had
committed the theft fell down seized by a demon, and began to be vexed. 
And, when the demon had let him go, he was asked by the monks who came
round him whether per<span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xv-Page_62"></span>chance he had purloined anything from what
he had received:  he denied, and was a second time vexed.  Eight times
he denied, and eight times was vexed.  But after his eighth denial he
confessed how much money he had purloined.  And repenting he
acknowledged, prostrate on the earth, that he had sinned, and when he
had undergone penance, the demon came to him no more.

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p9"></span>At another time also, on the anniversary
of the same apostle, while the brethren were resting during the mid-day
hours, suddenly a certain brother, having become blind with his eyes
open, began to tremble, to utter loud cries, testifying by these cries
that he could not bear what he was suffering.  The brethren ran together
to him, saw him blind with his eyes open, trembling, and crying out,
abstracted from the scene around him, and having no sense of anything
that could be done externally.  They lifted him in their hands, and cast
him before the altar of Saint Andrew the Apostle, prostrating themselves
also in prayer for him.  And he at once, coming to himself again,
declared what he had suffered; namely that a certain old man appeared to
him, and set a black dog at him to tear him, saying, Why wouldest thou
flee from this monastery?  And, when I could by no means have escaped
(said he) from the bites of the dog, certain monks came, and besought
that old man for me, who straightway bade the dog depart, and then I
came to myself.  And he often afterwards confessed, saying, On the day
on which I suffered these things I had had a design of flying from this
same monastery.

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p10"></span>Another monk also secretly desired to
depart from the same monastery.  And, having considered the matter in
his mind, he would have entered the oratory; but he was immediately
delivered to a demon and most sorely vexed.  But he used to be left by
the demon and if he remained outside the oratory, he would suffer no
harm; but, if he attempted to enter it, he was at once delivered to the
evil spirit and vexed.  And, when this took place frequently, he
confessed his fault, namely that he was thinking of going away from the
monastery.  Then the brethren, assembled in his behalf, bound themselves
to continue in prayer for him for three days, and he was so cured that
the evil spirit never came to him afterwards.  He used to say also that
he had seen the same blessed apostle while he was being vexed, and had
been reproached by him for wishing to depart from the monastery.

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p11"></span>Two other brethren also fled from the
same monastery, and gave some intimations previously to the brethren in
conversation that they were going down by the Appian way, to make for
Jerusalem; but, when they had gone out, they turned aside from the
road.  And, that there might be no possibility of their being found by
any that might follow them, finding some retired crypts near the
Flaminian gate, they hid themselves therein.  But when they had been
looked for in the evening, and not found in the monastery, certain
brethren followed them on horseback, going out by the gate of Metronus,
to follow them along the Latin or Appian way.  But suddenly they
conceived the design of looking further for them on the Salarian way: 
and so, in proceeding outside the city, they turned their course into
the Salarian way.  But, failing to find them, they decided to return
through the Flaminian gate.  And, as they were returning, presently when
their horses came in front of the crypts in which the men were hidden,
they stood still, and, though beaten and urged, refused to move.  The
monks considered that such a thing could not be without some mystery. 
They observed the crypts, and saw the entrance to them to be blocked by
a piled heap of stones, but, as their horses would not go in any
direction, they dismounted.  They displaced the stones which were placed
at the mouth of the crypts, entered, and found the men in a state of
consternation within these dark subterranean hiding-places.  They were
taken back to the monastery, and were so improved by this miracle that
it was of great advantage to them to have fled for a short time from the
monastery.

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p12"></span>I have told you these things that it may
be known to your Excellency whose oratory it is on which you have
bestowed your alms.  Now may Almighty God keep you under His heavenly
protection both in soul and in body and all your house, and grant you to
live long for our consolation.  I beg that my most beloved son the Lord
Strategius <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) with his glorious
parents your children may be greeted in my name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[61:150](2130097.htm#fr_149) <span
id="ii.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p3"></span> See II. 27, note 2.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[61:151](2130097.htm#fr_150) <span
id="ii.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p6"></span> The gifts that had been sent were, as
appears below, veils or hangings (*vela*) for the shrine of St. Peter in
the Vatican basilica.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[62:152](2130097.htm#fr_151) <span
id="ii.vii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xv-p13"></span> Strategius (as appears from other
letters) was the young grandson of Rusticiana, being the child of Appio
and Eusebia.  See II. 27, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theoctista, Patrician.](2130098)
