[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130092)  [Next](2130094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p2"></span>*To John, Bishop of Syracuse* <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) .

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p4"></span>Gregory to John, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p5"></span>I have received your Fraternity’s letters
telling me of the sickness of my most sweet son the lord Venantius, and
relating how all things are going on about him.  But when I heard at one
and the same time that he was desperately and grievously sick, and that
unfair men were laying claim to the property of the orphans, the sorrow
in my heart could scarce contain itself.  But in this there was comfort,
in that tears relieved my groans.  Your Holiness therefore ought not to
neglect, what should be your first care, to take thought for his soul,
by exhorting him, beseeching him, putting before him God’s terrible
judgment, and promising His ineffable mercy, so as to induce him to
return even at his last moments to his former state of life <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) , lest the guilt of so great a fault
should stand against him in the eternal judgment.  And then it is your
duty to take thought how his daughters, the ladies Barbara and Antonina,
may be disposed of, so that no opportunity be afforded to bad men.  For
after he had conjured me to take anxious care for them, adding that I
should see to the disposal of them, he went on in his letter to mention
a thing which, when I consider the matter, I have no doubt might stand
in the way.  For he says that I should repeatedly petition the most
pious lord Emperor, that he should himself cause provision to be made
for the disposal of them.  You observe how different this is from his
former wish.  And I fear lest an apt opportunity might hence be given to
men in Sicily who are seeking all opportunity for interfering in his
affairs.  For, when this is known, what will those men do who have
already, as report goes, been attempting to put a seal on his
effects <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) ?  Would not reason seem
to be on their side, and to afford them as it were a just ground for
this proceeding?  If they should say, the girls have been commended to
the lord Emperor; we cannot neglect the matter; it is at our peril if we
do; we make the property safe till such time as the lord Emperor may
order them to be taken to Constantinople;—tell me, I pray thee, what I
could do in such a case, wherein the father’s commendation seems to
<span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xi-Page_60"></span>support a man that has authority.  For he
conjures me to see to their being so disposed of that they may either be
in the Roman city or not be taken away from Sicily; and he so acts as to
leave no way of either bringing them hither or retaining them there. 
But, do you, as far as you can, oppose these bad men.  Defend their
substance for the sake of Almighty God as if it were your own:  and, if
it is still possible, see to all opportunity for wrong being removed
with regard to the will of the aforesaid lord Venantius.  But, if it is
thought fit that they should be commended to the palace, he ought not to
impose such a burden on me as to wish to charge my soul with the care of
the disposal of them; as to which be it enough that God Almighty knows
how I am taking thought.  Hence I have taken care to write at once to my
most beloved son the deacon Anatolius, bidding him endeavour to speak
with the glorious patrician lady Rusticiana <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) , and telling him in what manner he
should enquire and inform me about the persons whose names have been
transmitted to me; that so he may inform us of all things speedily, and
what is to be done, may under the ordering of God be arranged.

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p9"></span>Furthermore, in the letters that have
been sent to us we find that your Fraternity has been grieved at our not
having wished you to come hither, as though it had been on account of
some displeasure; whereas we acted with a sole view to utility, knowing
that on account of persons in your locality your presence there was
exceedingly necessary.  But, lest you should hence suppose that we have
any feeling or displeasure towards you (which God forbid), if you have
the will to come to us, present yourself at a suitable time at the
threshold of the apostles.  For, so far as we are concerned, we so love
your Charity that we desire to see you often.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[59:142](2130093.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p3"></span> Cf. I. 34, note 8.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[59:143](2130093.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.vii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p6"></span> Viz. Monasticism, which Venantius had
renounced in spite of the earnest remonstrance of Gregory ten years
previously.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[59:144](2130093.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.vii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p7"></span> It may have been that Venantius had
filled some public office, in connexion with which it was alleged that
his estate was liable to seizure by the government officials.  Gregory
evidently believes that there is not such liability; but, in view of the
attempt to assert it, he is anxious that no pretext should be afforded
to the authorities for taking charge of the property of the deceased,
such as they might have had if the orphans had been made wards of the
Emperor.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[60:145](2130093.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.vii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xi-p8"></span> See II. 27, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).](2130094)
