[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130206)  [Next](2130208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Hymn XLII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p2"></span>1.  The Evil One wailed “Where now, is
there a place for me to flee to from the righteous?  I stirred up Death
to slay the Apostles, that I might be safe from their blows.  By their
deaths now more exceedingly am I cruelly beaten.  The Apostle whom I
slew in India is before me in Edessa:  he is here wholly and also
there.  I went there, there was he:  here and there I have found him and
been grieved.”  *R., Blessed is the might that dwells in the hallowed
bones!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p3"></span>2.  The bones that merchantmen carried,
or was it then that they carried him?  For lo! they made gain each of
the other.  But for me what did they profit me? yea they profited each
by each, while to me from both of them there was damage.  O that one
would show me that bag of Iscariot, for by it I acquired strength!  The
bag of Thomas has slain me, for the secret strength that dwells in it
tortures me.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p4"></span>3.  Moses the chosen carried the bones,
in faith as for gain.  And if he a great prophet believed, that there is
benefit in bones, the merchant did well to believe, and did well to call
himself merchant.  That merchant made gain, and waxed great and
reigned.  His storehouse has made me very poor:  his storehouse has been
opened in Edessa, and has enriched the great city with benefit.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p5"></span>4.  At this storehouse of treasure I
was amazed, for small was its treasure at first; and though no man took
from it, poor was the spring of its wealth.  But when multitudes have
come round it, and plundered it and carried off its riches, according as
it is plundered, so much the more does its wealth <span id="page_206">p.
206</span> <span id="iii.iv.xxxi-Page_206"></span>increase.  For a
pent-up spring, if one seeks it out, when deeply pierced it flows forth
mightily and abounds.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p6"></span>5.  It is evident that Elisha was a
fountain in a thirsting people:  and because they that thirsted sought
him not out, his outflow was not great.  But when Naaman sought him out,
he abounded and poured forth healing.  The fountain into the midst of a
fountain, he took him and plunged him; for in the river he cleansed the
leper.  Jesus the Sea of benefits, into Siloam sent the blind man whose
eyes were opened.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p7"></span>6.  Gehazi, with the staff that brought
to life the dead, was unable to raise the child.  And how could the
famous prophet have been brought up by the sorceress?  We were they that
mocked Saul, for instead of one demon whom he questioned, two demons
came up and mocked him.  From the bones of Elisha learn also of *the
bones of* Samuel; for though *Elisha’s* bones brought to life the dead,
the sorcerers could not bring up the dead, the living and sacred bones.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p8"></span>7.  And though I asked this petition,
He who gives all gave it not to me.  For though the demons were
troubled, by the bones of some priest, or magician or wizard, of
Chaldean or soothsayer, yet I was aware that this was but mockery.  In
two ways I cause *men* to err:  either I make the Apostles to lie, or I
make my Apostles like the Apostles.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p9"></span>8.  The party of the demons lo! it is
spoiled; the party of the devils endures stripes:  though there be none
that lifts the rod openly, the demons cry out with pain; though there be
none that fetters and binds, the spirits hang bound.  This silent
judgment, which is calm and still, and works not even by questioning,
the one power that is all sufficing, lo! it dwells in the bones of this
second Elisha.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p10"></span>9.  He gave judgment unto His Twelve,
that they might judge the twelve Tribes.  And if so be that they are to
judge the sons of the great Abraham, this is then no great matter, that
they shall judge demons now.  And unless they make the crucifiers fulfil
the judgment that is to be, by our judgment shall they be proved.  For
worse than we did they cry out, in presence of the Apostles the judges
of the tribes.

<span id="iii.iv.xxxi-p11"></span>10.  For a wolf was Saul the Apostle,
and on the blood of the sheep I reared him; and he waxed strong and
became a singular wolf.  But nigh to Damascus suddenly, the wolf was
changed into a sheep.  He said that the Apostles, are to judge Angels;
for by the Angels he signified the priest as it is written.  If so be
then they are thus powerful, woe to the demons from the strokes of their
bones!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LII](2130208)
