[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130199)  [Next](2130201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Hymn XXXV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Concerning Our Lord, and Concerning Death
and Satan.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>1.  The Voice made proclamation:  and
they gathered and came; the hosts of the Evil One, together with his
ministers.  The army of the tares was gathered altogether, for they saw
that Jesus had triumphed, to the grief of all them on the left hand, for
there was none of them but had been tormented.  They began one by one to
relate all whatsoever they had endured.  Sin and Hell were terrified: 
Death trembled and the dead rebelled; and Satan because sinners rebelled
against him.  *R., To Thee be glory because the Evil One saw Thee and
was troubled!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p4"></span>2.  Sin cried aloud; she gave counsel
to her sons, to the demons and the devils, and unto them she said,
Legion the head of your ranks is not, the sea has swallowed him and his
company; and likewise ye my sons if ye despise, this Jesus will destroy
you.  Ye who in a snare took Solomon, it is therefore a reproach to you,
that ye should be overcome by his disciples, takers of fish and ignorant
men; for lo! they have taken the draught of men, which had been taken by
us.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p5"></span>3.  This is great, above all evils
(saith the Evil One, concerning our Saviour); for this suffices Him not
that He has spoiled us, but likewise on us He has begun retribution for
Jonah son of Amittai.  On Legion therefore He was avenging him when He
seized and cast him into the sea.  Jonah emerged, after three days and
came up; but Legion yea not after a long season, for the depth of the
sea closed upon him at the command.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p6"></span>4.  I tempted Him, after his past, with
pleasant bread, but He desired it not.  To my grief I strove to learn a
psalm, that by His psalm I might take Him as a prey:  I paused and
learned it a second time, but He made my second *trial* to be vain.  I
brought Him up to a mountain and showed Him all possessions; I gave
*them* to Him <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-Page_194"></span>and He was not moved.  Better was it
for me in the days of Adam, who gave me no great trouble in teaching
him.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>5.  The Evil One ceased, from his
activity and said, A cause of idleness to me, is this Jesus; for lo! the
publicans and harlots take refuge in Him.  What work shall I seek for
myself?  I who was master to all men, to whom shall I be a disciple? 
Sin again said, It must be, that I forsake, therefore, and change from
that which I am; for this Son of Mary who is come, as a new creation,
has created mankind.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>6.  Gluttonous Death, lamented and
said, I have learned fasting, which I used not to know; lo! Jesus
gathers multitudes, but as to me, in His feast a fast is proclaimed for
me.  One man has closed my mouth, mine who have closed the mouths of
many.  Hell said I will restrain my greed; hunger, therefore, is
*mine*:  this Man triumphs as at the marriage, when He changed the water
into wine, *so* He changes the vesture of the dead into life.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p9"></span>7.  And moreover, God made a flood, and
washed the earth, and purged her crimes; fire and brimstone again He
sent on her, that He might make white her stains.  By fire He gave me
the Sodomites, and by flood the Giants.  He closed the mouth of the
hosts of Sennacherib, and opened the mouth of Hell.  These things and
such as these, I loved.  *But now*, in place of deadly visitations of
justice, He has wrought in His Son, the quickening of the dead by grace.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p10"></span>8.  Prophets and righteous men, said
the Evil One, unto his companions, have been seen by me; and though
their strength was exceeding mighty, there was in them a savour of that
which is mine; for the stuff whereof the sons of man are made, is near
akin to our heaven.  This man has clothed Himself with the body of Adam,
and is troubling us, for our leaven has no power on Him.  He is man,
therefore, and God; for His manhood in His Godhead is intermingled.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p11"></span>9.  Adam was seen by me, that fountain
from whence flowed all races of *men*; his children has been sought out
by me, and proved one by one.  Yet have I not seen from the beginning a
man, of whom one part was of God, and the other half, man.  Moses, who
shone in his splendour, I tempted again, and in his tongue I made him to
err; but this man, yea, not in His mind, for pure exceedingly is the
fountain of His thoughts.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p12"></span>10.  The lust of the body, is in all
bodies; for even while they sleep, it wakes in them.  Him, who in his
waking hours keeps himself pure, by means of a dream, I disturb.  The
dregs of the body are stirred in him, by a shaking movement in secret
inwardly.  The sleeping and the waking besides, I trouble alike.  This
is He Who alone keeps Himself pure, Whom not even in a dream can I
disturb, Who even in His sleep is pure and holy.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p13"></span>11.  But separate was even His
childhood, from that of the children who have been seen by me; for I
have not seen in Him *any* part of that which is of me.  I was afraid of
His childhood; therefore, I stirred up Herod, that among the infants He
might be slain.  Because of this also that He escaped, I was greatly
afraid, for our mystery how did He find out!  He received the offerings
of the Wise Men; He scorned us and departed and escaped from our sword.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p14"></span>12.  Children have been seen by me,
sons of righteous men; yea, also youths, sons of chaste women; and I
have moved them from the womb, one by one, and I have seen in them our
leaven.  For they were wrathful men and revilers, yea, also furious and
gluttonous; fruits were they that by instruction were to be ripened and
sweetened.  But this man from His *first* planting, was a good fruit
that possessed sweetness, wherewith sinners were made sweet.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p15"></span>13.  Even while He was an infant, He
was a teacher of the sons of men, by the splendour that was upon Him. 
Even the priest as he carried Him was amazed at Him.  In the prudence of
old men was He clad.  Joseph stood aloof from Him:  His mother <span
id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-Page_195"></span>gloried in His presence.  He was a help
in His childhood, to every one that saw Him; He was a profit to them
that knew Him from the day when He entered into the world, He was a
helper of mankind by His excellencies.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p16"></span>14.  From whence has it sprung up
before me, this fruit of Mary, the grape whereof the wine is not
according to nature?  For lo! I stand between doubts.  To turn away and
leave Him, I am afraid, lest by His teaching, they should be sweetened,
they, who have acquired by bitterness.  But again to tread on Him and
crush Him, is a terror to me, lest haply He turn and become new wine
unto sinners, and when they are drunken therewith, lo! they forget their
idols.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p17"></span>15.  Lo! I am afraid of both things,
as well His death, as also His life.  Then unto the Evil One His
ministers made answer and counselled Him.  Though both these things be
grievous, somewhat lighter to us is the trouble, that we should choose
His death rather than his life.  Let Death tell us whether any one from
among the righteous, has ever from the first been aroused again.  The
sons of the Giants and the renowned ones, there is none that has issued
forth from her, even Hell, the Devourer.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p18"></span>16.  The blowing of the wind, a man
may feel after; but the Son of Mary, who shall search him out? for when
He wept, by His tears He robbed me; and again when I bid Him cast
Himself, from the holy Temple, I thought, that it was through fear He
cast Himself not:  yet when they threw Him from the hill-top, He flew
through the air.  On the well again when He was weary He sat.  His
variableness I understand not, for on the dry land alike and on the
water He walks.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p19"></span>17.  I have seen Him that He hungered,
as a Son of man; yet this was done away by the bread which He
multiplied.  From the beginning I proved Him and I came *to Him*; He
questioned *me* as though He knew *me* not; but this, too, was done
away, when He showed that He knew *our* secrets.  Again He chose
Iscariot, as though He knew him not; then He turned and showed that He
knew him, though he was binding and loosing.  I was mistaken in Him, for
He was baptized and emerged and overwhelmed me.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p20"></span>18.  But one token there is which I
have seen in Him that heartens me exceedingly above all.  For while He
was praying I saw Him and was glad, because He changed colour and was
afraid:  His sweat was as drops of blood, because He felt that His day
was come.  This is pleasant to me, exceedingly above all, if it be not
that deceiving He has deceived me therein.  But if beguiling He has
beguiled me, this is both for me and for you alike, my ministers.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p21"></span>19.  Then shouted the host of devils
and said, Hateful is the sign that we see in thee, for never from the
beginning has it thus happened to thee.  In prompt counsels thou wast
excellent:  the Son of Mary captures *our* cities, while thou art
prolonging thy discourse.  Arise, go forth, let us fight with Him, for
this were to us a reproach, that we being many should be overcome by
one.  And if thou art in pain or fear, give us counsel for the battle
and stay thou *behind*.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p22"></span>20.  This Jesus out of His own words
it is, that I shall teach *Him*, and war with Him; for He said that he,
even Satan, is divided, himself against himself, and that he cannot
stand.  Though He desires to fight with us, He has given us arms which
are against Himself, gage and divide for me His disciples, for if ye
divide them, with these you will conquer them, even with Eve and the
serpent, the weak *powers*, whereby I conquered the first Adam.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p23"></span>21.  Death unto the Evil One, made
answer and said to him, Wherefore tarriest thou not according to thy
wont? for lo! it is those that are despised and least, that thou
ensnarest after thy custom:  Jesus Who is great above all, wherewith
hast thou sought to ensnare Him?  The experience of His weapons moves
thee to fear, which He hurled against thee when he was tempted of thee. 
Thou and I with thy followers, <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxiv-Page_196"></span>the host of us is too little for the
battle with Him, the Son of Mary.

<span id="iii.iv.xxiv-p24"></span>22.  I counsel, then, if this our
strife permits us to do anything:  go thou into that disciple, let
thyself loose, that head may speak with heads; and let loose all thy
host, let it go and stir up the Pharisees.  And *beware*, lest thou
speak contentiously as thou art wont.  If thou be a god, descend from
hence, with fondness kiss them and betray Him; and, lo! we will bring on
Him the envy and the sword of the Levites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XXXVI.](2130201)
