[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130118)  [Next](2130120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXVII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvii-p2"></span>To Boniface, Guardian (Defensorem),
in Corsica.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Boniface, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvii-p4"></span>Thy experience is not free from
blame, in that, knowing Aleria and Adjacium, cities of Corsica, to have
been long without bishops, thou hast delayed admonishing their clergy
and people to choose for themselves priests.  But, since they ought to
be no longer without rulers of their own, hasten thou, on receiving this
authority, to exhort the clergy and people of these cities severally,
that they disagree not among themselves, but that each city with one
consent choose for itself a priest to be consecrated.  And, when they
have made their decree, let such person as shall have been elected come
to us.  But, if they should be unwilling to come to an unanimous
decision, being divided in their choice between two persons, let both in
like manner come to us, the decree having been made in the usual way,
that, after enquiry made into their lives and characters, the one who
may appear to be most fit may be ordained.  Seeing, moreover, that many
poor persons there are said to be oppressed and to suffer prejudice, let
thy Experience give heed to this, and not allow them to be unjustly
aggrieved; but so endeavour thyself that neither they who take action be
unreasonably hindered nor those against whom action is taken be in
danger of sustaining damage unjustly.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvii-p5"></span>Furthermore, it has reached our ears
that some of the clergy, thou being on the spot, are held in custody by
laymen.  If this is so, know that the blame will be imputed to thee,
since, if thou wert a man, it would not have been the case.  And
accordingly thou must needs pay attention in future so that thou permit
not the like to be done; but that, if any one should have a cause of
complaint against a clerk, he resort to his bishop.  And, if perchance
the latter should be suspected, a commissioner must be deputed by
him—or, if this too should be objected to by the plaintiff, by thy
Experience,—who may compel the parties to choose arbitrators by mutual
consent.  And whatever may be decided by them, let it <span
id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="ii.vii.xxxvii-Page_86"></span>be in
all ways so carried out, with due observance of law, by thy own or the
bishop’s care, that there may be no occasion for them to weary
themselves with disputes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Barbara and Antonina.](2130120)
