[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130086)  [Next](2130088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.v-p2"></span>*To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli* <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) .

<span id="ii.vii.v-p4"></span>Gregory to Augustine, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.v-p5"></span>*Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace to men of good will* ([Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="ii.vii.v-p5.1"></span>);
because a grain of wheat, falling into the earth, has died, that it
might not reign in heaven alone; even He by whose death we live, by
whose weakness we are made strong, by whose suffering we are rescued
from suffering, through whose love we seek in Britain for brethren whom
we knew not, by whose gift we find those whom without knowing them we
sought.  But who can describe what great joy sprung up here in the
hearts of all the faithful, for that the nation of the Angli through the
operation of the grace of Almighty God and the labour of thy Fraternity
has cast away the darkness of error, and been suffused with the light of
holy faith; that with most sound mind it now tramples on the idols which
it formerly crouched before in insane fear; that it falls down with pure
heart before Almighty God; that it is restrained by the rules of holy
preaching from the lapses of wrong doing; that it bows down in heart to
divine precepts, that in understanding it may be exalted; that it
humbles itself even to the earth in prayer, lest in mind and soul it
should lie upon the earth.  Whose is this work but His who says, *My
Father worketh hitherto, and I work* ([John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii.v-p5.2"></span>)?
who, to shew that He converts the world, not by men’s wisdom, but by His
own power, chose unlettered men as His preachers whom He sent into the
world?  And He does the same even now, having deigned to work mighty
works in the nation of the Angli through weak men.  But in this heavenly
gift, dearest brother, there is ground, along with great joy, for most
serious fear.  For I know that Almighty God has displayed great miracles
through thy Love in the nation which He has willed to be chosen. 
Wherefore thou must needs rejoice with fear for this same heavenly gift,
and tremble in rejoicing:—rejoice, that is, because the souls of the
Angli are drawn by outward miracles to inward grace; but tremble, lest
among the signs that are done the infirm mind lift itself up to
presumption about itself, and from being exalted in honour outwardly,
fall inwardly through vain glory.  For we ought to remember how, when
the disciples returned with joy from preaching, and said to their
heavenly Master, *Lord, in thy name even the devils are subject unto us*
([Luke x. 17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p5.3"></span>), they straightway heard, *In this rejoice
not; but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven* ([Luke
10.20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p5.4"></span>).  For they had set their minds on private
and temporal gladness, when they rejoiced in the miracles.  But they are
recalled from private to common, from temporal to eternal gladness, when
it is said to them, *In this rejoice ye, because your names are written
in heaven*.  For not all the elect work miracles; and yet the names of
all of them are kept enrolled in heaven.  For to the disciples of the
Truth there should not be joy, save for that good which they have in
common with all, and in which they have no end to their gladness.

<span id="ii.vii.v-p6"></span>It remains, therefore, dearest brother,
that in the midst of the things which through the operation of God thou
doest outwardly, thou shouldest ever nicely judge thyself within, and
nicely understand both what thou art thyself and how great is the grace
in the midst of that same nation for the conversion of which thou hast
received even the gift of doing signs.  And if at any time thou
shouldest remember having offended against our Creator, whether in
tongue or in deed, ever recall these things to thy memory, that memory
of guilt may keep down the rising glory of the heart.  And whatsoever
thou mayest receive, or hast received, in the way of doing signs, regard
these powers as not granted to thyself, but to those for whose salvation
they have been conferred upon thee.  Further, there occurs to my mind,
while I think on these things, what took place with <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="ii.vii.v-Page_56"></span>one servant
of God, even one eminently chosen.  Certainly Moses, when he led God’s
people out of Egypt, as thy Fraternity knows, wrought wonderful
miracles.  Fasting forty days and nights in Mount Sina, he received the
tables of the law; among lightnings and thunders, while all the people
trembled, he was attached to the service of Almighty God, being alone
with Him even in familiar colloquy ([Exod.
30:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#000), [Exod.
31:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#000)<span id="ii.vii.v-p6.1"></span>);
he opened a way through the Red Sea; he had a pillar of a cloud to lead
him on his journey; to the people when an hungered he gave manna from
heaven; flesh to those who longed for it he supplied in the wilderness
by a miracle, even unto overmuch satiety ([Exod.
13:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#000), [Exod.
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#000), [Exod.
16:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p6.2"></span>).  But, when in a time of drought they had
come to the rock, he was distrustful, and doubted being able to draw
water from the same, which still at the Lord’s command he opened without
fail in copious streams.  But how many and great miracles after these he
did during eight and thirty years in the desert who can count or search
out ([Exod. 17:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#000), [Num.
20:0](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p6.3"></span>)?  As often as a doubtful matter had troubled
his mind, he resorted to the tabernacle, and enquired of the Lord in
secret, and was forthwith taught concerning it, God speaking to him
([Exod. xxxiii](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p6.4"></span>. *seq.*).  When the Lord was wrath with the
people, he appeased Him by the intervention of his prayer; those who
rose in pride and dissented in discord he engulphed in the jaws of the
gaping earth; he bore down his enemies with victories, and shewed signs
to his own people.  But, when the land of promise had at length been
reached, he was called into the mountain, and heard of the fault which
he had committed eight and thirty years before, as I have said, in that
he had doubted about drawing water from the rock.  And for this reason
he was told that he might not enter the land of promise ([Num.
xxvii](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p6.5"></span>.).  Herein it is for us to consider how
formidable is the judgment of Almighty God, who did so many signs
through that servant of His whose fault He still bare in remembrance for
so long a time.

<span id="ii.vii.v-p7"></span>Wherefore, dearest brother, if we find
that even he whom we know to have been especially chosen by Almighty God
died for a fault after so many signs, with what fear ought we to
tremble, who do not yet know whether we are chosen?

<span id="ii.vii.v-p8"></span>But what should I say of the miracles of
the reprobate, when thy Fraternity well knows what the Truth says in the
Gospel; *Many shall come in that day saying to me, Lord in thy name we
have prophesied, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name
have done many wonderful works.  But I will say unto them, I know not
who ye are:  depart from me all ye workers of iniquity* ([Matt.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022), [Luke
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#027)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p8.1"></span>)?  The mind, then, should be much kept down
in the midst of signs and miracles, lest haply one seek therein one’s
own glory, and exult in private joy for one’s own exaltation.  For
through signs gains of souls should be sought, and His glory by whose
power these very signs are done.  But there is one sign that the Lord
has given us for which we may exceedingly rejoice, and acknowledge the
glory of election in ourselves, seeing that He says, *In this shall it
be known that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another*
([John xiii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p8.2"></span>).  Which sign the prophet demanded, when he
said, *Make with me, Lord, a sign for good, that they which hate me may
see it, and be confounded* ([Ps. lxxxv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii.v-p8.3"></span>).

<span id="ii.vii.v-p9"></span>These things I say, because I desire to
abase the mind of my hearer in humility.  But let thy very humility have
its confidence.  For I, a sinner, maintain a most certain hope that
through the grace of our Almighty Creator and Redeemer, our God and Lord
Jesus Christ, thy sins are already remitted, and thou art chosen for
this purpose, that those of others may be remitted through thee.  Nor
will you have sorrow for any guilt in the future, while you strive to
cause joy in heaven for the conversion of many.  Truly the same our
Maker and Redeemer, speaking of the repentance of men, says, *Verily I
say unto you there will be joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth,
more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance*
([Luke xv. 7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vii.v-p9.1"></span>).  And if for one penitent there is great joy
in heaven, of what kind may we believe the joy to be for so large a
people, converted from its error, which, coming to faith, has condemned
by penitence the evil things it did.  In this joy, then, of heaven and
the angels let us repeat the very words of the angels with which we
began:  let us say therefore, let us all say, *Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace to men of good will*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[55:136](2130087.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.v-p3"></span> For reasons for supposing this letter to
Augustine to have been written earlier than the 4th Indiction (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vii.v-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 600–1), to which
it is assigned by the Benedictine Editors, and for a summary of the
whole series of letters relating to the English mission, see
*Prolegom*., p. xxv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Bertha, Queen of the Angli.](2130088)
