[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130261)  [Next](2130263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p1"></span> <span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xvi-Page_287"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Hymn XV.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p2"></span>1.  In the Birth of the Son light
dawned,—and darkness fled from the world,—and the earth was enlightened;
then let it give glory—to the brightness of the Father Who has
enlightened it!

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p3"></span>2.  He dawned from the womb of the
Virgin,—and the shadows passed away when He was seen,—and the darkness
of error was strangled by Him,—and the ends of the earth were
enlightened that they should give glory.

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p4"></span>3.  Among the peoples there was great
tumult,—and in the darkness the light dawned,—and the nations rejoiced
to give glory—to Him in Whose Birth they all were enlightened.

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p5"></span>4.  His light shone out over the
east;—Persia was enlightened by the star:—*His* Epiphany gave good
tidings to her and invited her,—“He is come for the sacrifice that
brings joy to all.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p6"></span>5.  The star of light hasted and came
and dawned—through the darkness, and summoned them—that the peoples
should come and exult—in the great Light that has come down to earth.

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p7"></span>6.  One envoy from among the stars—the
firmament sent to proclaim to them,—to the sons of Persia, that they
might make ready—to meet the King and to worship Him.

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p8"></span>7.  Great Assyria when she perceived
*it*—called to the Magi and said to them,—“Take gifts and go, honour
Him—the great King Who in Judea has dawned.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p9"></span>8.  The princes of Persia,
exulting,—carried gifts from their region;—and they brought to the Son
of the Virgin—gold and myrrh and frankincense.

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p10"></span>9.  They entered and found Him as a
child—as He dwelt in the house of the lowly woman;—and they drew near
and worshipped with gladness,—and brought near before Him their
treasures.

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p11"></span>10.  Mary said, “For whom are
these?—and for what purpose? and what *is* the cause—that has called you
to come from your country—to the Child with your treasures?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p12"></span>11.  They said, “Thy Son is a King,—and
He binds crowns and is King of all;—and great *is* His power over the
world,—and to His Kingdom shall all be obedient.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p13"></span>12.  “At what time did this come to
pass,—that a lowly woman should bring forth a King?  I who am in need
and in want,—how then could a king come forth from me?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p14"></span>13.  “In thee alone has this come to
pass—that a mighty King from thee should appear;—thee in whom poverty
shall be magnified,—and to thy Son shall crowns be made subject.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p15"></span>14.  “Treasures of Kings I have
not;—riches have never fallen to my lot.—My house is lowly and my
dwelling needy;—why then proclaim ye that my Son is King?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p16"></span>15.  “Great treasure is in thy Son,—and
wealth that suffices to make all rich;—for the treasures of kings are
impoverished,—but He fails not nor can be measured.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p17"></span>16.  “Whether haply some other be for
you—the King that is born, enquire ye concerning Him.—This is the son of
a lowly woman,—of *one* who is not meet to look on a King.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p18"></span>17.  “Can it be that light should ever
miss—the way whereon it has been sent?  It was not darkness that
summoned and led us;—in light we walked, and thy Son is King.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p19"></span>18.  “Lo! ye see a babe without
speech,—and the house of His mother empty and needy,—and of that which
pertains to a king nought is in it:—how then in it is a king to be
seen?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p20"></span>19.  “Lo! we see that without speech
and at rest—*is* the King, and lowly as thou <span id="page_288">p.
288</span> <span id="iii.vi.xvi-Page_288"></span>hast said:—but again we
see that the stars—in the highest He bids haste to proclaim Him.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p21"></span>20.  “It were meet, O men, that ye
should enquire—who is the King, and then adore him;—lest haply *your*
way has been mistaken,—and another is the King that is born.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p22"></span>21.  “It were meet, O maiden, that thou
shouldst receive it,—that we have learned that thy Son is King,—from the
*star of* light that errs not,—and plain is the way, and he has led us.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p23"></span>22.  “The Child is a little one, and
lo! he has not—the diadem of a king and of a throne;—and what have ye
seen that ye should pay honour to Him,—as to a king, with your
treasures?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p24"></span>23.  “A little one, because He willed
*it* for quietness’ sake,—and meek now until He be revealed.—A time
shall be for Him when all diadems—shall bow down and worship Him.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p25"></span>24.  “Armies he has none;—nor has my
Son legions and troops:—in the poverty of His mother He dwells;—why then
King is He called by you?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p26"></span>25.  “The armies of thy Son are
above;—they ride on high, and they flame,—and one of them it was that
came and summoned us,—and all our country was dismayed.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p27"></span>26.  “The Child is a babe, and how is
it possible—He should be King, unknown to the world?—And they that are
mighty and of renown,—how can a babe be their ruler?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p28"></span>27.  “Thy babe is aged, O Virgin,—and
Ancient of Days and exalted above all and Adam beside Him is very
babe,—and in Him *all* created things are made new.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p29"></span>28.  “It is very seemly that ye should
expound—all the mystery and explain *it*;—who *it* is that reveals to
you the mystery of my Son,—that He is a King in your region.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p30"></span>29.  “It is likewise seemly for thee to
accept this,—that unless the truth had led us we had not wandered hither
from the ends of the earth,—nor come for the sake of thy Son.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p31"></span>30.  “All the mystery as it was
wrought—among you there in your country,—reveal ye to me now as
friends.—Who was He that called you to come to me?”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p32"></span>31.  “A mighty Star appeared to us—that
was glorious exceedingly above the stars,—and our land by its fire was
kindled;—that this King had appeared it bore tidings to us.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p33"></span>32.  “Do not, I beseech you, speak
of—these things in our land lest they rage,—*and* the kings of the earth
join together—against the Child in their envy.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p34"></span>33.  “Be not thou dismayed, O
Virgin!—Thy Son shall bring to nought all diadems, and set them
underneath his heel;—and they shall not subdue Him Whom they envy.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p35"></span>34.  “Because of Herod I am
afraid,—that unclean wolf, lest he assail me,—and draw his sword and
with it cut off—the sweet cluster before it be ripe.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p36"></span>35.  “Because of Herod fear thou
not;—for in the hands of thy Son is his throne placed:—and as soon as He
shall reign it shall be laid low,—and his diadem shall fall on the earth
beneath.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p37"></span>36.  “A torrent of blood is
Jerusalem,—wherein the excellent ones are slain;—and if she perceives
Him she will assail Him.—In mystery speak ye, and noise *it* not
abroad.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p38"></span>37.  “All torrents, and likewise
swords,—by the hands of thy Son shall be appeased;—and the sword of
Jerusalem shall be blunted,—and shall not desire at all to kill.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p39"></span>38.  “The scribes of the priests of
Jerusalem—pour forth blood and heed not.—<span id="page_289">p.
289</span> <span id="iii.vi.xvi-Page_289"></span>They will arouse
murderous strife—against me and against the Child; O Magi, be silent!”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p40"></span>39.  “The scribes and the priests will
be unable—to hurt thy son in their envy;—for by Him their priesthood
shall be dissolved,—and their festivals brought to nought.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p41"></span>40.  “A Watcher revealed to me, when I
received—conception of the Babe, that my Son is a King;—that His diadem
is from on high and is not dissolved,—he declared to me even as ye
*do*.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p42"></span>41.  “The Watcher, therefore, of whom
thou hast spoken—is he who came as a star,—and was shown to us and
brought us good tidings—that He is great and glorious above the stars.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p43"></span>42.  “That Angel declared to me—in his
good tidings, when he appeared to me,—that to His Kingdom no end shall
be—and the mystery is kept and shall not be revealed.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p44"></span>43.  “The Star also declared again to
us—that thy Son is He that shall keep the diadem.—His aspect was
something changed,—and he was the Angel and made *it* not known to us.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p45"></span>44.  “Before me when the Watcher showed
himself,—he called Him his Lord before He was conceived;—and as the Son
of the Highest announced Him to me:—but where His Father is he made not
known to me.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p46"></span>45.  “Before us he proclaimed in the
form of a star—that the Lord of the Highest is He Who is born;—and over
the stars of light thy Son *is* ruler,—and unless He commands they rise
not.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p47"></span>46.  “In your presence, lo! there are
revealed—other mysteries, that ye may learn the truth;—how in virginity
I bare my Son,—and He is Son of God; go ye, proclaim Him!”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p48"></span>47.  “In our presence the Star taught
*us*—that His Birth is exalted above the world and above all beings is
thy Son,—and is Son of God according to thy saying.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p49"></span>48.  “The *world* on high and the
*world* below bear witness to Him,—all the Watchers and the stars,—that
He is Son of God and Lord.—Bear ye His fame to your lands!”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p50"></span>49.  “All the world on high, in one
star,—has stirred up Persia and she has learnt the truth,—that thy Son
is Son of God,—and to Him shall all peoples be subject.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p51"></span>50.  “Peace bear ye to your
lands:—peace be multiplied in your borders!—As apostles of truth may ye
be believed—in all the way that ye shall pass through.”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p52"></span>51.  “The peace of thy Son, it shall
bear us—in tranquillity to our land, as it has led us *hither*;—and when
His power shall have grasped the worlds,—may He visit our land and bless
it!

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p53"></span>52.  “May Persia rejoice in your glad
tidings!—may Assyria exult in your coming—And when my Son’s Kingdom
shall arise,—may He plant His standard in your country!”

<span id="iii.vi.xvi-p54"></span>53.  Let the Church sing with
rejoicing,—“Glory in the Birth of the Highest,—by Whom the world above
and the world below are illumined!”—Blessed *be* He in Whose Birth all
are made glad!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephraim Syrus:  The Pearl.  Seven Hymns on the Faith.](2130263)
