[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130283)  [Next](2130285) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p1"></span> *<span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>Demonstration X.</span>*<span
class="c1"><span id="iii.ix.vii-p1.2"></span>—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.vii-p1.3"></span>Of</span> Pastors.</span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p2"></span>1.  Pastors are set over the flock, and
give the sheep the food of life.  Whosoever is watchful, and toils in
behalf of his sheep, is careful for his flock, and is the disciple of
our Good Shepherd, who gave Himself in behalf of His sheep. <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016)  And whosoever brings not back his
flock carefully, is likened to the hireling who has no care for the
sheep.  Be ye like, O Pastors, to those righteous Pastors of old.  Jacob
fed the sheep of Laban, and guarded them and toiled and was watchful,
and so received the reward.  For Jacob said to Laban:—*Lo! twenty years
am I with thee.  Thy sheep and thy flocks I have not robbed and the
males of thy sheep I have not eaten.  That which was broken I did not
bring unto thee, but thou required it at my hands!  In the daytime the
heat devoured me and the cold by night.* <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017)   *My sleep departed from my
eyes.*  Observe, ye Pastors, that Pastor, how he cared for his flock. 
He used to watch in the night-time to guard it and was vigilant; and he
used to toil in the daytime to feed it.  As Jacob was a pastor, so
Joseph was a pastor and his brethren were pastors.  Moses was a pastor,
and David also was a pastor.  So Amos was a pastor.  These all were
pastors who fed the sheep and led them well.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p5"></span>2.  Now, why, my beloved, did these
pastors first feed the sheep, and were then chosen to be pastors of
men?  Clearly that they might learn how a pastor cares for his sheep,
and is watchful and toils in behalf of his sheep.  And when they had
learned the manners of pastors, they were chosen for the pastoral
office.  Jacob fed the sheep of Laban and toiled and was vigilant and
led them well; and then he tended and guided well his sons, and taught
them the pattern of pastoral work.  And Joseph used to tend the sheep
along with his brethren; and in Egypt he became guide to a numerous
people, and led them back, as a good pastor does his flock.  Moses fed
the sheep of Jethro his father-in-law, and he was chosen from (tending)
the sheep to tend his people, and as a good pastor he guided them. 
Moses bore his staff upon his shoulder, and went in front of his people
that he was leading, and tended them for forty years; and he was
vigilant and toiled on behalf of his sheep, a diligent and good pastor. 
When his Lord wished to destroy them because of their sins, in that they
worshipped the calf, Moses prayed and besought of his Lord and
said:—*Either pardon the people for their sins, or else blot me out from
Thy book that Thou hast written*. <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018)   That is a most diligent pastor,
who delivered over himself on behalf of his sheep.  That is an excellent
leader, who gave himself in behalf of his sheep.  And that is a merciful
father who cherished his children and reared them up.  Moses the great
and wise shepherd, who knew how to lead back the flock, taught Joshua
the son of Nun, a man full of the spirit, who (afterwards) led the
flock, even all the host of Israel.  He destroyed kings and subdued the
land, and gave them the land as a place of pasturage, and divided the
resting-places and the sheepfolds to his <span id="page_384">p.
384</span> <span id="iii.ix.vii-Page_384"></span>sheep.  Furthermore,
David fed his father’s sheep, and was taken from the sheep to tend his
people.  *So he tended them in the integrity of his heart and by the
skill of his hands he guided them.* <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) * *And when David numbered the
flock of his sheep, wrath came upon them, and they began to be
destroyed.  Then David delivered himself over on behalf of his sheep,
when he prayed, saying:—*O Lord God, I have sinned in that I have
numbered Israel.  Let Thy hand be on me and on my father’s house.  These
innocent sheep, in what have they sinned*? <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020)   So also all the diligent pastors
used thus to give themselves on behalf of their sheep.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p9"></span>3.  But those pastors who did not care
for the sheep, those were hirelings who used to feed themselves alone. 
On this account the Prophet <span id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021)
addresses them, saying to them:—*O ye pastors who destroy and scatter
the sheep of my pasture, hear the word of the Lord.  Thus saith the
Lord:  Lo! I will visit My sheep as the pastor visits his flock in the
day of the whirlwind, and I will require My sheep at your hands.  O
foolish pastors, with the wool of the sheep do ye clothe yourselves and
the flesh of the fatlings do eat, and the sheep ye do not feed.  That
which was sick ye did not heal, and that which was broken ye did not
bind.  The weak ye did not strengthen, and the lost and the scattered ye
did not gather together.  The strong ones and the fatlings ye did guard,
but with harshness ye subdued them.  The good pastures ye yourselves
graze upon, and what remains ye trample with your feet.  The pleasant
waters do ye drink, and whatever remains ye defile with your feet.  And
My sheep have eaten the trampled (herbage) which your feet have
trampled, and they have drunk the waters which your feet have defiled.* 
These are the greedy and base pastors and hirelings, who did not feed
the sheep, or guide them well, or deliver them from the wolves.  But
when the Great Pastor, the chief of pastors, shall come, He will call
and visit His sheep and will take knowledge of His flock.  And He will
bring forward those pastors, and will exact an account from them, and
will condemn them for their deeds.  And those who fed the sheep well,
them the Chief of Pastors will cause to rejoice and to inherit life and
rest.  *O stupid and foolish pastor, to whose right hand and to whose
right eye I committed my sheep.  Because thou didst say concerning the
sheep, let that which dieth, die, and let that which perisheth perish,
and whatever is left, let them devour the flesh* of one another;
therefore, behold I will make blind thy right eye and I will wither up
thy right arm.  Thy eye which regarded a bribe *shall be blinded, and
thy hand* which did not rule in righteousness *shall waste away.* <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022)   *And as for you, my sheep, the
sheep of my pasture, ye are men; but I am the Lord your God.* <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023)   *Behold henceforth will feed you
in a good and rich pasture.* <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024)

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p14"></span>4.  *The good shepherd giveth himself
for the sake of his sheep.* <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025)  
And again He said:—*I have other sheep and I must bring them also
hither.  And the whole flock shall be one, and one shepherd, and My
Father because of this loveth Me; that I give Myself for the sake of the
sheep.* <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026)   And again He
said;—*I am the door of the sheep.  Every one that entereth by Me shall
live and shall go in and go out and find pasture.* <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027)   O ye pastors, be ye made like
unto that diligent pastor, the chief of the whole flock, who cared so
greatly for his flock.  He brought nigh those that were afar off.  He
brought back the wanderers.  He visited the sick.  He strengthened the
weak.  He bound up the broken.  He guarded the fatlings.  He gave
himself up for the sake of the sheep.  He chose and instructed excellent
leaders, and committed the sheep into their hands, and gave them
authority over all his flock.  For He said to Simon Cephas:—*Feed My
sheep and My lambs and My ewes*. <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028)   So Simon fed His sheep; and he
fulfilled his time and handed over the flock to you, and departed.  Do
ye <span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="iii.ix.vii-Page_385"></span>also feed and guide them well.  For the
pastor who cares for his sheep engages in no other pursuit along with
that.  He does not make a vineyard, nor plant gardens, nor does he fall
into the troubles of this world.  Never have we seen a pastor who left
his sheep in the wilderness and became a merchant, or one who left his
flock to wander and became a husbandman.  But if he deserts his flock
and does these things he thereby hands over his flock to the wolves.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p19"></span>5.  And remember, my beloved, that I
wrote to thee concerning our fathers of old that they first learned the
ways of tending sheep and in that received trial of carefulness, and
then were chosen for the office of guides, that they might learn and
observe how much the pastor cares for his flock, and as they used to
guide the sheep carefully, so also might be perfected in this office of
guidance.  Thus Joseph was chosen from the sheep, to guide the Egyptians
in the time of affliction.  And Moses was chosen from the sheep, to
guide his people and tend them.  And David was taken from following the
sheep, to become king over Israel.  And the Lord took Amos from
following the sheep, and made him a prophet over his people.  Elisha
likewise was taken from behind the yoke, to become a prophet in Israel. 
Moses did not return to his sheep, nor did he leave his flock that was
committed to him.  David did not return to his father’s sheep, but
guided his people in the integrity of his heart. <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029)   Amos did not turn back to feed
his sheep, or to gather (the fruit of) trees, but he guided them and
performed his office of prophecy.  Elisha did not turn back to his yoke,
but served Elijah and filled his place.  And he <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030) who was for him as a shepherd,
because he loved fields and merchandise and vineyards and oliveyards and
tillage, did not wish to become his disciple; and (therefore) he did not
commit the flock into his hand.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p22"></span>6.  I beseech you, ye pastors, that ye
set not over the flock, leaders who are foolish and stupid, covetous
also and lovers of possessions.  Every one who feeds the flock shall eat
of their milk. <span id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031)   And every
one who guides the yoke shall be ministered to from his labour.  The
priests have a right to partake of the altar, and the Levites shall
receive their tithes.  Whoever eats of the milk, let his heart be upon
the flock; and let him that is ministered to from the labour of his
yoke, take heed to his tillage.  And let the priests who partake of the
altar serve the altar with honour.  And as for the Levites who receive
the tithes, they have no portion in Israel.  O pastors, disciples of our
great Pastor, be ye not like hirelings; because the hireling cares not
for the sheep.  Be ye like our Sweet Pastor, Whose life was not dearer
to Him than His sheep.  Rear up the youths and bring up the maidens; and
love the lambs and let them be reared in your bosoms; that when ye shall
come to the Chief Pastor, ye may offer to Him all your sheep in
completeness, and so He may give you what He has promised:  *Where I am,
ye also shall be*. <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032)   These
things, brief as they are, will be sufficient for the good pastors and
leaders.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p25"></span>7.  Above, my beloved, I have written
to remind thee of the character that becomes the whole flock.  And in
this discourse I have written to thee about the pastors, the guides of
the flock.  These reminders I have written to thee, beloved, as thou
didst ask of me in thy dear letter.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p26"></span>8.  The Steward brought me into the
King’s treasury and showed me there many precious things; and when I saw
them my mind was captivated with the great treasury.  And as I looked
upon it, it dazzled my eyes, and took captive my thoughts, and caused my
reflections to wander in many ways.  Whosoever receives thereof, is
himself enriched, and enriches (others).  It lies open and unguarded
before all that seek it; and though many take from it there is no
deficiency; and when they give of that which <span id="page_386">p.
386</span> <span id="iii.ix.vii-Page_386"></span>they have received,
their own portion is greatly multiplied.  They that receive freely let
them give freely <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033) as they have
received.  For (this treasure) cannot be sold for a price, because there
is nothing equivalent to it.  Moreover the treasure fails not; and they
that receive it are not satiated.  They drink, and are still eager; they
eat, and are hungry.  Whosoever is not thirsty, finds not ought to
drink; whoever is not hungry, finds nothing to eat.  The hunger for it
satisfies many, and from the thirst for it flow forth water-springs. 
For the man who draws nigh to the fear of God is like the man who in his
thirst draws near to the water-spring and drinks and is satisfied, and
the fountain is not a whit diminished.  And the land that needs to drink
in water, drinks of the fountain, but its waters fail not.  And when the
land drinks, it needs again to drink, and the spring is not lessened by
its flowing.  So is the knowledge of God.  Though all men should receive
of it, yet there would come no lack in it, nor can it be limited by the
sons of flesh.  He that takes from it, cannot take away all; and when he
gives, he lacks nothing.  When thou takest fire with a candle from a
flame, though thou kindle many candles at it, yet the flame does not
diminish when thou takest from it, nor does the candle fail, when it
kindles many.  One man cannot receive all the King’s treasure, nor when
a thirsty man drinks of the fountain, do its waters fill.  When a man
stands on a lofty mountain, his eye does not (equally) comprehend the
near and the distant; nor, when he stands and counts the stars of
heaven, can he set limits to the hosts of the heavens.  So when he draws
nigh unto the fear of God, he cannot attain to the whole of it; and when
he receives much that is precious, it does not seem to be diminished;
and when he gives of that which he has received, it is not exhausted,
nor has it come to an end for him.  And remember, my beloved, what I
wrote to thee, in the first discourse, about faith, that whoever has
freely received ought to give freely as he has received, as our Lord
said:—*Freely ye have received, freely give.* <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034)   For whosoever keeps back part of
anything he has received, <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035)
even that which he has obtained shall be taken away from him. 
Therefore, my beloved, as I have been able to obtain now from that
treasure that fails not, I have sent unto thee from it.  Yet though I
have sent it to thee, it is all with me.  For the treasure fails not,
for it is the wisdom of God; and the steward is our Lord Jesus Christ,
as He testified when He said:—*All things have been committed to Me by
My Father*. <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036)   And while He is
the steward of the wisdom, again, as the Apostle said:—*Christ is the
power of God and His wisdom*. <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037)
  This wisdom is imparted to many, yet nothing is lacking, as I
explained to thee above; the Prophets received of the spirit of Christ,
yet Christ was not a whit diminished.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p32"></span>9.  Ten treatises have I written unto
thee, my beloved.  Whatsoever thou hast asked of me, I have explained to
thee without (receiving) ought from thee.  And that which thou
enquiredst not of me, I have given unto thee.  I have asked thy name and
written unto thee.  I have asked of myself thy question, and I have
answered thee as I was able, for thy persuasion.  Whatsoever I have
written unto thee, meditate in these things at every time; and labour to
read those books which are read in the church of God.  These ten little
books that I have written for thee, they borrow one from another, and
depend one upon another.  Separate them not one from another.  From
*Olaph to Yud* I have written for thee, each letter after its fellow. 
Read thou and learn thou and the brethren, the monks, and the faithful,
they from whom mocking is far removed; as I wrote unto thee above.  And
remember that which I pointed out to thee, that I have not brought these
matters to an end, but short of the end.  Nor are these <span
id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span id="iii.ix.vii-Page_387"></span>things
sufficient; but hear thou these things from me without wrangling, and
enquire concerning them with brethren who are apt for persuasion. 
Whatsoever thou hearest that assuredly edifies, receive; and whatever
builds up strange doctrines, overthrow and utterly demolish.  For
wrangling cannot edify.  But I, my beloved, as a stonecutter have
brought stones for the building, and let wise architects carve them out
and lay them in the building; and all the labourers that toil in the
building shall receive reward from the Lord of the house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[383:1017](2130284.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p3"></span> [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p3.1"></span>,
sq.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[383:1018](2130284.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p4"></span> [Gen.
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#038),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[383:1019](2130284.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p6"></span> [Exod.
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[384:1020](2130284.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p7"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[384:1021](2130284.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p8"></span> [2 Sam. xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[384:1022](2130284.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p10"></span> [Ezek.
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#010),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#019)<span
id="iii.ix.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[384:1023](2130284.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p11"></span> [Zech.
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)<span
id="iii.ix.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[384:1024](2130284.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p12"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#031)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[384:1025](2130284.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p13"></span> [Ezek. xxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[384:1026](2130284.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p15"></span> [John x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[384:1027](2130284.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p16"></span> [John
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)<span
id="iii.ix.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[384:1028](2130284.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p17"></span> [John x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[384:1029](2130284.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p18"></span> [John xxi.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span
id="iii.ix.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[385:1030](2130284.htm#fr_1029) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p20"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[385:1031](2130284.htm#fr_1030) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p21"></span> *Sc*. Gehazi.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[385:1032](2130284.htm#fr_1031) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p23"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p23.1"></span>,
sq.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[385:1033](2130284.htm#fr_1032) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p24"></span> [John xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[386:1034](2130284.htm#fr_1033) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p27"></span> [Matt. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[386:1035](2130284.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p28"></span> [Matt. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[386:1036](2130284.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p29"></span> [Matt. xxv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[386:1037](2130284.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p30"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[386:1038](2130284.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p31"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Demonstration XVII](2130285)
