[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr12)  [Next](odpr14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### APPENDIX B

### AL-ḤĀKIM'S ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE USE OF WINE

In the name of Allah, the compassionate, the merciful.

Praise be to Allah who has rendered Islam strong and dear through its
pious saints, and has entrusted its laws to the *imāms* of his religion
and to his blessed confidants who have preserved them! And may Allah's
grace be upon our grandfather Muḥammad, the seal of the prophets and the
chief of all messengers—may Allah's grace be upon him and upon all
members of his holy family!

The Commander of the Believers, duly authorized by Allah and entrusted
by him with the management of the affairs of both religion and state
over which his word is supreme, is devoting all his energy, judgment,
and deliberations to defend these two institutions, to guard them
against any damage that may find its way into them, to promote their
interests and welfare, to strengthen the agencies that make firm their
foundations, to give preference to whatsoever maintains their
organization, and to preserve whatever alterations and modifications
have been introduced for their perfection and completion. Allah (may he
remain majestic and glorious!) accords his support to the Commander of
the Believers in all that conforms to his favor, and enables him to
succeed in accomplishing whatever makes him merit his favor and pleasure
and deserve his grace and his power.

Verily the measure that will produce the most useful results to Islam
and the Moslems, and that will contribute more than any other measure to
the maintenance of the fundamentals of our religion, is to declare a
general prohibition for everybody against the use of intoxicating
liquor, and to deny them the right of insisting upon the drinking of
intoxicating liquor which

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

is the center of all sorts of evil and the conductor to all kinds of
detestable and abhorrent acts.

The Commander of the Believers has therefore ordained, expecting from
Allah success, that this edict be written so that it be read to the
privileged classes as well as to the common people, whether they be high
in rank or low, making illegal the use of any kind of intoxicating
liquor, no matter what its brand, name, color or taste may be (liquor
being used here to include every kind of drink, whether it be
intoxicating in large or in small quantities), and prohibiting all
resort to the sayings and opinions justifying its use together with all
interpretations and excuses which the rabble hold fast to; for the
Commander of the Believers has declared all that illegal, after having
heard all things connected with it. He has prohibited the use of
intoxicating liquor, its purchase, storage, manufacture, and extraction
to the end that the whole empire may be purified of its evil effects.

The execution of this edict he has left as a trust in the hands of those
of his officials who are ever loyal to him, and as a sign of allegiance
in charge of his counsellors and those who are faithful to him, holding
them responsible for investigating all cases and submitting full reports
regarding their findings. The Commander of the Believers himself has
thus become discharged before Allah of all responsibility and evil
consequence in this world and in the next.

Let all the godly, the believers, and those included within the fold of
true religion know that this is issued by the Commander of the
Believers; and let them do accordingly. Let them unhesitatingly obey its
command and beware of violating it; for the Commander of the Believers
has prepared for the enemies of his ordinance painful punishment and
shameful degradation.

And Allah alone is all-sufficient to the Commander of the Believers and
the best one to depend upon.

Written in the month of Dhu-al-Qa‘dah, 400.

Praise be to Allah alone, and may his grace be upon his Messenger, the
seal of the prophets, as well as upon his holy family; and may he give
them peace!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix C: Excerpt From the Charter Found Posted on the Walls of
the Mosques on the Occasion of the Disappearance of Our Lord Al-Imām
Al-Ḥākim](odpr14)
