[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr15)  [Next](odpr17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

### APPENDIX E

### EXCERPT FROM BAHĀ’-AL-DĪN'S EPISTLE ENTITLED CHRISTIANITY

My trust I put in our lord the Ḥakīm-God who is above number and child,
and my thanks I offer to his servant, the only Messiah \[Ḥamzah\]. From
the eloquent servant, <span id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_215.md) the slave of
our lord the guide and Messiah, to all those who seek rapprochement to
the deity through the reality of the Eucharist and who, of all people of
truth, hold fast to the belief in it \[i.e., the Eucharist\] be they
priest, bishop or patriarch. Peace be upon the people who profess Unity,
who walk in the footsteps of the holy apostles, who know the creed of
the trusted, truthful saints whose souls are pure, who are steadfast in
their loyalty to the Lord according to the covenant they made with him
pledging their own souls, and who offer their lives in the love of the
loyal one, the high priest, the martyr of martyrs, John the Evangelist,
who sustained for the sake of his Lord insult, slaughter and
beheadedness! <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_216.md)

One of the strangest things of the age is how these people have
forgotten the fundamentals of their religion, followed what has been
forbidden them regarding loyalty to *Iblīs* and Satan, confessed by
themselves the practice of what according to their own books of worship
is false and untrue, agreed among themselves to follow evil and
iniquity, and have become widely known among the people of truth, near
and far, for their wicked beliefs.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Where is then your loyalty to the Lord, O you assembly of
hypocrites, <span id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_217.md) and where is your
acceptance of his commandments, O liars, if you believe in him and trust
in his return for the salvation of the people of truth from their sins?
Did he not command you in the third chapter of the Gospel of Matthew
saying: "Love your enemies, bless them who curse you, do good to them
who do evil to you, pray for them who drive you away by force and chase
you out haughtily and arrogantly; so that you may become children to
your father who is in the heavens, who makes his sun to shine upon the
good and the evil, and his rain to fall upon the righteous and the
wicked? For if you love those who love you, what reward or credit should
be given you? Even the Pharisees may do this very thing itself." <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_218.md)

O you stiff-necked and stupid ones, the remnant of idol worshipers! You
have neither accepted him who gave you his commandment, recognized and
remembered the one who announced to you beforehand his coming and
directed his grace toward you, nor heard and obeyed his command.

O liars! You rather have violated the covenant of his command, you
assembly of hypocrites, and disobeyed the word of the Lord who forbade
you to obey satans. In this, you traitors, you have followed the example
of the rebellious Jews who killed and scared the prophets. Likewise you
have perpetrated evil and mischief against those who announced the
coming of the lord Messiah, and practiced polytheism and real atheism
which he forbade. You then persecuted the apostles and among them the
learned one—the faithful and truthful sheikh—and in so doing you have
deviated from the straight path, and forsaken the laws of the people of
reality and of true religion, following the example of the priests and
chiefs of the Jews in

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

their dealing with the worshipful and kneeling Christians and in their
rise to repel by unbelief and apostasy the word of the Lord after it had
appeared.

Your case, you vicious ones, from the standpoint of deafness, imbecility
and blindness, is similar to the case of a dumb animal, which, seeing by
its side a man sympathizing with it because of some harm that has
befallen it, gives him a painful kick that makes it impossible for him
to administer the good he meant to administer to it. Such is your case,
you who are too deaf to hear the truth and who refuse to accept the
parables of the true Messiah.

Look, you heedless, but whence are you to get the right eye? And
understand, but how are you to understand these parables extracted from
the clear mines of truth? In the sixth chapter of the Gospel of Matthew,
he said to the people: "Verily I say to you, the taxgatherers and
hypocrites shall get into the kingdom of heaven before you, because John
brought you the path of the Lord and of justice, and you did not believe
him, although you saw him with your very eyes." You did not repent for
what you had done, and did not believe in what you saw. You neither
accepted the sermon of this clear wisdom nor respected the right of
those who relate themselves to the Christian nation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_215"></span>[68:1](odpr16.htm#fr_215.md) I. e. Bahā’-al-Dīn,
the writer of this epistle.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[68:2](odpr16.htm#fr_216.md) Bahā’-al-Dīn, who may
have been a Christian apostate, confuses here John the Evangelist with
John the Baptist, and in another place with John Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[69:1](odpr16.htm#fr_217.md) In the preceding
Epistle to Constantine, Bahā’-al-Dīn addresses the Christians as
"assembly of saints," because he was then still hopeful of winning them
to the Druze religion.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[69:2](odpr16.htm#fr_218.md) *Cf*. Matthew 5:
44-47.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix F. Exhortations And Prayers By Al-Sayyid ‘Abdullāh
Al-Tanūkhi](odpr17.md)
