[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr10)  [Next](odpr12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### FOLKLORE

*Animism and Saint Worship:*—With the semi-, or quasi-, religious
popular beliefs held by the Druzes of today which do not figure in their
books and learned system—if indeed system it be—we are not particularly
concerned in this study. Such beliefs represent, in general, animistic,
pantheistic and polytheistic remnants of ancient beliefs which those
people held before their admission into, and profession of, Islam. Many
of them, under some form or other, are shared by their neighbors,
Christian and Moslem alike. The belief in magic and in the evil eye is
potent and widespread.

A venerable oak-tree in ‘Ālayh, Lebanon, by which I passed many times,
was ordinarily so bedecked with colorful rags from the clothes of pious
Druze passers-by that its fame spread throughout the land under the name
of "The Mother-of-Rags Oak-Tree."

The sight of Druze men and women walking a distance of miles, barefoot,
to visit some *wali* tomb, particularly that of al-Sayyid ‘Abdullāh
al-Tanūkhi in ‘Abayh, <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182) is familiar
to all those who have lived for any length of time in south Lebanon.
This cult of the dead, a form of polytheism, is strong among them as it
is among other Eastern peoples. <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183)

*Charges of Licentious Practices:*—Ever since the days of the Nuṣayri,
whose charges of immorality against the Druzes solicited a special reply
from Ḥamzah, <span id="fr_184"></span>[3](#fn_184) and the days of
Benjamin of Tudela

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

who visited the Lebanon around 1165 A.D. and wrote that the Druzes "live
incestuously" and once every year assemble and "hold promiscuous
intercourse," <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185) similar charges have
been brought against them, as they are against most secret cults,
without much to substantiate them. There is, however, more to justify
charges of nocturnal orgies and phallic worship against the Nuṣayriyyah
of Syria and the ‘Ali-Ilāhis of Lūristān. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_186)

The secrecy with which the Druzes hold their Thursday evening meetings
in their secluded *khalwahs*, which meetings are attended also by the
initiated women sitting behind a partition, has undoubtedly contributed
to the rise of such suspicions. The *khalwahs* usually crown the
hilltops, and the meetings consist principally of the perusal and
explanation of the sacred writings, some of which are chanted. The
writings of Ḥamzah and Bahā’-al-Dīn, together with the commentaries of
al-Sayyid ‘Abdullāh, constitute the favorite readings. The early part of
certain sessions is open for the uninitiated Druzes. The latter part of
the evening is usually consumed with political and social discussions.

*Ḥamzites versus Darazites:*—Nevertheless, it is admitted by the Druzes
themselves that Darazi, the disreputed missionary whose name the Druzes
reluctantly bear, in order to swell the ranks of his converts did
sanction some licentious and libertine principles. But he was later
discredited and deposed by his superior Ḥamzah from the position he
aspired to maintain as the head of the Druze religion. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[3](#fn_187) The liberties introduced by Darazi were
evidently too seducing in their appeal to be entirely abandoned and to
this day the line of cleavage between the purer

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

and more orthodox Ḥamzites and the Darazites is noticeable. In the
introduction of his unscrupulous libertinism, Darazi was following the
precedent of the Qarāmiṭah, <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188)
sometimes called the "free-lovers" and the "Bolsheviks of Islam."

*Family Organization:*—In their family life, the Druzes, under Christian
influence, strictly adhere to the monogamous form of organization; but
divorce is easy. The *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_189) probably misled by Volney, <span
id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_190) erroneously states that they allow
polygamy. They intermarry among themselves only.

\*  
\*     \*

*Summary and Conclusion:*—On the whole it might be said that the
immediate origins of the Druze religion should be sought in the
multitudinous heterodoxies of the Shī‘ah and schools of thought which
split early Islam asunder, and the ultimate origins in Neo-Platonism,
Gnosticism and Manichaeism. What makes its study especially interesting
and valuable <span id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_191) is the fact that
while most of those systems from which the eclectic Druze founders drew
their material have perished and become extinct, the Druze religion is
still virile and strong and its followers are today numerous and
aggressive enough to attract international attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[52:1](odpr11.htm#fr_182) See Appendix F.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[52:2](odpr11.htm#fr_183) For other
illustrations of the folklore, see "Druzes" in *Palestine Exploration
Fund Quarterly Statement*, 1889, pp. 120-126.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[52:3](odpr11.htm#fr_184) *Al-Radd ‘ala
al-Risālah al-Dāmighah li-al-Fāsiq al-Nuṣayri*, MS.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[53:1](odpr11.htm#fr_185) *Early Travels in
Palestine . . . Travels of Rabbi Benjamin of Tudela* (London, 1848), p.
80. This "*fēte des bougies*" is described by "St. Ed." in *Revue de
l’Orient*, 2<sup>e</sup> sér. (Paris, 1841), IV, 240.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[53:2](odpr11.htm#fr_186) Sir Henry Layard,
*Early Adventures in Persia, Susiana, and Babylonia* (London, 1887), I,
217 and II, 318; C. R. Conder, Syrian Stone-Lore (London, 1896), P. 423.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[53:3](odpr11.htm#fr_187) Ḥamzah denounces him
bitterly in a tract entitled *al-Ghāyah w-al-Naṣīḥah*, MS.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[54:1](odpr11.htm#fr_188) Al-Baghdādi, ed.
Mitzi, pp. 175-176, 180. According to the same authority the Khārijite
Maymūniyyah (p. 169) sanctioned the marriage of grandchildren to
grandparents, and nieces to uncles.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[54:2](odpr11.htm#fr_189) Article "Druzes."

<span id="fn_190"></span>[54:3](odpr11.htm#fr_190) *op. cit.*, I, 425.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[54:4](odpr11.htm#fr_191) Gibbon, *Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire*, *op. cit.*, chap. LVII, n. 68, states with
regard to this religion that "The little that is, or deserves to be,
known may be seen in the industrious Niebuhr, and the second volume of
the recent and instructive *Travels* of M. de Volney."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix A. Covenant of Induction Into the Religion of the Ruler
of the Age](odpr12)
