[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr05)  [Next](odpr07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### CHAPTER II

### SOCIAL AND HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT

*Feudal Organization:*—When we catch our first clear glimpse of the
Druze people we find them living—as they are still living today—in small
village communities at Wādi-al-Taym and southern Lebanon, organized into
a feudal state of society. These village communities were under the
control of local sheikhs, themselves subordinate to one or more *amīrs*
(princes), and the whole system bound together under a singular form of
theocracy. This is still a distinguishing feature of Druze national
life.

The early Druze communities flourished at the foot of Mt. Hermon, and in
the southern part of Western Lebanon overlooking Beirūt and Sidon. They
were in every case agricultural, and subsisted wholly on the produce of
the land. Commerce and industry had no attraction to them. These same
conditions prevail almost unchanged among the Druzes until the present
day. In the lists of the leading merchants of Aleppo, Damascus, Beirūt
and Sidon, one would search in vain for a Druze name. Perhaps the
greatest merchants that the Druze nation ever produced are Druze
immigrants in the United States.

*Part Played during the Crusades:*—In the early period of the Crusading
era, the Druze feudal power was in the hands of two families: the
Tanūkhs and the Arislāns. From their fortresses in the Gharb
district <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) of southern Lebanon, the
Tanūkhs led their incursions into the Phoenician coast and finally
succeeded in holding Beirūt and the maritime plain against the Franks.

After the middle of the twelfth century, the Ma‘n family superseded the
Tanūkhs in Druze leadership. The origin of the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

family goes back to a prince Ma‘n who made his appearance in the Lebanon
in the days of the ‘Abbāsid Caliph al-Mustarshid (1118-1135 A.D.), and
died in 1149 in the days of Sultan Nūr-al-Dīn of Damascus. The Mains
chose for their abode the Shūf district in the southern part of Western
Lebanon, overlooking the maritime plain between Beirūt and Sidon, and
made their headquarters in Ba‘aqlīn, which is still to the present day
the leading Druze village. They were invested with feudal jurisdiction
by Sultan Nūr-al-Dīn and furnished respectable contingents to the Moslem
ranks in their struggle against the Crusaders.

Having cleared Syria from the Franks, the Mamlūk Sultans of Egypt turned
their attention to the schismatic Moslems of Syria; and in the year
1305, al-Malik al-Nāṣir inflicted a disastrous defeat on the Druzes at
Kasrawān <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) and forced outward compliance
on their part to orthodox (Sunni) Islam. Later under the Ottoman Turks
they were again chastised severely at ‘Ayn-Ṣawfar, in 1585, for having
attacked and robbed near Tripoli a body of Janizaries on their way to
Constantinople carrying to the imperial treasury taxes collected from
Egypt and Syria.

*The Druze Power at its Height:*—With the advent of the Ottoman Turks
and the conquest of Syria by Sultan Selīm I, in 1516, the Ma‘ns threw in
their lot with the conquering invaders and were immediately acknowledged
by the new suzerain as the feudal lords of southern Lebanon. Druze
villages spread and prospered in that region, which under Min leadership
so flourished that it acquired the generic appellation of Jabal
Bayt-Ma‘n (the mountain of the Ma‘n family) or Jabal al-Durūz. The
latter title, however, has since been usurped by the Ḥawrān region
which, since the middle of the nineteenth century, has proven a haven of
refuge to Druze emigrants from Lebanon and has become the headquarters
of Druze power.

Under Fakhr-al-Dīn ibn-Ma‘n II (1585-1635) the Druze dominion increased
until it included almost all Syria extending from the edge of the
Antioch plain in the north to Ṣafad in the south

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

with a part of the Syrian desert dominated by Fakhr-al-Dīn's castle at
Tadmur (Palmyra), the ancient capital of Zenobia. The ruins of this
castle still stand on a steep hill overlooking the town and greet the
eye of the passer-by.

Fakhr-al-Dīn became too strong for his Turkish sovereign in
Constantinople. He went so far in 1608 as to sign a commercial treaty
with Duke Ferdinand I of Tuscany containing secret military clauses. The
Sultan then sent a force against him, and he was compelled, in 1614, to
flee the land and seek refuge in the courts of Tuscany and Naples. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

Fakhr-al-Dīn was the first ruler in modern Lebanon to open the doors of
his country to foreign Western influences. Under his auspices the French
established a *khān* (hostel) in Sidon, the Florentines a consulate, and
the Christian missionaries were admitted into the country. Beirūt and
Sidon, which Fakhr-al-Dīn beautified, still bear traces of his benign
rule.

*Banu-Shihāb, the Last Feudal Chiefs:*—As early as the days of Saladin,
and while the Ma‘ns were still in complete control over southern
Lebanon, the Shihāb tribe, originally Ḥijāz Arabs but later domiciled in
Ḥawrān, advanced from Ḥawrān, in 1172, and settled in Wādi-al-Taym at
the foot of Mt. Hermon. They soon made an alliance with the Ma‘ns and
were acknowledged the Druze chiefs in Wādi-al-Taym. At the end of the
seventeenth century (1697), the Shihābs succeeded the Ma‘ns in the
feudal leadership of Druze southern Lebanon, though, unlike them, they
professed Sunni Islam. Secretly, they showed sympathy with Druzism, the
religion of the majority of their subjects. Because of their blood
relationship to the Quraysh, the family of the Prophet Muḥammad, the
Shihāb, next to the Quraysh, is the noblest family in the Arabic world.

The Shihāb leadership continued till the middle of the last century and
culminated in the illustrious governorship of al-Amīr Bashīr (1788-1840)
who, after Fakhr-al-Dīn, was the greatest

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

feudal lord Lebanon produced. Though governor of the Druze mountain,
Bashīr was a crypto-Christian, and it was he whose aid Napoleon
solicited in 1799 during his campaign against Syria.

Having consolidated his conquests in Syria (1831-1838), Ibrāhīm Pasha,
son of the viceroy of Egypt, Muḥammad ‘Ali Pasha, made the fatal mistake
of trying to disarm the Christians and Druzes of the Lebanon and to
draft the latter into his army. This was contrary to the principles of
the life of independence which these mountaineers had always lived, and
resulted in a general uprising against the Egyptian rule. The uprising
was encouraged, for political reasons, by the British. The Druzes of
Wādi-al-Taym and Ḥawrān, under the leadership of Shibli al-‘Aryān,
distinguished themselves in their stubborn resistance at their
inaccessible headquarters, al-Laja, lying southeast of Damascus. It is
in this same place that the Druzes have for the last two years held out,
against the French, under Sultan Pasha al-Aṭrash.

*Druzes and Christians Grouped in Political Rather than Religious
Parties:*—The conquest of Syria by the Moslem Arabs in the middle of the
seventh century introduced into the land two political factions later
called the Qaysites and the Yemenites. The Qaysite party represented the
Ḥijāz and Bedouin Arabs who were regarded as inferior by the Yemenites
who were earlier and more cultured emigrants into Syria from southern
Arabia. The party lines in the Lebanon obliterated racial and religious
lines and the people grouped themselves regardless of their religious
affiliations, into one or the other of these two parties. The sanguinary
feuds between these two factions depleted, in course of time, the
manhood of the Lebanon and ended in the decisive battle of ‘Ayn-Dārah,
in 1711, which resulted in the utter defeat of the Yemenite party. Many
Yemenite Druzes thereupon emigrated to the Ḥawrān region and thus laid
the foundation of Druze power there.

*The Civil War of 1860:*—The Druzes and their Christian Maronite
neighbors, who had thus far lived as religious communities on amicable
terms, entered a period of social disturbance

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

in the year 1840 which culminated in the civil war of 1860. For this
disturbance the Sublime Porte in Constantinople was, in a great measure,
responsible. The Sultan, realizing that the only way to bring the
semi-independent people of the Lebanon under his direct control was to
sow the seeds of discord among the people themselves, inaugurated in the
mountain a policy long tried and found successful in the Ottoman
provinces—the policy of "divide and rule." The civil war of 1860 cost
the Christians some ten thousand lives in Damascus, Zaḥlah,
Dayr-al-Qamar, Ḥāṣbayya and other towns of the Lebanon. The European
powers then determined to interfere and authorized the landing in Beirūt
of a body of French troops under General Beaufort d’Hautpoul whose
inscription can still be seen on the historic rock at the mouth of the
Dog River. Following the recommendations of the powers, the Porte
granted Lebanon a local autonomy, guaranteed by the powers, under a
Christian governor. This autonomy was maintained until the Great War.

Besides Wādi-al-Taym, the southern part of Western Lebanon and Ḥawrān,
the Druzes today occupy a few villages in al Jabal al-A‘la, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) Mt. Carmel in Palestine, and Ṣafad. Their
districts in southern Lebanon are al-Matn and al-Shūf, and their leading
villages are: ‘Ālayh, Bayṣūr, al-Shuwayfāt, ‘Abayh, Ba‘aqlīn, and
al-Mukhtārah. They number in all Syria and Palestine about 117,000.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](odpr06.htm#fr_3) The district lying to the
west of Beirūt. The ruins of one of these fortresses still crown a
little hill near Saraḥmūl.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:1](odpr06.htm#fr_4) This region is today
entirely occupied by Christians.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:1](odpr06.htm#fr_5) For a biography of
Fakhr-al-Dīn, see H. F. Wuestenfeld, *Fachreddin, der Drusenfürst, und
seine Zeitgenossen* (Göttingen, 1866).

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:1](odpr06.htm#fr_6) In the vicinity of Aleppo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Racial Origins](odpr07)
