<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index) 
[Roma](../../neu/roma/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gsft10) 
[Next](gsft12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMSI/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Sorcery and Fortune Telling*, by Charles Godfrey Leland,
\[1891\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

 

<span id="img_14200"></span> ![](img/14200.jpg)

 

# CHAPTER IX

THE RENDEZVOUS OR MEETINGS OF WITCHES, SORCERERS, AND VILAS—A
CONTINUATION OF SOUTH SLAVONIAN GYPSY-LORE

<span id="img_14201"></span> ![](img/14201.jpg)IN Eastern Europe witches
and their kin, or kind, assemble on the eve of Saint John and of Saint
George, Christmas and Easter, at cross-roads on the broad *pustas*, or
prairies, and there brew their magic potions. This, as Dr. KRAUSS
observes, originated in feasts held at the same time in pre-Christian
times. "So it was that a thousand years ago old and young assembled in
woods or on plains to bring gifts to their gods, and celebrated with
dances, games, and offerings the festival of spring, or of awaking and
blooming Nature. These celebrations have taken Christian names, but
innumerable old heathen rites and customs are still to be found in
them." It may be here observed that mingled with these are many of a
purely gypsy-Oriental origin, which came from the same source and which
it remains for careful

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

ethnologists and critical Folk-lorists to disentangle and make clear.
The priestesses of prehistoric times on these occasions performed
ceremonies, as was natural, to protect cattle or land from evil
influences. To honour their deities the "wise women" bore certain kinds
of boughs and adorned animals with flowers and wreaths. The new religion
declared that this was all sorcery and devil-work, but the belief in the
efficacy of the rites continued. The priestesses became witches, or
Vilas, the terms being often confused, but they were still feared and
revered.

In all the South Slavonian. country the peasants on Saint George's. Day
adorn the horns of cattle with garlands, in gypsy Indian style, to
protect them from evil influences. I have observed that even in Egypt
among Mahometans Saint George is regarded with great reverence, and I
knew one who on this day always sacrificed a sheep. The cow or ox which
is not thus decorated becomes a prey in some way to witches. The
garlands are hung up at night over the stable door, where they remain
all the ensuing year. If a peasant neglects to crown his cow, he not
only does not receive a certain fee from its owner, but is in danger of
being beaten. On the same day the shepherdess, or cow-herd, takes in one
hand salt, in the other a potsherd containing live coals. In the coals
roses are burned. By this means witches lose all power over the animal.
Near Karlstadt the mistress of the family merely strikes it with a cross
to produce the same effect.

Among the Transylvanian Hungarian gypsies there is a magical ceremony
performed on Saint George's Day, traces of which may be found in
England. Then the girls bake a peculiar kind of cake, in which certain
herbs are mixed, and which Dr. von WLISLOCKI declares has an agreeable
taste. This is divided among friends and foes, and it is believed to
have the property of reconciling the bitterest enemies and of increasing
the love of friends. But it is most efficient as a love-charm,
especially when given by women to men. The following gypsy song
commemorates a deed of this kind by a husband, who recurred to it with
joy:—

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

"Kásáve romñi ná jidel,  
Ke kásávo maro the del;  
Sar m're gule lele pekel  
Káná Sváto Gordye ável.

"Furmuntel bute luludya  
Furmuntel yoy bute charma  
Andre petrel but kámábe  
Ko chal robo avla bake."

No one bakes such bread as my wife, such as she baked me on St. George's
Day. Many flowers and dew were kneaded into the cake with love. Whoever
eats of it will be her slave."

In England I was told by an old gypsy woman named LIZZIE BUCKLAND, that
in the old time gypsy girls made a peculiar kind of cake, a *Romany
morriclo*, which they baked especially for their lovers, and used to
throw to them over the hedge by night. To make it more acceptable, and
probably to facilitate the action of the charm, they would put money
into the cake. It was observed of old among the Romans that *fascinatio*
began with flattery, compliments, and presents!

On the night of Saint John the witch climbs to the top of the hurdle
fence which surrounds the cow-yard, and sings the following spell:—

"K meni sir,  
K meni maslo,  
K meni puter,  
K meni mleko  
Avam pak kravsku kožu!"

"To me the cheese,  
To me the tallow (or meat),  
To me the butter,  
To me the milk,  
To you only the cowhide."

Or, as it may be expressed in rhyme:—

"The cheese, meat, butter, and milk for me,  
But only the cowhide left for thee."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Then the cow will die, the carcass be buried, and the skin sold. To
prevent all this the owner goes early on St. John's Day to the meadow
and gathers the morning dew in a cloak. This he carries home, and after
binding the cow to a beam washes her with it. She is then milked, and it
is believed that if all has gone right she will yield four bucketsful.

In the chapter on "Conjurations and Exorcisms among the Hungarian
Gypsies," I have mentioned the importance which they attach to the being
born a seventh or twelfth child. This is the same throughout South
Slavonia, where the belief that such persons in a series of births are
exceptionally gifted is shared by both gypsies, with whom it probably
originated, and the peasants. What renders this almost certain is that
Dr. KRAUSS mentions that the oldest information as to the subject among
the Slavs dates only from 1854, while the faith is ancient among the
gypsies. He refers here to the so-called *Kerstniki*, who on the eve of
St. John do battle with the witches. *Krstnik* is a Greek word, meaning,
literally, one who has been baptized. But the Krstnik proper is the
youngest of twelve brothers, all sons of the same father. There appears
to be some confusion and uncertainty among the Slavs as to whether all
the twelve brothers or only the twelfth are "Krstnik"—according to the
gypsy faith it would be the latter. These "twelvers" are the great
protectors of the world from witchcraft. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) But they are in great danger on Saint
John's Eve, for then the witches, having most power, assail them with
sticks and stakes, or stumps of saplings, for which reason it is usual
in the autumn to carefully remove everything of the kind from the
ground.

A krstnik is described by Miklosič as "Človek kterega vile obijubiju"—"A
man who has won the love of a Vila." The Vila ladies, or a certain

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

class of them, are extremely desirous of contracting the closest
intimacy—in short, of becoming the mistresses, of superior men. The
reader may find numerous anecdotes of such amours in the "Curiosa" of
Heinrich KORNMANN, 1666, and in my "Egyptian Sketch Book" (Trübner &.
Co., London, 1874). In the heathen days, as at present among all gypsies
and Orientals, it was believed to be a wonderfully lucky thing for a man
to get the love of one of these beautiful beings. What the difficulties
were which kept them from finding lovers is not very clear, unless it
were that the latter must be twelfth sons, or, what is far more
difficult to find, young men who would not gossip about their
supernatural sweethearts to other mortals, who would remain true to
them, and who finally would implicitly obey all their commands and
follow their advice. There is a vast array of tales—Gypsy, Arab,
Provençal, Norman, German, and Scandinavian, which show that on these
points the Vila, or forest-maiden, or spirit of earth or air, or fairy,
was absolutely exacting and implacable, being herself probably allowed
by occult laws to contract an intimacy only with men of a high order, or
such as are—

"Few in a heap and very hard to find."

On the other hand, the Vila yearns intensely for men and their near
company, because there is about those who have been baptized a certain
perfume or odour of sanctity, and as the unfortunate nymph is not
immortal herself, she likes to get even an association or sniff of it
from those who are. According to the Rosicrucian Mythology, as set forth
in the "Undine" of LA MOTTE FOUQUÉ, she may acquire a soul by marrying a
man who will be faithful to her—which accounts for the fact that so few
Undines live for ever. However this may be, it appears that the Krstniki
are specially favoured, and frequently invited by the Vilas to step
in—generally to a hollow tree—and make a call. The hollow tree proves to
be a door to Fairyland, and the call a residence of seven days, which on
returning home the caller finds were seven years, for—

"When we are pleasantly employed, time flies."

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

These spirits have one point in common with their gypsy friends—they
steal children—with this difference, that the Vila only takes those
which have been baptized, while the gypsy—at present, at least—is
probably not particular in this respect. But I have very little doubt
that originally one motive, and perhaps the only one which induced these
thefts, was the desire of the gypsies, as heathens and sorcerers, to
have among them, "for luck," a child which had received the initiation
into that mysterious religion from which they were excluded, and which,
as many of their charms and spells prove, they really regarded as a
higher magic. It is on this ground only, or for this sole reason, that
we can comprehend many of the child-stealings effected by gypsies; for
it is absolutely true that, very often when they have large families of
their own, they will, for no apparent cause whatever, neither for the
sake of plunder, profit, or revenge, adopt or steal some poor child and
bring it up, kindly enough after their rough fashion; and in doing this
they are influenced, as I firmly believe, far more by a superstitious
feeling of *bâk*, or luck, and the desire to have a *Mascot* in the
tent, than any other. That children have been robbed or stolen for
revenge does not in the least disprove what I believe—that in most cases
the motive for the deed is simply superstition.

On the eve of Saint George old women cut thistle-twigs and bring them to
the door of the stall. This is only another form of the nettle which
enters so largely into the Hungarian gypsy incantations, and they also
make crosses with cowdung on the doors. This is directly of Indian
origin, and points to gypsy tradition. Others drive large nails into the
doors—also a curious relic of a widely-spread ancient custom, of which a
trace may be found in the Vienna *Stock im Eisen*, or trunk driven full
of nails by wandering apprentices, which may be seen near the church of
Saint Stephen. But the thistle-twigs are still held to be by far the
most efficacious. In Vinica, or near it, these twigs are cut before
sunset. They are laid separately in many places, but are especially
placed in garlands on the necks of cattle. If a witch, in spite of these
precautions, contrives to get into the stable, all will go wrong with
the beasts during the coming year.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

Now there was once a man who would have none of this thistle work—nay,
he mocked at those who believed in it. So it came to pass that all
through the year witches came every night and milked his cows. And he
reflected, "I must find out who does this!" So he hid himself in the bay
and kept sharp watch. All at once, about eleven o'clock, there came in a
milk-pail, which moved of its own accord, and the cows began to let down
their milk into it. The farmer sprang out and kicked it over. Then it
changed into a tremendous toad which turned to attack him, so that in
terror he took refuge in his house. That proved to be a lucky thing for
him. A week after came the day of Saint George. Then he hung
thistle-twigs on his stable door, and after that his cows gave milk in
plenty.

Witches may be seen on Saint George's Day, and that unseen by them if a
man will do as follows: He must rise before the sun, turn all his
clothes inside out and then put them on. Then he must cut a green turf
and place it on his head. Thus he becomes invisible, for the witches
believe he is under the earth, being themselves apparently bewitched by
this.

Very early on the day of Saint George, or before sunrise, the witches
climb into the church belfry to get the grease from the axle on which
the bell swings, and a piece of the bell-rope, for these things are
essential to them. Dr. KRAUSS observes that in the MS. from which he
took this, *schmierfetet* or axle-grease, is indicated by the word
*svierc*, "in which one at once recognizes the German word *schwartz*, a
black." It is remarkable that the Chippeway and other Algonkin Indians
attach particular value to the black dye made from the grease of the
axle of a grindstone.

The extraordinary pains which they took to obtain this had attracted the
attention of a man in Minnesota, who told me of it. It required a whole
day to obtain a very little of it. The Indians, when asked by curious
white people what this was for, said it was for dyeing baskets, but, as
my informant observed, the quantity obtained was utterly inadequate to
any such purpose, and even better black dyes (*e.g.*, hickory bark and
alum) are known to, and can be very easily obtained by, them. The real
object was to use the grease in "medicine," *i.e.*, for sorcery. The
eagerness of both witches in Europe

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

and Indians in America to obtain such a singular substance is very
strange. However, the idea must be a recent one among the Indians, for
there were certainly no grindstones among them before the coming of the
white men.

"For all that I can tell, said he,  
Is that it is a mystery,"

Heathens though they be, many gypsies have a superstitious belief in the
efficacy of the sacramental bread and wine, and there are many instances
of their stealing them for magical purposes. So in the Middle Ages
witches and sorcerers used these objects for the most singular purposes,
Paulus Grillandus, in his "Tractatus de Hereticis et Sortilegiis," &c.
(Lyons, 1547), assuring his readers that he had known a witch who had
two holy wafers, inscribed with magical characters which she used for
debauching innocent girls and betraying them to men, and that it was a
belief that if a woman had the sacred oil fresh on her lips no man could
refrain from kissing her. This is the union of two kinds of magic; a
view which never once occurred to theological writers. And here I may
appropriately mention that while the proofs of this work were passing
through my hands accident threw into my way an extremely rare work,
which illustrates to perfection the identity of popular and
ecclesiastical sorcery. This is entitled, "De Effectibus Magicis, ac de
Nuce Maga Beneventana," "Six Books of Magic Effects and of the Witch
Walnut-tree of Benevento. A work necessary, joyous, and useful to
Astrologists, Philosophers, Physicians, Exorcists, and Doctors, and
Students of Holy Scriptures. By the Chief Physician, PETER PIPERNO." It
appears to have been privately printed at Naples in 164-7, and came from
a conventual library. It bare, written on a fly-leaf, the word
*Proibito*.

In it every kind of disorder or disease is declared to be caused by
devils and witches. The author believes with DELRIO that disease entered
into the world as a consequence of sin (*referenda sit ad primæ nostræ
matris peccatum*)—a view held by JOHN MILTON; hence, of course, all
disease is caused solely by the devil. In his volume of two hundred

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

large and close pages, our PETER PIPERNO displays a vast erudition on
the origin of devils and diseases, is bitter on the rival school of
magical practitioners who use cures and incantations unlike his own, and
then gives us the name and nature of all diseases, according to the
different parts of the body, &c., the medical prescriptions proper for
them, and what is, in his opinion, most needful of all, the
*incantation* or exorcism to be pronounced. Sometimes there are several
of these, as one for making up a pill, another on taking it, &c. There
are also general conjurations—I mean benedictions—for the medicines
altogether or in particular, such as the *Benedictio Syruporum*, "The
Blessing of the Syrups," and there is a very affecting and appropriately
moving one for making or taking Castor Oil, and oils of all kinds, as
follows:—

"BENEDICTIO OLEI.

"This begins with the *In nomine Patris*, &c., and *Adjutorium nostrum*,
&c., and then:

"I exorcise you all aromatics, herbs, roots, seeds, stones, gums, and
whatever is to be compounded with this oil, by God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost, by the God triune yet one, by the holy and
single Trinity, that the impure Spirit depart from you, and with it
every incursion of Satan, every fraud of the Enemy, every evil of the
Devil, and that mixed with oil you may free the subject from all
infirmities, incantations, bindings, witchcrafts, from all diabolical
fraud, art, and power, by the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ and the
most beloved Virgin Mary, and of all the saints. Amen."

The curses for the devils of colds, fevers, rheumatisms, gouts,
stomachaches, &c., are awful, both in number, length, and quality;
enough to frighten a cowboy or "exhort an impenitent mule" into
docility. There is the *Exorcismus terribilis*, or "Terrible Exorcism"
of Saint Zeno, in which the disorder is addressed literally as "A dirty,
false, heretical, drunken, lewd, proud, envious, deceitful, vile,
swindling, stupid devil" with some twenty more epithets which, if
applied in these our days to the devil himself, would ground an action
for libel and bring heavy damages in any court. It is to be remarked
that in many prescriptions the author adds to legitimate remedies,
ingredients which are simply taken from popular necromancy, or
witchcraft, as for instance, rue—fugæ dæmonum—verbena,

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

and artemisia, all of which are still in use in Tuscany against sorcery
and the evil eye.

The really magical character of these exorcisms is shown by the vast
array of strange words used in them, many of which have a common source
with those used by sorcerers of the Cabalistic or Agrippa school, such
as *Agla, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, Fons, Origo, Serpens, Avis, Leo,
Imago, Sol, Floy, Vitis, Mons, Lapis, Angularis, Ischyros, Pantheon*,
all of which are old heathen terms of incantation. These are called in
the exorcism "words by virtue of which"—*per virtutem istorum
verborum*—the devils are invited to depart. The whole is as much a work
of sorcery as any ever inscribed in a catalogue of *occulta*, and it was
as a specimen of *occulta* that I bought it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[145:1](gsft11.htm#fr_16) In Northern Sagas it
appeared that Berserkers, or desperate warriors, frequently bound
themselves together in companies of twelve. *Vide* the Hervor Saga, Olaf
Tryggvason's and the Gautrek Saga. So there were the twelve Norse gods
and the twelve apostles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Of the Haunts, Homes and Habits of Witches in the
South Slavic Lands](gsft12)

</div>
