[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry006)  [Next](ry008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO V.: AYODHYÁ

   'Ikshváku's sons from days of old  
Were ever brave and mighty-souled.  
The land their arms had made their own  
Was bounded by the sea alone.  
Their holy works have won them praise,  
Through countless years, from Manu's days.  
Their ancient sire was Sagar, he  
Whose high command dug out the sea:  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1b](#fn_60.md)  
With sixty thousand sons to throng  
Around him as he marched along.  
From them this glorious tale proceeds;  
The great Rámáyan tells their deeds.  
This noble song whose lines contain,  
Lessons of duty, love, and gain,  
We two will now at length recite,  
While good men listen with delight.  
   On Sarjú's  <span id="fr_61"></span>[2b](#fn_61.md) bank, of ample
size,  
The happy realm of Kos'al lies,  

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>  

With fertile length of fair champaign  
And flocks and herds and wealth of grain.  
There, famous in her old renown,  
Ayodhyá <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) stands, the royal town,  
In bygone ages built and planned  
By sainted Manu's <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) princely hand.  
Imperial seat! her walls extend  
Twelve measured leagues from end to end,  
And three in width from side to side,  
With square and palace beautified.  
Her gates at even distance stand;  
Her ample roads are wisely planned.  
Right glorious is her royal street  
Where streams allay the dust and heat.  
On level ground in even row  
Her houses rise in goodly show:  
Terrace and palace, arch and gate  
The queenly city decorate.  
High are her ramparts, strong and vast,  
By ways at even distance passed,  
With circling moat, both deep and wide,  
And store of weapons fortified.  

King Das'aratha, lofty-souled,  
That city guarded and controlled,  
With towering Sál trees belted round, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64.md)  
And many a grove and pleasure ground,  
As royal Indra, throned on high,  
Rules his fair city in the sky. <span id="fr_65"></span>[4](#fn_65.md)  
She seems a painted city, fair  
With chess-board line and even square. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[5](#fn_66.md)  
And cool boughs shade the lovely lake  

Where weary men their thirst may slake.  
There gilded chariots gleam and shine,  
And stately piles the Gods enshrine.  
There gay sleek people ever throng  
To festival and dance and song.  
A mine is she of gems and sheen,  
The darling home of Fortune's Queen.  
With noblest sort of drink and meat,  
The fairest rice and golden wheat,  
And fragrant with the chaplet's scent  
With holy oil and incense blent.  
With many an elephant and steed,  
And wains for draught and cars for speed.  
With envoys sent by distant kings,  
And merchants with their precious things,  
With banners o'er her roofs that play,  
And weapons that a hundred slay; <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1b](ry008.htm#fn_67.md)  
All warlike engines framed by man,  
And every class of artisan.  
A city rich beyond compare  
With bards and minstrels gathered there,  
And men and damsels who entrance  
The soul with play and song and dance.  
In every street is heard the lute,  
The drum, the tabret, and the flute,  
The Veda chanted soft and low,  
The ringing of the archer's bow;  
With bands of godlike heroes skilled  
In every warlike weapon, filled,  
And kept by warriors from the foe,  
As Nágas guard their home below. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2b](ry008.htm#fn_68.md)  
There wisest Bráhmans evermore  
   The flame of worship feed,  
And versed in all the Vedas' lore,  
   Their lives of virtue lead.  
Truthful and pure, they freely give;  
   They keep each sense controlled,  
And in their holy fervour live  
   Like the great saints of old.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[11:1b](ry007.htm#fr_60.md) This exploit is related
in Canto XI.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[11:2b](ry007.htm#fr_61.md) The Sarjú or Ghaghra,
anciently called Sarayú, rises in the Himalayas, and after flowing
through the province of Oudb, falls into the Gauges.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[12:1](ry007.htm#fr_62.md) The ruins of the ancient
capital of Rama and the Children of the Sun may still be traced in the
present Ajudhyá near Fyzabad. Ajudhyá is the Jerusalem or Mecca of the
Hindus.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[12:2](ry007.htm#fr_63.md) A legislator and saint,
the son of Brahmá or a personification of Brahmá himself, the creator of
the world, and progenitor of mankind. Derived from the root *man* to
think, the word means originally *man*, the thinker, and is found in
this sense in the Rig-veda.

Manu as a legislator is identified with the Cretan Minos, as progenitor
of mankind with the German Mannus: 'Celebrant carminibus antiquis, quod
unum apud illos memoriae et annalium genus est, Tuisconem deum terra
editum, et fllium Mannum, originem gentis conditoresque.' TACITUS,
*Germania*, Cap. II.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[12:3](ry007.htm#fr_64) The Sál (Shorea Robusta.md)
is a valuable timber tree of considerable height.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[12:4](ry007.htm#fr_65.md) The city of Indra is
called Amarávati or Home of the Immortals.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[12:5](ry007.htm#fr_66.md) Schlegel thinks that
this refers to the marble of different colours with which the houses
were adorned. It seems more natural to understand it as implying the
regularity of the streets and houses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VI.: The King.](ry008.md)
