[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry008)  [Next](ry010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO VII.: THE MINISTERS.

Two sages, holy saints, had he,  
His ministers and priests to be:  
Vasishtha, faithful to advise.  
And Vámadeva, Scripture-wise.  

Eight other lords around him stood,  
All skilled to counsel, wise and good;  
Jayanta, Vijay, Dhrishti bold  
In fight, affairs of war controlled:  
Siddhárth and Arthasádhak true  
Watched o'er expense and revenue,  
And Dharmapál and wise Aœok  
Of right and law and justice spoke.  
With these the sage Sumantra, skilled  
To urge the car, high station filled.  
   All these in knowledge duly trained  
Each passion and each sense restrained:  
With modest manners, nobly bred  
Each plan and nod and look they read,  
Upon their neighbours' good intent,  
Most active and benevolent:  
As sit the Vasus  <span id="fr_78"></span>[1b](#fn_78) round their
king.  
They sate around him counselling.  
They ne'er in virtue's loftier pride  
Another's lowly gifts decried.  
In fair and seemly garb arrayed,  
No weak uncertain plans they made.  
Well skilled in business, fair and just,  
They gained the people's love and trust,  
And thus without oppression stored  
The swelling treasury of their lord,  
Bound in sweet friendship each to each,  
They spoke kind thoughts in gentle speech.  
They looked alike with equal eye  
On every caste, on low and high.  
Devoted to their king, they sought,  
Ere his tongue spoke, to learn his thought.  
And knew, as each occasion rose,  
To bide their counsel or disclose.  
In foreign land--or in their own  
Whatever passed, to them was known.  
By secret spies they timely knew  
What men were doing or would do.  
Skilled in the grounds of war and peace  
They saw the monarch's state increase,  
Watching his weal with conquering eye  
That never let occasion by,  
While nature lent her aid to bless  
Their labours with unbought success.  
Never for anger, lust, or gain,  
Would they their lips with falsehood stain.  
Inclined to mercy they could scan  
The weakness and the strength of man.  
They fairly judged both high and low,  
And ne'er would wrong a guiltless foe;  
Yet if a fault were proved, each one  
Would punish e'en his own dear son.  
But there and in the kingdom's bound  
No thief or man impure was found:  
None of loose life or evil fame,  
No temper of another's dame.  
Contented with their lot each caste  

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>  

Calm days in blissful quiet passed;  
And, all in fitting tasks employed,  
Country and town deep rest enjoyed,  
With these wise lords around his throne  
   The monarch justly reigned,  
And making every heart his own  
   The love of all men gained.  
With trusty agents, as beseems,  
   Each distant realm he scanned,  
As the sun visits with his beams  
   Each corner of the land.  
Ne'er would he on a mightier foe  
   With hostile troops advance,  
Nor at an equal strike a blow  
   In war's delusive chance.  
These lords in council bore their part  
With ready brain and faithful heart,  
With skill and knowledge, sense and tact,  
Good to advise and bold to act.  
And high and endless fame he won  
   With these to guide his schemes,  
As, risen in his might, the sun  
   Wins glory with his beams.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[14:1](ry008.htm#fr_75) The elephants of Indra
and other deities who preside over the four points of the compass.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[14:2](ry008.htm#fr_76) There are four kinds of
elephants. 1 *Bhaddar*. It is well proportioned, has an erect head, a
broad chest, large ears, a long tail, and is bold and can bear fatigue.
2 *Mand.* It is black, has yellow eyes, a uniformly sized body, and is
wild and ungovernable. 3 *Mirg*. It has a whitish skin, with black
spots. 4 *Mir*. It has a small head, and obeys readily. It gets
frightened when it thunders.' *Ain-i-Ahbarí* \* . Translated by H.
Blochmann, Ain 41, *The Imperial Elephant Stables*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[14:3](ry008.htm#fr_77) Ayodhyá means *not to be
fought against*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[14:1b](ry009.htm#fr_78) Attendants of Indra,
eight Gods whose names signify fire, light aud its phenomena.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VIII.: Sumantra's Speech.](ry010)
