[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry000)  [Next](ry002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>  

# INVOCATION. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

  

Praise to Válmíki, <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) bird of charming
song, <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)  
   Who mounts on Poesy's sublimest spray,  
And sweetly sings with accent clear and strong  
   Ráma, aye Ráma, in his deathless lay.  

Where breathes the man can listen to the strain  
   That flows in music from Válmíki's tongue,  
Nor feel his feet the path of bliss attain  
   When Ráma's glory by the saint is sung!  

The stream Rámáyan leaves its sacred fount  
   The whole wide world from sin and stain to free. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1b](ry003.htm#fn_3.md)  
The Prince of Hermits is the parent mount,  
   The lordly Ráma is the darling sea.  

Glory to him whose fame is ever bright!  
   Glory to him, Prachetas'  <span id="fr_4"></span>[2b](ry003.htm#fn_4.md)
holy son!  
Whose pure lips quaff with ever new delight  
   The nectar-sea of deeds by Ráma done.  

Hail, arch-ascetic, pious, good, and kind!  
   Hail, Saint Válmíki, lord of every lore!  
Hail, holy Hermit, calm and pure of mind!  
   Hail, First of Bards, Válmíki, hail once more!  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](ry001.htm#fr_0.md) The MSS. vary very
considerably in these stanzas of invocation: many lines are generally
prefixed in which not only the poet, but those who play the chief parts
in the poem are panegyrized. It is self-apparent that they are not by
the author of the Rámáyan himself.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:2](ry001.htm#fr_1.md) 'Válmíki was the son of
Varuna, the regent of the waters, one of whose names is Prachetas.
According to the *Adhyátmá Rámáyana*, the sage, although a Bráhman by
birth, associated with foresters and robbers. Attacking on one occasion
the seven Rishis, they expostulated with him successfully, and taught
him the *mantra* of Ráma reversed, or *Mará*, *Mará*, in the inaudible
repetition of which he remained immovable for thousands of years, so
that when the sages returned to the same spot they found him still
there, converted into a *valmik* or ant-hill, by the nests of the
termites, whence his name of Válmíki.'

WILSON. *Specimens of the Hindu Theatre, Vol. I. p*. 313.

'Válmíki is said to have lived a solitary life in the woods: he is
called both a *muni* and a *rishi*. The former word properly signifies
an anchorite or hermit; the latter has reference chiefly to wisdom. The
two words are frequently used promiscuously, and may both be rendered by
the Latin *cates* in its earliest meaning of *seer*: Válmíki was both
poet and seer, as he is said to have sung the exploits of Ráma by the
aid of divining insight rather than of knowledge naturally acquired.'
SCHLEGEL.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[1:3](ry001.htm#fr_2.md) Literally, *Kokila*, the
Koil, or Indian Cuckoo. Schlegel translates 'luscinium.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I](ry002.md)
