[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry005)  [Next](ry007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO IV.: THE RHAPSODISTS.

When to the end the tale was brought,  
Rose in the sage's mind the thought;  
Now who throughout this earth will go,  
And tell it forth that all may know?'  

As thus he mused with anxious breast,  
Behold, in hermit's raiment dressed,  
Kus'a and Lava  <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) came to greet  
Their master and embrace his feet.  
The twins he saw, that princely pair  
Sweet-voiced, who dwelt beside him there  
None for the task could be more fit,  
For skilled were they in Holy Writ;  
And so the great Rámáyan, fraught  
With lore divine, to them he taught:  
The lay whose verses sweet and clear  
Take with delight the listening ear,  
That tell of Sítá's noble life  
And Rávan's fall in battle strife.  
Great joy to all who hear they bring,  
Sweet to recite and sweet to sing.  
For music's sevenfold notes are there,  
And triple measure,  <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56) wrought with
care  
With melody and tone and time,  
And flavours  <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57) that enhance the
rime:  
Heroic might has ample place,  
And loathing of the false and base,  
With anger, mirth, and terror, blent  
With tenderness, surprise, content.  
When, half the hermit's grace to gain,  
And half because they loved the strain,  
The youth within their hearts had stored  
The poem that his lips outpoured,  
Válmíki kissed them on the head,  
As at his feet they bowed, and said  
'Recite ye this heroic song  
In tranquil shades where sages throng  
Recite it where the good resort,  
In lowly home and royal court,'  
The hermit ceased. The tuneful pair  
Like heavenly minstrels sweet and fair  
In music's art divinely skilled,  
Their saintly master's word fulfilled.  
Like Ráma's self, from whom they came,  
They shared their size in face and frame,  

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>  

As though from some fair sculptured stone  
Two selfsame images had grown.  
Sometimes the pair rose up to sing,  
Surrounded by a holy ring,  
Where seated on the grass bad met  
Full many a musing anchoret.  
Then tears bedimmed those gentle eyes,  
As transport took them and surprise,  
And as they listened every one  
Cried in delight, Well done! Well done!  
Those sages versed in holy lore  
Praised the sweet minstrels more and more:  
And wondered at the singers' skill,  
And the bard's verses sweeter still,  
Which laid so clear before the eye  
The glorious deeds of days gone by.  
Thus by the virtuous hermits praised,  
Inspirited their voice they raised.  
Pleased with the song this holy man  
Would give the youths a water-can;  
One gave a fair ascetic dress,  
Or sweet fruit from the wilderness.  
One saint a black-deer's hide would bring,  
And one a sacrificial string:  
One, a clay pitcher from his hoard,  
And one, a twisted munja cord.  <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)  
One in his joy an axe would find,  
One, braid, their plaited locks to bind.  
One gave a sacrificial cup,  
One rope to tie their fagots up;  
While fuel at their feet was laid,  
Or hermit's stool of fig-tree made.  
All gave, or if they gave not, none  
Forgot at least a benison.  
Some saints, delighted with their lays,  
Would promise health and length of days;  
Others with surest words would add  
Some boon to make their spirit glad.  
In such degree of honour then  
That song was held by holy men:  
That living song which life can give,  
By which shall many a minstrel live.  
In seat of kings, in crowded hall,  
They sang the poem, praised of all.  
And Ráma chanced to hear their lay,  
While he the votive steed  <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) would
slay,  
And sent fit messengers to bring  
The minstrel pair before the king.  
They came, and found the monarch high  
Enthroned in gold, his brothers nigh;  
While many a minister below,  
And noble, sate in lengthened row.  

The youthful pair awhile he viewed  
Graceful in modest attitude,  
And then in words like these addressed  
His brother Lakshman and the rest:  
'Come, listen to the wondrous strain  
Recited by these godlike twain.  
Sweet singers of a story fraught  
With melody and lofty thought.'  
   The pair, with voices sweet and strong,  
Rolled the full tide of noble song,  
With tone and accent deftly blent  
To suit the changing argument.  
Mid that assembly loud and clear  
Rang forth that lay so sweet to hear,  
That universal rapture stole  
Through each man's frame and heart and soul.  
'These minstrels, blest with every sign  
That marks a high and princely line,  
   In holy shades who dwell,  
Enshrined in Saint Válmiki's lay,  
A monument to live for aye,  
   My deeds in song shall tell.'  
Thus Ráma spoke: their breasts were fired,  
And the great tale, as if inspired,  
   The youths began to sing,  
While every heart with transport swelled,  
And mute and rapt attention held  
   The concourse and the king,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[10:1](ry006.htm#fr_55) The twin sons if Ráma
and Sítá, born after Ráma had repartiated Sítá, and brought up in the
hermitage of Válmíki. As they were the first rhapsodists the combined
name Kus'alava signifies a reciter of paeans or an improvisatore even to
the present day.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[10:2](ry006.htm#fr_56) Perhaps the base, tenor,
and treble, or quick, slow and middle times. We know but little of the
ancient music of the Hindus.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[10:3](ry006.htm#fr_57) Eight flavours or
sentiments are usually enumerated, love, mirth, tenderness, anger,
heroism, terror, disgust, and surprise; tranquility or content, or
paternal tenderness, is sometimes considered the ninth. WILSON. See the
*Sáhitya Darpana* or *Mirror of Composition* translated by Dr.
Ballantyne and Bábá Pramadádása Mitra in the *Bibliotheca Indica*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[11:1](ry006.htm#fr_58) Saccharum Munja is a
plant from whose fibres is twisted the sacred string which a Bráhman
wears over one shoulder after he has been initiated by a rite which in
some respects answers to confirmation.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[11:2](ry006.htm#fr_59) A description of an
As'vamedha or horse sacrifice is given in Canto XIII. of this Book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto V.: Ayodhyá](ry007)
