[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry002)  [Next](ry004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO I: NÁRAD.  <span id="fr_6"></span>[4b](#fn_6.md)

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

  

OM.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[5b](#fn_7.md)

  

   To sainted Nárad, prince of those  
Whose lore in words of wisdom flows.  
Whose constant care and chief delight  
Were Scripture and ascetic rite,  
The good Válmíki, first and best  

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>  

Of hermit saints, these words addressed: <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md)  
'In all this world, I pray thee, who  
Is virtuous, heroic, true?  
Firm in his vows, of grateful mind,  
To every creature good and kind?  
Bounteous, and holy, just, and wise,  
Alone most fair to all men's eyes?  
Devoid of envy, firm, and sage,  
Whose tranquil soul ne'er yields to rage?  
Whom, when his warrior wrath is high,  
Do Gods embattled fear and fly?  
Whose noble might and gentle skill  
The triple world can guard from ill?  
Who is the best of princes, he  
Who loves his people's good to see?  
The store of bliss, the living mine  
Where brightest joys and virtues shine?  
Queen Fortune's  <span id="fr_9"></span>[2](#fn_9.md) best and dearest
friend,  
Whose steps her choicest gifts attend?  
Who may with Sun and Moon compare,  
With Indra,  <span id="fr_10"></span>[3](#fn_10.md) Vishnu,  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[4](#fn_11.md) Fire, and Air?  
Grant, Saint divine,  <span id="fr_12"></span>[5](#fn_12.md) the boon I
ask,  
For thee, I ween, an easy task,  
To whom the power is given to know  
If such a man breathe here below.'  

Then Nárad, clear before whose eye  
The present, past, and future lie,  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1b](#fn_13.md)  
Made ready answer: 'Hermit, where  
Are graces found so high and rare?  
Yet listen, and my tongue shall tell  
In whom alone these virtues dwell.  
From old Ikshváku's  <span id="fr_14"></span>[2b](#fn_14.md) line he
came,  
Known to the world by Ráma's name:  
With soul subdued, a chief of might,  
In Scripture versed, in glory bright,  
His steps in virtue's paths are bent,  
Obedient, pure, and eloquent.  
In each emprise he wins success,  
And dying foes his power confess.  
Tall and broad-shouldered, strong of limb,  
Fortune has set her mark on him.  
Graced with a conch-shell's triple line,  
His threat displays the auspicious sign. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3b](#fn_15.md)  

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>  

High destiny is clear impressed  
On massive jaw and ample chest,  
His mighty shafts he truly aims,  
And foemen in the battle tames.  
Deep in the muscle, scarcely shown,  
Embedded lies his collar-bone.  
His lordly steps are firm and free,  
His strong arms reach below his knee; <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)  
All fairest graces join to deck  
His head, his brow, his stately neck,  
And limbs in fair proportion set:  
The manliest form e'er fashioned yet.  
Graced with each high imperial mark,  
His skin is soft and lustrous dark.  
Large are his eyes that sweetly shine  
With majesty almost divine.  
His plighted word he ne'er forgets;  
On erring sense a watch he sets.  
By nature wise, his teacher's skill  
Has trained him to subdue his will.  
Good, resolute and pure, and strong,  
He guards mankind from scathe and wrong,  
And lends his aid, and ne'er in vain,  
The cause of justice to maintain.  
Well has he studied o'er and o'er  
The Vedas <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md) and their kindred lore.  

Well skilled is he the bow to draw, <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1b](#fn_18.md)  
Well trained in arts and versed in law;  
High-souled and meet for happy fate,  
Most tender and compassionate;  
The noblest of all lordly givers,  
Whom good men follow, as the rivers  
Follow the King of Floods, the sea:  
So liberal, so just is he.  
The joy of Queen Kaus'alyá's <span id="fr_19"></span>[2b](#fn_19.md)
heart,  
In every virtue he has part:  
Firm as Himálaya's <span id="fr_20"></span>[3b](#fn_20.md) snowy steep,  
Unfathomed like the mighty deep:  
The peer of Vishnu's power and might,  
And lovely as the Lord of Night; <span id="fr_21"></span>[4b](#fn_21.md)  
Patient as Earth, but, roused to ire,  
Fierce as the world-destroying fire;  
In bounty like the Lord of Gold, <span id="fr_22"></span>[5b](#fn_22.md)  
And Justice self ia human mould.  

With him, his best and eldest son,  
By all his princely virtues won  
King Das'aratha <span id="fr_23"></span>[6b](#fn_23.md) willed to share  
His kingdom as the Regent Heir.  
But when Kaikeyí, youngest queen,  
With eyes of envious hate had seen  
The solemn pomp and regal state  
Prepared the prince to consecrate,  
She bade the hapless king bestow  
Two gifts he promised long ago,  
That Ráma to the woods should flee,  
And that her child the heir should be.  

By chains of duty firmly tied,  
Thw wretched king perforce complied.  

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>  

Ráma, to please Kaikeyí went  
Obedient forth to banishment.  
Then Lakshman's truth was nobly shown,  
Then were his love and courage known,  
When for his brother's sake he dared  
All perils, and his exile shared.  
And Sítá, Ráma's darling wife,  
Loved even as he loved his life,  
Whom happy marks combined to bless,  
A miracle of loveliness,  
Of Janak's royal lineage sprung,  
Most excellent of women, clung  
To her dear lord, like Rohiní  
Rejoicing with the Moon to be.  <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md)  
The King and people, sad of mood,  
The hero's car awhile pursued.  
But when Prince Ráma lighted down  
At S'riugavera's pleasant town,  
Where Gangá's holy waters flow,  
He bade his driver turn and go.  
Guha, Nishádas' king, he met,  
And on the farther bank was set.  
Then on from wood to wood they strayed,  
O'er many a stream, through constant shade,  
As Bharadvája bade them, till  
They came to Chitrakúta's hill.  
And Ráma there, with Lakshman's aid,  
A pleasant little cottage made,  
And spent his days with Sítá, dressed  

In coat of bark and deerskin vest.  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1b](#fn_25.md)  
And Chitrakuta grew to be  
As bright with those illustrious three  
An Meru's  <span id="fr_26"></span>[2b](#fn_26.md) sacred peaks that
shine  
With glory, when the Gods recline  
Beneath them: Siva's  <span id="fr_27"></span>[3b](#fn_27.md) self
between  
The Lord of Gold and Beauty's Queen.  

The aged king for Rama pined,  
And for the skies the earth resigned,  
Bharat, his son, refused to reign,  
Though urged by all the twice-born  <span id="fr_28"></span>[4b](#fn_28.md)
train.  
Forth to the woods he fared to meet  
Hia brother, fell before his feet,  
And cried, 'Thy [claim](errata.htm#0.md) all men allow:  
O come, our lord and king be thou.'  
But Rama nobly chose to be  
Observant of his sire's decree.  
He placed his sandals  <span id="fr_29"></span>[5b](#fn_29.md) in his
hand  
A pledge that he would rule the land:  
And bade his brother turn again.  
Then Bharat. finding prayer was vain,  
The sandals took and went away;  
Nor in Ayodhyá would he stay.  
But turned to Nandigráma, where  
He ruled the realm with watchful care,  
Still longing eagerly to learn  
Tidings of Ráma's safe return.  

Then lest the people should repeat  
Their visit to his calm retreat,  
Away from Chitrakúta's hill  
Fared Ráma ever onward till  

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>  

Beneath the shady trees he stood  
Of Dandaká's primeval wood,  
Virádha, giant fiend, he slew,  
And then Agastya's friendship knew.  
Counselled by him he gained the sword  
And bow of Indra, heavenly lord:  
A pair of quivers too, that bore  
Of arrows an exhaustless store.  
While there he dwelt in greenwood shade  
The trembling hermits sought his aid,  
And bade him with his sword and bow  
Destroy the fiends who worked them woe:  
To come like Indra strong and brave,  
A guardian God to help and save.  
And Ráma's falchion left its trace  
Deep cut on Súrpanakhá's face:  
A hideous giantess who came  
Burning for him with lawless flame.  
Their sister's cries the giants heard.  
And vengeance in each bosom stirred:  
The monster of the triple head.  
And Dúshan to the contest sped.  
But they and myriad fiends beside  
Beneath the might of Ráma died.  

When Rávan, dreaded warrior, knew  
The slaughter of his giant crew:  
Rávan, the king, whose name of fear  
Earth, hell, and heaven all shook to hear:  
He bade the fiend Márícha aid  
The vengeful plot his fury laid.  
In vain the wise Márícha tried  
To turn him from his course aside:  
Not Rávan's self, he said, might hope  
With Ráma and his strength to cope.  
Impelled by fate and blind with rage  
He came to Ráma's hermitage.  
There, by Márícha's magic art,  
He wiled the princely youths apart,  
The vulture <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) slew, and bore away  
The wife of Ráma as his prey.  
The son of Raghu <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31.md) came and found  
Jatáyu slain upon the ground.  
He rushed within his leafy cot;  
He sought his wife, but found her not.  
Then, then the hero's senses failed;  
In mad despair he wept and wailed,  
Upon the pile that bird he laid,  
And still in quest of Sitá strayed.  
A hideous giant then he saw,  
Kabandha named, a shape of awe.  

The monstrous fiend he smote and slew,  
And in the flame the body threw;  
When straight from out the funeral flame  
In lovely form Kabandha came,  
And bade him seek in his distress  
A wise and holy hermitess.  
By counsel of this saintly dame  
To Pampá's pleasant flood he came,  
And there the steadfast friendship won  
Of Hanumán the Wind-God's son.  
Counselled by him he told his grief  
To great Sugríva, Vánar chief,  
Who, knowing all the tale, before  
The sacred flame alliance swore.  
Sugríva to his new-found friend  
Told his own story to the end:  
His hate of Báli for the wrong  
And insult he had borne so long.  
And Ráma lent a willing ear  
And promised to allay his fear.  
Sugríva warned him of the might  
Of Báli, matchless in the fight,  
And, credence for his tale to gain,  
Showed the huge fiend <span id="fr_32"></span>[1b](#fn_32.md) by Báli
slain.  
The prostrate corpse of mountain size  
Seemed nothing in the hero's eyes;  
He lightly kicked it, as it lay,  
And cast it twenty leagues <span id="fr_33"></span>[2b](#fn_33.md) away.  
To prove his might his arrows through  
Seven palms in line, uninjured, flew.  
He cleft a mighty hill apart,  
And down to hell he hurled his dart,  
Then high Sugríva's spirit rose,  
Assured of conquest o'er his foes.  
With his new champion by his side  
To vast Kishkindhá's cave he hied.  
Then, summoned by his awful shout,  
King Báli came in fury out,  
First comforted his trembling wife,  
Then sought Sugríva in the strife.  
One shaft from Ráma's deadly bow  
The monarch in the dust laid low.  
Then Ráma bade Sugríva reign  
In place of royal Báli slain.  
Then speedy envoys hurried forth  
Eastward and westward, south and north,  
Commanded by the grateful king  
Tidings of Ráma's spouse to bring.  

Then by Sampáti's counsel led,  
Brave Hanumán, who mocked at dread,  
Sprang at one wild tremendous leap  
Two hundred leagues across the deep.  
To Lanká's <span id="fr_34"></span>[3b](#fn_34.md) town he urged his way,  
Where Rávan held his royal sway.  

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>  

There pensive 'neath As'oka  <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md)
boughs  
He found poor Sitá, Ráma's spouse.  
He gave the hapless girl a ring,  
A token from her lord and king.  
A pledge from her fair hand he bore;  
Then battered down the garden door.  
Five captains of the host be slew,  
Seven sons of councillors o'erthrew;  
Crushed youthful Aksha on the field,  
Then to his captors chose to yield.  
Soon from their bonds his limbs were free,  
But honouring the high decree  
Which Brahmá had pronounced of yore,  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36.md)  
He calmly all their insults bore.  
The town he burnt with hostile flame,  
And spoke again with Ráma's dame,  
Then swiftly back to Ráma flew  
With tidings of the interview.  
   Then with Sugríva for his guide,  
Came Ráma to the ocean side.  
He smote the sea with shafts as bright  
As sunbeams in their summer height,  
And quick appeared the Rivers' King  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37.md)  
Obedient to the summoning.  
A bridge was thrown by Nala o'er  
The narrow sea from shore to shore.  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[4](#fn_38.md)  
They crossed to Lanká's golden town,  
Where Ráma's hand smote Rávan down.  
Vibhishan there was left to reign  
Over his brother's wide domain.  
To meet her husband Sitá came;  
But Ráma, stung with ire and shame,  
With bitter words his wife addressed  
Before the crowd that round her pressed.  
But Sitá, touched with noble ire,  
Gave her fair body to the fire.  
Then straight the God of Wind appeared,  
And words from heaven her honour cleared.  
And Ráma clasped his wife again,  
Uninjured, pure from spot and stain,  
Obedient to the Lord of Fire  
And the high mandate of his sire.  
Led by the Lord who rules the sky,  
The Gods and heavenly saints drew nigh,  
And honoured him with worthy meed,  
Rejoicing in each glorious deed.  
His task achieved, his foe removed,  

He triumphed, by the Gods approved,  
By grace of Heaven he raised to life  
The chieftains slain in mortal strife;  
Then in the magic chariot through  
The clouds to Nandigráma flew.  
Met by his faithful brothers there,  
He loosed his votive coil of hair:  
Thence fair Ayodhyá's town he gained,  
And o'er his father's kingdom reigned.  
Disease or famine ne'er oppressed  
His happy people, richly blest  
With all the joys of ample wealth,  
Of sweet content and perfect health.  
No widow mourned her well-loved mate,  
No sire his son's untimely fate.  
They feared not storm or robber's hand;  
No fire or flood laid waste the land:  
The Golden Age  <span id="fr_39"></span>[1b](#fn_39.md) had come again  
To bless the days of Ráma's reign.  
   From him, the great and glorious king,  
Shall many a princely scion spring.  
And he shall rule, beloved by men,  
Ten thousand years and hundreds ten, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[2b](#fn_40.md)  
And when his life on earth is past  
To Brahmá's world shall go at last.'  
   Whoe'er this noble poem reads  
That tells the tale of Ráma's deeds,  
Good as the Scriptures, he shall be  
From every sin and blemish free.  
Whoever reads the saving strain,  
With all his kin the heavens shall gain.  
Bráhmans who read shall gather hence  
The highest praise for eloquence.  
The warrior, o'er the laud shall reign,  
The merchant, luck in trade obtain;  
And S'údras listening  <span id="fr_41"></span>[3b](#fn_41.md) ne'er shall
fail  
To reap advantage from the tale.  <span id="fr_42"></span>[4b](#fn_42.md)  

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1:1b](ry001.htm#fr_3.md) Comparison with the Ganges
is implied, that river being called the purifier of the world.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[1:2b](ry001.htm#fr_4.md) 'This name may have been
given to the father of Válmíki allegorically. If we look at the
derivation of the word (*pra*, before, and *chetas*, mind) it is as if
the poet were called the son of Prometheus, the Forethinker.' SCHLEGEL.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1:3b](ry002.htm#fr_5.md) Called in Sanskrit also
*Bála-Kánda*, and in Hindi *Bál-Kánd*, i. e. the Book describing Ráma's
childhood, *bála* meaning a boy up to his sixteenth year.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[1:4b](ry003.htm#fr_6.md) A divine saint, son of
Brahmá. He is the eloquent messenger of the Gods, a musician of
exquisite skill, and the inventor of the *viná* or Indian lute. He bears
a strong resemblance to Hermes or Mercury.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[1:5b](ry003.htm#fr_7.md) This mystic syllable, said
to typify the supreme Deity, the Gods collectively, the Vedas, the three
spheres of the world, the three holy fires, the three steps of Vishnu
etc., prefaces the prayers and most venerated writings of the Hindus.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[2:1](ry003.htm#fr_8.md) This colloquy is supposed
to have taken place about sixteen years after Ráma's return from his
wanderings and occupation of his ancestral throne.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[2:2](ry003.htm#fr_9.md) Called also S'ri and
Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, the Queen of Beauty as well as the Dea
Fortuna. Her birth 'from the full-flushed wave' is described in Canto
XLV of this Book.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[2:3](ry003.htm#fr_10.md) One of the most prominent
objects of worship in the Rig-veda, Indra was superseded in later times
by the more popular deities Vishnu and S'iva. He is the God of the
firmament, and answers in many respects to the Jupiter Pluvius of the
Romans. See *Additional Notes*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[2:4](ry003.htm#fr_11.md) The second God of the
Trimúrti or Indian Trinity. Derived from the root *vis'* to penetrate,
the meaning of the name appears to be *he who penetrates or pervades all
things*. An embodiment of the preserving power of nature, he is
worshipped as a Saviour who has nine times been incarnate for the good
of the world and will descend on earth once more. See *Additional Notes*
and Muir's Sanskrit Texts *passim*.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[2:5](ry003.htm#fr_12.md) In Sanskrit *devarshi.
Rishi* is the general appellation of sages, and another word is
frequently prefixed to distinguish the degrees. A *Brahmarshi* is a
theologian or Bráhmanical sage; a Rájarshi is a royal sage or sainted
king; a *Devarshi* is a divine or deified sage or saint.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:1b](ry003.htm#fr_13.md) *Trikálaj'na*. Literally
*knower of the three times*. Both Schlegel and Gorresio quote Homer's.

Os aedae ta t eonta, ta t essomena, pro t eonta.

'That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view, The past, the present, and
the future knew.'

The Bombay edition reads *trilokajna, who knows the three worlds*
(earth, air and heaven.) 'It is by *topas* (austere fervour) that rishis
of subdued souls, subsisting on roots, fruits and air, obtain a vision
of the three worlds with all things moving and stationary.' MANU, XI.
236.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[2:2b](ry003.htm#fr_14.md) Son of Manu, the first
king of Kos'ala and founder of the solar dynasty or family of the
Children of the Sun, the God of that luminary being the father of Manu.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[2:3b](ry003.htm#fr_15.md) The Indians paid great
attention to the art of physiognomy and believed that character and
fortune could be foretold not from the face only, but from marks upon
the neck and hands. Three lines under the chin like those at the mouth
of a conch (*S'an'kha*) were regarded as a peculiarly auspicious sign
indicating, as did also the mark of Vishnu's discus on the hand, one
born to be a *chakravartin* or universal emperor. In the palmistry of
Europe the line of fortune, as well as the line of life, is in the hand.
Cardan says that marks on the nails and teeth also show what is to
happen to us: 'Sunt etiam in nobis vestigia quædam futurorum eyentuum in
unguibus atque etiam in dentibus.' Though the palmy days of Indian
chiromancy have passed away, the art is still to some extent studied and
believed in.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[3:1](ry003.htm#fr_16.md) Long arms were regarded
as a sign of heroic strength.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[3:2](ry003.htm#fr_17.md) 'Veda means originally
knowing or knowledge, and this name ia given by the Bráhmans not to one
work, but to the whole body of their most ancient sacred literature.
Veda is the same word which appears in the Greek οἰδα, I know, and in
the English wise, wisdom, to wit. The name of Veda is commonly given to
four collections of hymns, which are respectively known by the names of
Rig-veda, Yajur-veda, Sáma-veda, and Atharva-veda.'

'As the language of the Veda, the Sanskrit, is the most ancient type of
the English of the present day, (Sanskrit and English are but varieties
of one and the same language,) so its thoughts and feelings contain in
reality the first roots and germs of that intellectual growth which by
an unbroken chain connects our own generation with the ancestors of the
Aryan race,--with those very people who at the rising and setting of the
sun listened with trembling hearts to the songs of the Veda, that told
them of bright powers above, and of a life to come after the sun of
their own lives had set in the clouds of the evening. These men were the
true ancestors of our race, and the Veda is the oldest book we have in
which to study the first beginnings of our language, and of all that is
embodied in language. We are by nature Aryan, Indo-European, not
Semitic: our spiritual kith and kin are to be found in India, Persia,
Greece, Italy, Germany: not in Mesopotamia, Egypt, or Palestine.' *Chips
from a German Workshop,* Vol. I. pp. 8. 4.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[3:1b](ry003.htm#fr_18.md) As with the ancient
Persians and Scythians, Indian princes were carefully instructed in
archery which stands for military science in general, of which, among
Hindu heroes, it was the most important branch.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[3:2b](ry003.htm#fr_19.md) Chief of the three
queens of Das'aratha and mother of Ráma.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[3:3b](ry003.htm#fr_20.md) From *hima* snow, (Greek
χειμ-ών Latin hiems) and *álaya* abode, the Mansion of snow.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[3:4b](ry003.htm#fr_21.md) The moon (*Soma, Indu,
Chandra etc.*) is masculine with the Indians as with the Germans.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[3:5b](ry003.htm#fr_22.md) Kuvera, the Indian
Plutus, or God of Wealth.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[3:6b](ry003.htm#fr_23.md) The events here briefly
mentioned will be related fully in the course of the poem. The first
four cantos are introductory, and are evidently the work of a later hand
than Valmiki's.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[4:1](ry003.htm#fr_24.md) 'Chandra, or the Moon, is
fabled to have been married to the twenty-seven daughters of the
patriarch Daksha, or Asviní and the rest, who are in fact
personifications of the Lunar Asterisms. His favourite amongst them was
Rohiní to whom he so wholly devoted himself as to neglect the rest. They
complained to their father, and Daksha repeatedly interposed, till,
finding his remonstrances vain, he denounced a curse upon his
son-in-law, in consequence of which he remained childless and became
affected by consumption. The wives of Chandra having interceded in his
behalf with their father, Daksha modified an imprecation which he could
not recall, and pronounced that the decay should be periodical only, not
permanent, and that it should alternate with periods of recovery. Hence
the successive wane and increase of the Moon. *Padma, Purána,
Swarga-Khanda,* Sec. II. *Rohini* in Astronomy is the fourth lunar
mansion, containing live stars, the principal of which is Aldebaran.'
WILSON, *Specimens of the Hindu Theatre*. Vol. I. p. 234.

The Bengal recension has a different reading:

  
'Shone with her husband like the light  
Attendant on the Lord of Night.'  

<span id="fn_25"></span>[4:1b](ry003.htm#fr_25.md) The garb prescribed for
ascetics by Manu.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[4:2b](ry003.htm#fr_26.md) Mount Meru, situated
like Kailása in the lofty regions to the north of the Himálayas, is
celebrated in the traditions and myths of India. Meru and Kailása are
the two Indian Olympi. Perhaps they were held in such veneration because
the Sanskrit-speaking Indians remembered the ancient home where they
dwelt with the other primitive peoples of their family before they
descended to occupy the vast plains which extend between the Indus and
the Ganges.' GOBRESIO.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[4:3b](ry003.htm#fr_27.md) The third God of the
Indian Triad, the God of destruction and reproduction. See *Additional
Notes*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[4:4b](ry003.htm#fr_28.md) The epithet *dmija*, or
*twice-born*, is usually appropriate to Bráhmans, but is applicable to
the three higher castes. Investiture with the sacred thread and
initiation of the neophyte into certain religious mysteries are regarded
as his regeneration or second birth.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[4:5b](ry003.htm#fr_29.md) His shoes to be a
memorial of the absent heir and to maintain his right. Kálidása
(Raghuvans'a, XII. 17.) says that they were to be *ahidevate* or
guardian deities of the kingdom.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[5:1](ry003.htm#fr_30.md) Jatáyu, a semi-divine
bird, the friend of Ráma, who fought in defence of Sitá.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[5:2](ry003.htm#fr_31.md) Raghu was one of the most
celebrated ancestors of Ráma whose commonest appellation is, therefore,
Rághava or descendant of Raghu. Kálidása in the Raghuvans'a makes him
the son of Dilipa and great-grandfather of Ráma. See *Idylls from the
Sanskrit*, 'Aja' and 'Dilipa'.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[5:1b](ry003.htm#fr_32.md) Dundhubi

<span id="fn_33"></span>[5:2b](ry003.htm#fr_33.md) Literally *ten yojanas*.
The yojana is a measure of uncertain length variously reckoned as equal
to nine miles, five, and a little less.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[5:3b](ry003.htm#fr_34.md) Ceylon

<span id="fn_35"></span>[6:1](ry003.htm#fr_35.md) The Jonesia As'oka is a
most beautiful tree bearing a profusion of red blossoms.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[6:2](ry003.htm#fr_36.md) *Brahmá*, the Creator, is
usually regarded as the first God of the Indian Trinity, although, as
Kálidása says:

'Of Brahma, Vishnu, S'iva, each may be First, second, third, amid the
blessed Three.'

   Brahmá had guaranteed Rávan's life against all enemies except man.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[6:3](ry003.htm#fr_37.md) Ocean personified.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[6:4](ry003.htm#fr_38.md) The rocks lying between
Ceylon and the mainland are still called Ráma's Bridge by the Hindus.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[6:1b](ry003.htm#fr_39.md) The Bráhmans, with a
system rather cosmogonical than chronological, divide the present
mundane period into four ages or *yugas* as they call them: the Krita,
the Tretá, the Dwápara, and the Kali. The Krita, cailed also the
Deva-yuga or that of the Gods, is the age of truth, the perfect age, the
Tretá is the age of the three sacred fires, domestic and sacrificial;
the Dwápara is the age of doubt; the Kali, the present age, is the age
of evil.' GORRESIO.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[6:2b](ry003.htm#fr_40.md) The ancient kings of
India enjoyed lives of more than patriarchal length as will appear in
the course of the poem.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[6:3b](ry003.htm#fr_41.md) S'údras, men of the
fourth and lowest pure caste, were not allowed to read the poem, but
might hear it recited.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[6:4b](ry003.htm#fr_42.md) The three *s'lokas* or
distichs which these twelve lines represent are evidently a still later
and very awkward addition to the introduction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto II: Brahmá's Visit](ry004.md)
