[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry014)  [Next](ry016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIII.: THE SACRIFICE FINISHED.

The circling year had filled its course,  
And back was brought the wandering horse:  
Then upon Sarjú's northern strand  
Began the rite the king had planned.  
With Rishyas'ring the forms to guide,  
The Bráhmans to their task applied,  
At that great offering of the steed  
Their lofty-minded king decreed.  
The priests, who all the Scripture knew,  
Performed their part in order due,  
And circled round in solemn train  
As precepts of the law ordain.  
Pravargya rites  <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) were duly sped:  
For Upusads  <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92) the flames were fed.  
Then from the plant  <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93) the juice was
squeezed,  
And those high saints with minds well pleased  
Performed the mystic rites begun  
With bathing ere the rise of sun.  
They gave the portion Indra's claim,  

And hymned the King whom none can blame.  
The mid-day bathing followed next,  
Observed as bids the holy text.  
Then the good priests with utmost care,  
In form that Scripture's rules declare,  
For the third time pure water shed  
On high souled Das'aratha's head.  
Then Rishyas'ring and all the rest  
To Indra and the Gods addressed  
Their sweet-toned hymn of praise and prayer,  
And called them in the rite to share.  
With sweetest song and hymn intoned  
They give the Gods in heaven enthroned,  
As duty bids, the gifts they claim,  
The holy oil that feeds the flame.  
And many an offering there was paid,  
And not one slip in all was made,  
For with most careful heed they saw  
That all was done by Veda law.  
None, all those days, was seen oppressed  
By hunger or by toil distressed.  
Why speak of human kind? No beast  
Was there that lacked an ample feast.  
For there was store for all who came,  
For orphan child and lonely dame;  
The old and young were well supplied,  
The poor and hungry satisfied.  
Throughout the day ascetics fed,  
And those who roam to beg their bread:  
While all around the cry was still,  
'Give forth, give forth,' and ' Eat your fill.'  
'Give forth with liberal hand the meal,  
And various robes in largess deal.'  
Urged by these cries on every side  
Unweariedly their task they plied:  
And heaps of food like hills in size  
In boundless plenty met the eyes:  
And lakes of sauce, each day renewed,  
Refreshed the weary multitude.  
And strangers there from distant lands,  
And women folk in crowded bands  
The best of food and drink obtained  
At the great rite the king ordained.  
Apart from all, the Bráhmans there,  
Thousands on thousands, took their share  
Of various dainties sweet to taste,  
On plates of gold and silver placed,  
All ready set, as, when they willed,  
The twice-born men their places filled.  
And servants in fair garments dressed  
Waited upon each Bráhman guest.  
Of cheerful mind and mien were they,  
With gold and jewelled earrings gay.  
The best of Bráhmans praised the fare  
Of countless sorts, of flavour rare:  
And thus to Raghu's son they cried:  
'We bless thee, and are satisfied.'  
Between the rites some Bráhmans spent  
The time in learned argument,  

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>  

With ready flow of speech, sedate,  
And keen to vanquish in debate.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)  

There day by day the holy train  
Performed all rites as rules ordain.  
No priest in all that host was found  
But kept the vows that held him bound:  
None, but the holy Vedas knew,  
And all their six-fold science  <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95)
too.  
No Bráhman there was found unfit  
To speak with eloquence and wit.  

And now the appointed time came near  
The sacrificial posts to rear.  
They brought them, and prepared to fix  
Of Bel  <span id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96) and Khádir  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[4](#fn_97) six and six;  
Six, made of the Palás'a  <span id="fr_98"></span>[5](#fn_98) tree,  
Of Fig-wood one, apart to be:  
Of Sleshmát  <span id="fr_99"></span>[6](#fn_99) and of Devadár  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[7](#fn_100)  
One column each, the mightiest far:  
So thick the two, the arms of man  
Their ample girth would fail to span.  
All these with utmost care were wrought  
By hand of priests in Scripture taught,  
And all with gold were gilded bright  
To add new splendour to the rite:  

Twenty-and-one those stakes in all,  
Each one-and-twenty cubits tall:  
And one-and-twenty ribbons there  
Hung on the pillars, bright and fair.  
Firm in the earth they stood at last,  
Where cunning craftsmen fixed them fast;  
And there unshaken each remained,  
Octagonal and smoothly planed.  
Then ribbons over all were hung,  
And flowers and scent around them flung.  
Thus decked they cast a glory forth  
Like the great saints who star the north.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1b](#fn_101)  
The sacrificial altar then  
Was raised by skilful twice-born men,  
In shape and figure to behold  
An eagle with his wings of gold,  
With twice nine pits and formed three-fold  
Each for some special God, beside  
The pillars were the victims tied;  
The birds that roam the wood, the air,  
The water, and the land were there,  
And snakes and things of reptile birth,  
And healing herbs that spring from earth;  
As texts prescribe, in Scripture found,  
Three hundred victims there were bound.  
The steed devoted to the host  
Of Gods, the gem they honour most,  
Was duly sprinkled. Then the Queen  
Kaus'alyá, with delighted mien,  
With reverent steps around him paced.  
And with sweet wreaths the victim graced;  
Then with three swords in order due  
She smote the steed with joy, and slew.  
That night the queen, a son to gain,  
With calm and steady heart was fain  
By the dead charger's side to stay  
From evening till the break of day.  
Then came three priests, their care to lead  
The other queens to touch the steed,  
Upon Kaus'alyá to attend,  
Their company and aid to lend.  
As by the horse she still reclined,  
With happy mien and cheerful mind,  
With Rishyas'ring the twice-born came  
And praised and blessed the royal dame.  
The priest who well his duty knew,  
And every sense could well subdue,  
From out the bony chambers freed  
And boiled the marrow of the steed.  
Above the steam the monarch bent,  
And, as he smelt the fragrant scent,  
In time and order drove afar  
All error that his hopes could mar.  
Then sixteen priests together came  
And cast into the sacred flame  
The severed members of the horse,  
Made ready all in ordered course.  
On piles of holy Fig-tree raised  

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>  

The meaner victims' bodies blazed:  
The steed, of all the creatures slain,  
Alone required a pile of cane.  
Three days, as is by law decreed,  
Lasted that Offering of the Steed.  
The Chatushtom began the rite,  
And when the sun renewed his light,  
The Ukthya followed: after came  
The Atirátra's holy flame.  
These were the rites, and many more  
Arranged by light of holy lore,  
The Aptoryám of mighty power,  
And, each performed in proper hour,  
The Abhijit and Vis'vajit  
With every form and service fit;  
And with the sacrifice at night  
The Jyotishtom and Áyus rite.  <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)  

The task was done, as laws prescribe:  
The monarch, glory of his tribe,  
Bestowed the land in liberal grants  
Upon the sacred ministrants.  
He gave the region of the east,  
His conquest, to the Hotri priest.  
The west, the celebrant obtained:  
The south, the priest presiding gained:  
The northern region was the share  
Of him who chanted forth the prayer,  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1b](#fn_103)  
Thus did each priest obtain his meed  
At the great Slaughter of the Steed,  
Ordained, the best of all to be,  
By self-existent deity.  
Ikshváku's son with joyful mind  
This noble fee to each assigned,  
But all the priests with one accord  
Addressed that unpolluted lord:  
'Tis thine alone to keep the whole  
Of this broad earth in firm control.  

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>  

No gift of lands from thee we seek:  
To guard these realms our hands were weak.  
On sacred lore our days are spent:  
Let other gifts our wants content.'  
The chief of old Ikshváku's line  
Gave them ten hundred thousand kine,  
A hundred millions of fine gold,  
The same in silver four times told.  
But every priest in presence there  
With one accord resigned his share.  
To Saint Vas'ishtha, high of soul,  
And Rishyas'ring they gave the whole.  
That largess pleased those Brahmans well,  
Who bade the prince his wishes tell.  
Then Das'aratha, mighty king.  
Made answer thus to Rishyas'ring:  
'O holy Hermit, of thy grace,  
Vouchsafe the increase of my race.'  
He spoke; nor was his prayer denied:  
The best of Bráhmans thus replied:  
'Four sons, O Monarch, shall be thine,  
Upholders of thy royal line.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[22:1](ry015.htm#fr_91) 'The Pravargya ceremony
lasts for three days, and is always performed twice a day, in the
forenoon and afternoon. It precedes the animal and Soma sacrifices. For
without having undergone it no one is allowed to take part in the solemn
Soma feast prepared for the gods.' HAUG's *Aitareya Bráhmanam*. Ved. II.
p. 41. note,. *q. v.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[22:2](ry015.htm#fr_92) *Upasads*. 'The Gods
said, Let us perform the burnt offerings called Upasads (*i. e.*
besieging). For by means of an *Upasad*, *i. e.* besieging, they conquer
a large (fortified) town.' --*Ibid.* p. 32.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[22:3](ry015.htm#fr_93) The Soma plant, or
Asclepias Acida. lts fermented juice was drunk in sacrifice by the
priests and offered to the Gods who enjoyed the intoxicating draught.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[23:1](ry015.htm#fr_94) 'Dum\* in caerimoniarum
intervallis Brachmanae facundi, sollertes, crebros sermones de rerum
causis instituebant, alter alterum vincendi cupidi. This public
disputation in the assembly of Bráhmans on the nature of things, and the
almost fraternal connexion between theology and philosophy deserves some
notice; whereas the priests of some religions are generally but little
inclined to show favour to philosophers, nay, sometimes persecute them
with the most rancorous hatred, as we are taught both by history and
experience.... This s'loka is found in the MSS. of different recensions
of the Rámáyan, and we have, therefore, the most trustworthy testimony
to the antiquity of philosophy among the Indians.' SCHLEGEL.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[23:2](ry015.htm#fr_95) The *Angas* or
appendices of the Vedas, pronunciation, prosody, grammar, ritual,
astronomy, and explanation of obscurities.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[23:3](ry015.htm#fr_96) In Sanskrit *vilva*, the
Aegle Marmelos. 'He who desires food and wishes to grow fat, ought to
make his Yúpa (sacrificial Post) of Bilva wood.' HAUG'S *Aítareya
Bráhmanam*. Vol. II. p. 73.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[23:4](ry015.htm#fr_97) The *Mimosa Catechu*. '
He who desires heaven ought to make his Yúpa of Khádira wood.' --*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[23:5](ry015.htm#fr_98) The *Butea Frondosa*.
'He who desires beauty and sacred knowledge ought to make his Yúpa of
Palás'a wood.' --*lbid*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[23:6](ry015.htm#fr_99) The *Cardia Latifolia*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[23:7](ry015.htm#fr_100) A kind of pine. The
word means literally the tree of the Gods; Compare the עצי יהוה 'trees
of the Lord.'

<span id="fn_101"></span>[23:1b](ry015.htm#fr_101) The Hindus call the
constellation of Ursa Major the Seven Rishis or Saints.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[24:1](ry015.htm#fr_102) A minute account of
these ancient ceremonies would be out of place here. 'Ágnishtoma is the
name of a sacrifice, or rather a series of offerings to fire for five
days. It is the first and principal part of the Jyotishtoma, one of the
great sacrifices in which especially the juice of the Soma plant is
offered for the purpose of obtaining Swarga or heaven.' GOLDSTÜCKER'S
DICTIONARY. 'The *Ágnishtoma* is Agni. It is called so because they (the
gods) praised him with this Stoma. They called it so to hide the proper
meaning of the word: for the gods like to hide the proper meaning of
words.'

'On account of four classes of gods having praised Agni with four
Stomas, the whole was called *Chatushtoma* (containing four Stomas).'

'It (the Ágnishtoma) is called *Jyotishtoma*, for they praised Agni when
he had risen up (to the sky) in the shape of a light (*jyotis*).'

'This (Ágnishtoma) is a sacrificial performance which has no beginning
and no end.' HAUG'S *Aitareya Bráhmanam*.

The Atirátra, literally *lasting through the night*, is a division of
the service of the Jyotishtoma.

The Abhijit, *the everywhere victorious*, is the name of a sub-division
of the great sacrifice of the Gavámanaya.

The Vis'vajit, or *the all-conquering*, is a similar sub-division.

Áyus is the name of a service forming a division of the Abhiplava
sacrifice.

'The *Aptoryám*, is the seventh or last part of the Jyotishtoma, for the
performance of which it is not essentially necessary, but a voluntary
sacrifice instituted for the attainment of a specific desire. The
literal meaning of the word would be in conformity with the
*Praudhamanoramá*, a sacrifice which procures the attainment of the
desired object. GOLDSTÜCKER'S DICTIONARY.

'The *Ukthya* is a slight modification of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. The
noun to be supplied to it is *kratu*. It is a Soma sacrifice also, and
one of the seven Sansthas or component parts of the Jyotishtoma. Its
name indicates its nature. For *Ukthya* means "what refers to the
Uktha," which is an older name for Shástra, i.e. recitation of one of
the Hotri priests at the time of the Soma libations. Thus this sacrifice
is only a kind of supplement to the Agnishtoma.' HAUG.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[24:1b](ry015.htm#fr_103) 'Four classes of
priests were required in India at the most solemn sacrifices. 1. The
officiating priests, manual labourers, and acolytes, who had chiefly to
prepare the sacrificial ground, to dress the altar, slay the victims,
and pour out the libations. 2. The choristers, who chant the sacred
hymns. 3. The reciters or readers, who repeat certain hymns. 4. The
overseers or bishops, who watch and superintend the proceedings of the
other priests, and ought to be familiar with all the Vedas. The formulas
and verses to be muttered by the first class are contained in the
Yajur-veda-sanhitá. The hymns to be sung by the second class are in the
Sama-veda-sanhitá. The Atharva-veda in said to be intended for the
Brahman or overseer, who is to watch the proceedings of the sacrifice,
and to remedy any mistake that may occur. The hymns to he recited by the
third class are contained in the Rigveds,' *Chips from a German
Workshop*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XIV.: Rávan Doomed.](ry016)
