[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry020)  [Next](ry022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIX.: THE BIRTH OF THE PRINCES.

The seasons six in rapid flight  
Had circled since that glorious rite.  
Eleven months had passed away:  
'Twas Chaitra's ninth returning day.  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1b](#fn_129.md)  
The moon within that mansion shone  
Which Aditi looks kindly on.  
Raised to their apex in the sky  
Five brilliant planets beamed on high.  
Shone with the moon, in Cancer's sign.  
Vrihaspati  <span id="fr_130"></span>[2b](#fn_130.md) with light divine.  
Kaus'alyá bore an infant blest  
With heavenly marks of grace impressed;  
Ráma, the universe's lord,  
A prince by all the worlds adored.  
New glory Queen Kaus'alyá won  
Reflected from her splendid son.  
So Aditi shone more and more,  
The Mother of the Gods, when she  
The King of the Immortals  <span id="fr_131"></span>[3b](#fn_131.md)
bore,  
The thunder-wielding deity.  

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>  

The lotus-eyed, the beauteous boy,  
He came fierce Rávan to destroy;  
From half of Vishnu's vigour born,  
He came to help the worlds forlorn.  
And Queen Kaikeyí bore a child  
Of truest valour, Bharat styled,  
With every princely virtue blest,  
One fourth of Vishnu manifest.  
Sumitrá too a noble pair,  
Called Lakshman and S'atrughna, bare,  
Of high emprise, devoted, true,  
Sharers in Vishnu's essence too.  
'Neath Pushya's  <span id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132.md) mansion, Mína's
 <span id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_133.md) sign,  
Was Bharat born, of soul benign.  
The sun had reached the Crab at morn  
When Queen Sumitrá's babes were born,  
What time the moon had gone to make  
His nightly dwelling with the Snake.  
The high-souled monarch's consorts bore  
At different times those glorious four,  
Like to himself and virtuous, bright  
As Proshthapadá's  <span id="fr_134"></span>[3](#fn_134.md) four-fold
light.  
Then danced the nymphs' celestial throng,  
  The minstrels raised their strain;  
The drums of heaven pealed loud and long,  
And dowers came down in rain.  
Within Ayodhyá, blithe and gay,  
All kept the joyous holiday.  
The spacious square, the ample road  
With mimes and dancers overflowed,  
And with the voice of music rang  
Where minstrels played and singers sang,  
And shone, a wonder to behold,  
With dazzling show of gems and gold,  
Nor did the king his largess spare,  
For minstrel, driver, bard, to share;  
Much wealth the Bráhmans bore away,  
And many thousand dine that day.  

Soon as each babe was twelve days old  
'Twas time the naming rite to hold.  
When Saint Vas'ishtha, rapt with joy,  
Assigned a name to every boy.  
Ráma, to him the high-souled heir,  
Bharat, to him Kaikeyí bare:  
Of Queen Sumitrá one fair son  
Was Lakshman, and S'atrughna  <span id="fr_135"></span>[4](#fn_135.md)
one.  

Ráma,his sire's supreme delight,  
Like some proud banner cheered his sight,  
And to all creatures seemed to be  
The self-existent deity.  
All heroes, versed in holy lore,  
To all mankind great love they bore.  
Fair stores of wisdom all possessed,  
With princely graces all were blest.  
But mid those youths of high descent,  
With lordly light preeminent.  
Like the full moon unclouded, shone  
Ráma, the world's dear paragon.  
He best the elephant could guide.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1b](ry022.htm#fn_136.md)  
Urge the fleet car, the charger ride;  
A master he of bowman's skill,  
Joying to do his father's will.  
The world's delight and darling, he  
Loved Lakshman best from infancy;  
And Lakshman, lord of lofty fate,  
Upon his elder joyed to wait,  
Striving his second self to please  
With friendship's sweet observances.  
His limbs the hero ne'er would rest  
Unless the couch his brother pressed;  
Except beloved Ráma shared  
He could not taste the meal prepared.  
When Ráma, pride of Raghu's race,  
Sprang on his steed to urge the chase,  
Behind him Lakshman loved to go  
And guard him with his trusty bow.  
As Ráma was to Lakshman dear  
More than his life and ever near,  
So fond S'atrughna prized above  
His very life his Bharat's love.  
Illustrious heroes, nobly kind  
In mutual love they all combined,  
And gave their royal sire delight  
With modest grace and warrior might:  
Supported by the glorious four  
Shone Das'aratha more and more,  
As though, with every guardian,\*God  
Who keeps the land and skies,  
The Father of all creatures trod  
The earth before men's eyes.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[31:1b](ry021.htm#fr_129.md) 'The poet no doubt
intended to indicate the vernal equinox as the birthday of Ráma. For the
month *Chaitra* is the first of the two months assigned to the spring;
it corresponds with the latter half of March and the former half of
April in our division of the year. *Aditi*, the mother of the Gods, is
lady of the seventh lunar mansion which is called *Punarvasu*. The five
planets and their positions in the Zodiac are thus enumerated by both
commentators: the Sun in Aries, Mars in Capricorn, Saturn in Libra,
Jupiter in Cancer, Venus in Pisces.... I leave to astronomers to examine
whether the parts of the description agree with one another, and, if
this be the case, thence to deduce the date. The Indians place the
nativity of Ráma in the confines of the second age (tretá) and the third
(dwápara): but it seems that this should be taken in an allegorical
sense.... We may consider that the poet had an eye to the time in which,
immediately before his own age, the aspects of the heavenly bodies were
such as he has described.' SCHLEGEL.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[31:2b](ry021.htm#fr_130.md) The regent of the
planet Jupiter.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[31:3b](ry021.htm#fr_131.md) Indra=Jupiter Tonans.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[32:1](ry021.htm#fr_132.md) '*Pushya* is the name
of a month; but here it means the eighth mansion. The ninth is called
*Aslesh*, or the snake. It is evident from this that Bharat, though his
birth is mentioned before that of the twins, was the youngest of the
four brothers and Rama's junior by eleven months' SCHLEGEL.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[32:2](ry021.htm#fr_133.md) A fish, the Zodiacal
sign *Pisces*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[32:3](ry021.htm#fr_134.md) One of the
constellations, containing stars in the wing of Pegasus.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[32:4](ry021.htm#fr_135.md) Ráma means the Delight
(of the World); Bharat, the Supporter: Lakshman, the Auspicious;
S'atrughna, Slayer of' Foes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XX.: Vis'vámitra's Visit.](ry022.md)
