[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry019)  [Next](ry021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XVIII.: RISHYAS'RING'S DEPARTURE.

The monarch called a Bráhman near  
   And said, 'Now speed away  
To Kas'yap's son,  <span id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126.md) the mighty
seer,  
   And with all reverence say  
The holy child he holds so dear,  
The hermit of the noble mind.  
Whose equal it were hard to find,  
   Returned, is dwelling here.  
Go, and instead of me do thou  
Before that best of hermits bow,  
That still he may, for his dear son,  
Show me the favour I have won.'  
Soon as the king these words had said,  
To Kas'yap's son the Bráhman sped.  
Before the hermit low he bent  
And did obeisance, reverent;  
Then with meek words his grace to crave  
The message of his lord he gave:  
'The high-souled father of his bride  
Had called thy son his rites to guide:  
Those rites are o'er, the steed is slain;  
Thy noble child is come again.'  

Soon as the saint that speech had heard  
His spirit with desire was stirred  
To seek the city of the king  
And to his cot his son to bring.  

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>  

With young disciples at his side  
Forth on his way the hermit hied,  
While peasants from their hamlets ran  
To reverence the holy man,  
Each with his little gift of food,  
Forth came the village multitude,  
And, as they humbly bowed the head,  
'What may we do for thee?' they said.  
Then he, of Bráhmans first and best,  
The gathered people thus addressed:  
'Now tell me for I fain would know,  
Why is it I am honoured so?'  
They to the high-souled saint replied:  
'Our ruler is with thee allied.  
Our master's order we fulfil;  
O Bráhman, let thy mind be still.'  

With joy the saintly hermit heard  
Each pleasant and delightful word,  
And poured a benediction down  
On king and ministers and town.  
Glad at the words of that high saint  
Some servants hastened to acquaint  
Their king, rejoicing to impart  
The tidings that would cheer his heart.  
Soon as the joyful tale he knew  
To meet the saint the monarch flew,  
The guest-gift in his hand he brought,  
And bowed before him and besought:  
'This day by seeing thee I gain  
Not to have lived my life in vain.  
Now be not wroth with me, I pray,  
Because I wiled thy son away.'  <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127.md)  

The best of Bráhmans answer made:  
'Be not, great lord of kings, afraid.  
Thy virtues have not failed to win  
My favour, O thou pure of sin.'  
Then in the front the saint was placed,  
The king came next in joyous haste,  
And with him entered his abode,  
Mid glad acclaim as on they rode.  
To greet the sage the reverent crowd  
Raised suppliant hands and humbly bowed.  
Then from the palace many a dame  
Following well-dressed S'ántá came,  
Stood by the mighty saint and cried:  
'See, honour's source, thy son's dear bride.'  
The saint, who every virtue knew,  
His arms around his daughter threw,  
And with a father's rapture pressed  
The lady to his wondering breast.  
Arising from the saint's embrace  
She bowed her low before his face,  
And then, with palm to palm applied,  
Stood by her hermit father's side.  
He for his son, as laws ordain,  
Performed the rite that frees from stain,  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_128.md)  

And, honoured by the wise and good,  
With him departed to the wood.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_125"></span>[30:1](ry019.htm#fr_125.md) The *Michelia
champaca*. It bears a scented yellow blossom:

  
   'The maid of India blest again to hold  
   In her full lap the Champac's leaves of gold.'  

*Lallah Rookh*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[30:2](ry020.htm#fr_126.md) Vibhándak, the father
of Rishyás'ring.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[31:1](ry020.htm#fr_127.md) A hemis'loka is
wanting in Schlegel's text, which he thus fills up in his Latin
translation.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[31:2](ry020.htm#fr_128.md) Rishyas'ring, a
Bráhman, had married Sántá who was of the Kshatriya or Warrior caste and
an expiatory ceremony was necessary on account of this violation of the
law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XIX.: The Birth of The Princes.](ry021.md)
