[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry025)  [Next](ry027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXIV.: THE SPELLS.

Vas'ishtha thus was speaking still:  
The monarch, of his own free will.  
Bade with quick seal and joyful cheer  
Ráma and Lakshman hasten near.  
Mother and sire in loving care  
Sped their dear son with rite and prayer:  
Vas'ishtha blessed him ere he went;  
O'er his loved head the father bent,  
And then to Kus'ik's son resigned  
Ráma with Lakshman close behind.  
Standing by Vis'vámitra's side,  
The youthful hero, lotus-eyed,  
The Wind-God saw, and sent a breeze  
Whose sweet pure touch just waved the trees.  
There fell from heaven a flowery rain,  
And with the song and dance the strain  
Of shell and tambour sweetly blent  
As forth the son of Raghu went.  

The hermit led: behind him came  
The bow-armed Ráma, dear to fame,  
Whose locks were like the raven's wing;  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1b](#fn_146.md)  
Then Lakshman, closely following.  
The Gods and Indra, filled with joy,  
Looked down upon the royal boy,  
And much they longed the death to see  
Of their ten-headed enemy.  <span id="fr_147"></span>[2b](#fn_147.md)  
Ráma and Lakshman paced behind  
That hermit of the lofty mind.  
As the young As'vins,  <span id="fr_148"></span>[3b](#fn_148.md) heavenly
pair,  
Follow Lord Indra through the air.  
On arm and hand the guard they wore,  
Quiver and bow and sword they bore;  
Two fire-born Gods of War seemed they.  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[4b](#fn_149.md)  
He, S'iva's self who led the way.  

Upon fair Sarjú's southern shore  
They now had walked a league and more,  
When thus the sage in accents mild  
To Ráma said: 'Beloved child,  
This lustral water duly touch;  
My counsel will avail thee much.  
Forget not all the words I say,  
Nor let the occasion slip away.  
Lo, with two spells I thee invest,  
The mighty and the mightiest.  
O'er thee fatigue shall ne'er prevail,  
Nor age or change thy limbs assail.  
Thee powers of darkness ne'er shall smite  
ln tranquil sleep or wild delight.  
No one is there in all the land  
Thine equal for the vigorous hand.  

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>  

Thou, when thy lips pronounce the spell,  
Shalt have no peer in heaven or hell,  
None in the world with thee shall vie,  
O sinless one, in apt reply,  
In fortune, knowledge, wit, and tact,  
Wisdom to plan and skill to act.  
This double science take, and gain  
Glory that shall for aye remain.  
Wisdom and judgment spring from each  
Of these fair spells whose use I teach.  
Hunger and thirst unknown to thee,  
High in the worlds thy rank shall be.  
For these two spells with might endued,  
Are the Great Father's heavenly brood,  
And thee, O Chief, may fitly grace,  
Thou glory of Kakutstha's race.  
Virtues which none can match are thine,  
Lord, from thy birth, of gifts divine,  
And now these spells of might shall cast  
Fresh radiance o'er the gifts thou hast.'  
Then Ráma duly touched the wave,  
   Raised suppliant hands, bowed low his head,  
And took the spells the hermit gave  
   Whose soul on contemplation fed.  
From him whose might these gifts enhanced,  
A brighter beam of glory glanced:  
So shines in all his autumn blaze  
The Day-God of the thousand rays.  
The hermit's wants those youths supplied,  
As pupils use to holy guide.  
And then the night in sweet content  
On Sarjú's pleasant bank they spent.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[36:1](ry025.htm#fr_145.md) These mysterious
animated weapons are enumerated in Cantos XXIX and XXX. Daksha was the
son of Brahmá and one of the Prajápatis, Demiurgi, or secondary authors
of creation.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[36:1b](ry026.htm#fr_146.md) Youths of the
Kshatriya class used to leave unshorn the side locks of their hair.
These were called *Káka-paksha*, or raven's wings.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[36:2b](ry026.htm#fr_147.md) The Rákshas or giant
Rávan, king ot Lanká.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[36:3b](ry026.htm#fr_148.md) The meaning of
As'vins (from *as'va* a horse, Persian asp, Greek ἵιππος, Latin *equus*,
Welsh \*eck, is Horsemen. They were twin deities of whom frequent
mention is made in the Vedas and the Indian myths. The As'vins have much
in common with the Dioscuri of Greece, and their mythical genealogy
seems to indicate that their origin was astronomical. They were,
perhaps, at first the morning star and evening star. They are said to be
the children of the sun and the nymph As'viní, who is one of the lunar
asterisms personified. In the popular mythology they are regarded as the
physicians of the Gods. GORRESIO.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[36:4b](ry026.htm#fr_149.md) The word Kumára, (a
young prince, h Childe, is also a proper name of Skanda or Kártikeya God
of War, the son of S'iva and Umá. The babe was matured in the fire. See
Appendix, *Kártikeii Generatio*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXV.: The Hermitage of Love.](ry027.md)
