[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry038)  [Next](ry040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXXIX.: THE SONS OF SAGAR.

The saint in accents sweet and clear  
Thus told his tale for Ráma's ear,  
And thus anew the holy man  
A legend to the prince began:  
'There reigned a pious monarch o'er  
Ayodhyá in the days of yore:  
Sagar his name: no child bad he,  
And children much he longed to see.  
His honoured consort, fair of face,  
Sprang from Vidarbha's royal race,  
Kes'ini, famed from early youth  
For piety and love of truth.  
Arishtanemi's daughter fair,  
With whom no maiden might compare  
In beauty, though the earth is wide,  
Sumati, was his second bride.  
With his two queens afar he went,  
And weary days in penance spent,  
Fervent, upon Himálaya's hill  
Where springs the stream called Bhrigu' rill.  
Nor did he fail that saint to please  
With his devout austerities,  
And, when a hundred years had fled,  
Thus the most truthful Bhrigu said:  
'From thee, O Sagar, blameless King,  
A mighty host of sons shall spring,  
And thou shalt win a glorious name  
Which none, O Chief, but thou shall claim.  
One of thy queens a son shall bear,  
Maintainer of thy race and heir;  
And of the other there shall be  
Sons sixty thousand born to thee.'  

Thus as he spake, with one accord,  
To win the grace of that high lord,  
The queens, with palms together laid,  
In humble supplication prayed:  
'Which queen, O Bráhman, of the pair,  
The many, or the one shall bear?  
Most eager, Lord, are we to know,  
And as thou sayest be it so.'  

 <span id="fr_180"></span>[1b](#fn_180)  

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>  

With his sweet speech the saint replied:  
'Yourselves, O Queens, the choice decide.  
Your own discretion freely use  
Which shall the one or many choose:  
One shall the race and name uphold,  
The host be famous, strong, and bold.  
Which will have which?' Then Kes'inî  
The mother of one heir would be.  
Sumati, sister of the king  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[1](ry040.htm#fn_181)  
Of all the birds that ply the wing,  
To that illustrious Bráhman sued  
That she might bear the multitude  
Whose fame throughout the world should sound  
For mighty enterprise renowned.  
Around the saint the monarch went,  
Bowing his head, most reverent.  
Then with his wives, with willing feet,  
Besought his own imperial seat.  
Time passed. The elder consort bare  
A son called Asamanj, the heir.  
Then Sumati, the younger, gave  
Birth to a gourd,  <span id="fr_182"></span>[2](ry040.htm#fn_182) O hero
brave,  
Whose rind, when burst and cleft in two,  
Gave sixty thousand babes to view.  
All these with care the nurses laid  
In jars of oil; and there they stayed,  
Till, youthful age and strength complete,  
Forth speeding from each dark retreat,  
All peers in valour, years, and might,  
The sixty thousand came to light.  
Prince Asamanj, brought up with care,  
Scourge of his foes, was made the heir.  
But liegemen's boys he used to cast  
To Sarjû's waves that hurried past,  
Laughing the while in cruel glee  
Their dying agonies to see.  
This wicked prince who aye withstood  
The counsel of the wise and good,  
Who plagued the people in his hate,  
His father banished from the state.  
His son, kind-spoken, brave, and tall,  
Was Ans'uman, beloved of all.  
   Long years flew by. The king decreed  
To slay a sacrificial steed.  
Consulting with his priestly band  
He vowed the rite his soul had planned,  
And, Veda skilled, by their advice  
Made ready for the sacrifice.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[49:1b](ry039.htm#fr_180) I am compelled to
omit Cantos XXXVII and XXXVIII, THE GLORY OF UMÀ, and THE BIRTH OF
KÁRTIKEYA, as both in subject and language offensive to modern taste.
They will be found in Schlegel's Latin translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XL.: The Cleaving of The Earth.](ry040)
