[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry040)  [Next](ry042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLI.: KAPIL.

The father lent a gracious ear  
And listened to their tale of fear,  

And kindly to the Gods replied  
Whom woe and death had terrified;  
'The wisest Vasudeva, <span id="fr_185"></span>[1b](#fn_185) who  
The Immortals' foe, fierce Madhu, slew,  
Regards broad Earth with love and pride  
And guards, in Kapil's form, his bride. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[2b](#fn_186)  
His kindled wrath will quickly fall  
On the king's sons and burn them all.  
This cleaving of the earth his eye  
Foresaw in ages long gone by:  
He knew with prescient soul the fate  
That Sagar's children should await.'  
   The Three-and-thirty, <span id="fr_187"></span>[3b](#fn_187) freed
from fear.  
Sought their bright homes with hopeful cheer.  
Still rose the great tempestuous sound  
As Sagar's children pierced the ground.  
When thus the whole broad earth was cleft,  
And not a spot unsearched was left,  
Back to their home the princes sped,  
And thus unto their father said:  
'We searched the earth from side to side,  
While countless hosts of creatures died.  
Our conquering feet in triumph trod  
On snake and demon, fiend and God;  
But yet we failed, with all our toil,  
To find the robber and the spoil.  
What can we more? If more we can,  
Devise, O King, and tell thy plan.'  
   His chidren's speech King Sagar heard,  
And answered thus, to anger stirred:  
'Dig on, and ne'er your labour stay  
Till through earth's depths you force your way.  
Then smite the robber dead, and bring  
The charger back with triumphing.'  

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>  

   The sixty thousand chiefs obeyed:  
Deep through the earth their way they made.  
Deep as they dug and deeper yet  
The immortal elephant they met,  
Famed Virúpáksha  <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188) vast of size,  
Upon whose head the broad earth lies:  
The mighty beast who earth sustains  
With shaggy hills and wooded plains.  
When, with the changing moon, distressed,  
And longing for a moment's rest,  
His mighty head the monster shakes,  
Earth to the bottom reels and quakes.  
Around that warder strong and vast  
With reverential steps they passed.  
Nor, when the honour due was paid,  
Their downward search through earth delayed.  
But turning from the east aside  
Southward again their task they plied.  
There Mahápadma held his place,  
The best of all his mighty race,  
Like some huge hill, of monstrous girth,  
Upholding on his head the earth.  
When the vast beast the princes saw,  
They marvelled and were tilled with awe.  
The sons of high-souled Sagar round  
That elephant in reverence wound.  
Then in the western region they  
With might unwearied cleft their way.  
There saw they with astonisht eyes  
Saumanas, beast of mountain size.  
Round him with circling steps they went  
With greetings kind and reverent.  
   On, on--no thought of rest or stay--  
They reached the seat of Soma's sway.  
There saw they Bhadra, white as snow,  
With lucky marks that fortune show,  
Bearing the earth upon his head.  
Round him they paced with solemn tread,  

And honoured him with greetings kind,  
Then downward yet their way they mined.  
They gained the tract 'twixt east and north  
Whose fame is ever blazoned forth, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1b](ry042.htm#fn_189)  
And by a storm of rage impelled,  
Digging through earth their course they held.  
   Then all the princes, lofty-souled,  
Of wondrous vigour, strong and bold,  
Saw Vásudeva  <span id="fr_190"></span>[2b](ry042.htm#fn_190) standing
there  
In Kapil's form he loved to wear,  
And near the everlasting God  
The victim charger cropped the sod.  
They saw with joy and eager eyes  
The fancied robber and the prize,  
And on him rushed the furious band  
Crying aloud, Stand, villain! stand!  
'Avaunt! avaunt!' great Kapil cried,  
His bosom flusht with passion's tide;  
Then by his might that proud array  
All scorcht to heaps of ashes lay. <span
id="fr_191"></span>[3b](ry042.htm#fn_191)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[51:1](ry040.htm#fr_184) Said to be so called
from the Jambu, or Rose Apple, abounding in it, and signifying according
to the Purána, the central division of the world, the known world.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[51:1b](ry041.htm#fr_185) Here used as a name
of Vishnu.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[51:2b](ry041.htm#fr_186) Kings are called the
husbands of their kingdoms or of the earth; 'She and his kingdom were
his only brides.' *Raghuvans'a*.

  
  'Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate  
   A double marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,  
   And then between me and my married wife.'  
                         King Richard II. Act V. Sc. I.  

<span id="fn_187"></span>[51:3b](ry041.htm#fr_187) The thirty-three Gods
are said in the *Aitareya. Bráhmana*.Book 1. ch. II. 10. to be the eight
Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the twelve Àdityas, Prajápati, either Brahmá
or Daksha, and Vashatkára or deitied oblation. This must have been the
actual number at the beginning of the Vedic religion gradually increased
by successive mythical and religious creations till the Indian Pantheon
was crowded with abstractions of every kind. Through the reverence with
which the words of the Veda were regarded, the immense host of
multiplied divinities, in later times, still bore the name of the
Thirty-three Gods.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[52:1](ry041.htm#fr_188) 'One of the elephants
which, according to an ancient belief popular in India, supported the
earth with their enormous backs; when one of these elephants shook his
wearied head the earth trembled with its woods and hills. An idea, or
rather a mythical fancy, similar to this, but reduced to proportions
less grand, is found in Virgil when he speaks of Enceladus buried under
Ætna:

  
  'Fama est Enceladi semiustum fulmine corpus  
   Urgeri molo haec, ingentemque insuper Ætnam  
   Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;  
   Et fessum quoties mutat latus, intremere omnem  
   Murmure Trinacriam, et coelum subtexere fumo.'  

                                 Æneid. Lib, III. GORRESIO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLII.: Sagar's Sacrifice.](ry042)
