[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry090)  [Next](ry092.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIII.: DAS'ARATHA'S DISTRESS.

Unworthy of his mournful fate,  
The mighty king, unfortunate,  
Lay prostrate in unseemly guise,  
As, banished from the blissful skies,  
Yayáti, in his evil day.  
His merit all exhausted, lay.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_276.md)  
The queen, triumphant in the power  
Won by her beauty's fatal dower,  
Still terrible and unsubdued,  
Her dire demand again renewed:  
'Great Monarch,'twas thy boast till now  
To love the truth and keep the vow;  
Then wherefore would thy lips refuse  
The promised boon 'tis mine to choose?'  
   King Das'aratha, thus addressed,  
With anger raging in his breast,  
Sank for a while beneath the pain,  
Then to Kaikeyí spoke again:  

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>  

'Childless so long, at length I won,  
With mighty toil, from Heaven a son,  
Ráma, the mighty-armed; and how  
Shall I desert my darling now?  
A scholar wise, a hero bold,  
Of patient mood, with wrath controlled,  
How can I bid my Ráma fly,  
My darling of the lotus eye?  
In heaven itself I scarce could bear,  
When asking of my Ráma there,  
To hear the Gods his griefs declare,  
And O, that death would take me hence  
Before I wrong his innocence!'  

As thus the monarch wept and wailed,  
And maddening grief his heart assailed,  
The sun had sought his resting-place,  
And night was closing round apace.  
But yet the moon-crowned night could bring  
No comfort to the wretched king.  
As still he mourned with burning sighs  
And fixed his gaze upon the skies:  
'O Night whom starry fires adorn,  
I long not for the coming morn.  
Be kind and show some mercy: see,  
My suppliant hands are raised to thee.  
Nay, rather fly with swifter pace;  
No longer would I see the face  
Of Queen Kaikeyí, cruel, dread,  
Who brings this woe upon mine head.'  
Again with suppliant hands he tried  
To move the queen, and wept and sighed:  
'To me, unhappy me, inclined  
To good, sweet dame, thou shouldst be kind;  
Whose life is well-nigh fled, who cling  
To thee for succour, me thy king.  
This, only this, is all my claim:  
Have mercy, O my lovely dame.  
None else have I to take my part.  
Have mercy: thou art good at heart.  
Hear, lady of the soft black eye.  
And win a name that ne'er shall die:  
Let Ráma rule this glorious land,  
The gift of thine imperial hand.  
O lady of the dainty waist,  
With eyes and lips of beauty graced,  
Please Ráma, me, each saintly priest,  
Bharat, and all from chief to least.'  

   She heard his wild and mournful cry,  
     She saw the tears his speech that broke,  
   Saw her good husband's reddened eye,  
       But, cruel still, no word she spoke.  
   His eyes upon her face he bent,  
     And sought for mercy, but in vain:  
   She claimed his darling's banishment,  
     He swooned upon the ground again.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[106:1](ry091.htm#fr_276.md) Only the highest
merit obtains a home in heaven for ever. Minor degrees of merit procure
only leases of heavenly mansions terminable after periods proportioned
to the fund which buys them. King Yayáti went to heaven and when his
term expired was unceremoniously ejected, and thrown down to earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XIV.: Ráma Summoned.](ry092.md)
