[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry120)  [Next](ry122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLIII.: KAUS'ALYÁ'S LAMENT.

Kaus'alyá saw the monarch lie  
With drooping frame and failing eye,  
And for her banished son distressed  
With these sad words her lord addressed:  
'Kaikeyí, cruel, false, and vile  
Has cast the venom of her guile  
On Ráma lord of men, and she  
Will ravage like a snake set free;  
And more and more my soul alarm,  
Like a dire serpent bent on harm.  
For triumph crowns each dark intent,  
And Ráma to the wild is sent.  
Ah, were he doomed but here to stray  
Begging his food from day to day,  
Or do, enslaved, Kaikeyí's will,  
This were a boon, a comfort still.  
But she, as chose her cruel hate,  
Has hurled him from his high estate,  
As Bráhmans when the moon is new  
Cast to the ground the demons' due.  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_318)  
The long-armed hero, like the lord  
Of Nágas, with his bow and sword  
Begins, I ween, his forest life  
With Lakshman and his faithful wife.  
Ah, how will fare the exiles now,  
Whom, moved by Queen Kaikeyí, thou  
Hast sent in forests to abide,  
Bred in delights, by woe untried?  
Far banished when their lives are young,  
With the fair fruit before them hung,  
Deprived of all their rank that suits,  
How will they live on grain and roots?  
O, that my years of woe were passed,  
And the glad hour were come at last  
When I shall see my children dear,  
Ráma, his wife, and Lakshman here!  
When shall Ayodhyá, wild with glee,  
Again those mighty heroes see,  
And decked with wreaths her banners wave  
To welcome home the true and brave?  
When will the beautiful city view  
With happy eyes the lordly two  
Returning, joyful as the main  
When the dear moon is full again?  
When, like some mighty bull who leads  
The cow exulting through the meads,  
Will Ráma through the city ride,  
Strong-armed, with Sítá at his side?  
When will ten thousand thousand meet  
And crowd Ayodhyá's royal street,  
And grain in joyous welcome throw  
Upon my sons who tame the foe?  
When with delight shall youthful bands  
Of Bráhman maidens in their hands  

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>  

Bear fruit and flowers in goodly show,  
And circling round Ayodhyá go?  
With ripened judgment of a sage,  
And godlike in his blooming age,  
When shall my virtuous son appear,  
Like kindly rain, our hearts to cheer?  
Ah, in a former life, I ween,  
This hand of mine, most base and mean,  
Has dried the udders of the kine  
And left the thirsty calves to pine.  
Hence, as the lion robs the cow,  
Kaikeyí makes me childless now,  
Exulting from her feebler foe  
To rend the son she cherished so.  
I had but him, in Scripture skilled,  
With every grace his soul was filled.  
Now not a joy has life to give,  
And robbed of him I would not live:  
Yea, all my days are dark and drear  
If he, my darling, be not near,  
And Lakshman brave, my heart to cheer.  
As for my son I mourn and yearn,  
The quenchless flames of anguish burn  
   And kill me with the pain,  
As in the summer's noontide blaze  
The glorious Day-God with his rays  
   Consumes the parching plain.´  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_318"></span>[145:1](ry121.htm#fr_318) The husks and chaff
of the rice offered to the Gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLIV.: Sumitra's Speech.](ry122)
