[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry148)  [Next](ry150.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LXXI.: BHARAT'S RETURN.

Then Bharat's face was eastward bent  
As from the royal town he went.  
He reached Sudámá's farther side,  
And glorious, gazed upon the tide;  
Passed Hládiní, and saw her toss  
Her westering billows hard to cross.  
Then old Ikshváku's famous son  
O'er S'atadrú <span id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_348.md) his passage won,  
Near Ailadhána on the strand,  
And came to Aparparyat's land.  
O'er S'ilás flood he hurried fast,  
Akurvatí's fair stream he passed,  
Crossed o'er A'gneya's rapid rill,  
And S'alyakartan onward still.  
S'ilávahá's swift stream he eyed,  
True to his vows and purified.  
Then crossed the lofty hills, and stood  
In Chaitraratha's mighty wood.  
He reached the confluence where meet  
Sarasvatí <span id="fr_349"></span>[2](#fn_349.md) and Gangá fleet,  
And through Bhárunda forest, spread  
Northward of Víramatsya, sped.  
He sought Kalinda's child, who fills  

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>  

The soul with joy, begirt by hills,  
Reached Yamuná and passing o'er,  
Rested his army on the shore:  
He gave his horses food and rest,  
Bathed reeking limb and drooping crest.  
They drank their fill and bathed them there,  
And water for their journey bare.  
Thence through a mighty wood he sped  
All wild and uninhabited,  
As in fair chariot through the skies,  
Most fair in shape a Storm-God flies.  
At Ans'udhána Gangá, hard  
To cross, his onward journey barred,  
So turning quickly thence he came  
To Prágvat's city dear to fame.  
There having gained the farther side  
To Kutikoshtiká he hied:  
The stream he crossed, and onward then  
To Dharmavardhan brought his men.  
Thence, leaving Toran on the north.  
To Jambuprastha journeyed forth.  
Then onward to a pleasant grove  
By fair Varúha's town he drove,  
And when a while he there had stayed,  
Went eastward from the friendly shade.  
Eastward of Ujjiháná where  
The Priyak trees are tall and fair,  
He passed, and rested there each steed  
Kxhausted with the journey's speed.  
There orders to his men addressed,  
With quickened pace he onward pressed,  
A while at Sarvatirtha spent,  
Then o'er Uttániká he went.  
O'er many a stream beside he sped  
With coursers on the mountains bred,  
And passing Hastiprishthak, took  
The road o'er Kutikás fair brook.  
Then, at Lohitya's village, he  
Crossed o'er the swift Kapívatí,  
Then passed, where Ekas'ála stands,  
The Sthánumatís flood and sands,  
And Gomatí of fair renown  
By Vinata's delightful town.  
When to Kalinga near he drew,  
A wood of Sal trees charmed the view;  
That passed, the sun began to rise,  
And Bharat saw with happy eyes,  
Ayodhá's city, built and planned  
By ancient Manu's royal hand,  
Seven nights upon the road had passed,  
And when he saw the town at last  
Before him in her beauty spread,  
Thus Bharat to the driver said:  
'This glorious city from afar,  
Wherein pure groves and gardens are,  
Seems to my eager eyes to-day  
A lifeless pile of yellow clay.  
Through all her streets where erst a throng  
Of men and women streamed along,  
Uprose the multitudinous roar:  
To-day I hear that sound no more.  
No longer do mine eyes behold  
The leading people, as of old,  
On elephants, cars, horses, go  
Abroad and homeward, to and fro.  
The brilliant gardens, where we heard  
The wild note of each rapturous bird.  
Where men and women loved to meet,  
In pleasant shades, for pastime sweet,--  
These to my eyes this day appear  
Joyless, and desolate, and drear;  
Each tree that graced the garden grieves,  
And every path is spread with leaves.  
The merry cry of bird and beast,  
That spake aloud their joy has ceased:  
Still is the long melodious note  
That charmed us from each warbling throat,  
Why blows the blessed air no more,  
The incense-breathing air that bore  
Its sweet incomparable scent  
Of sandal and of aloe blent?  
Why are the drum and tabour mute?  
Why is the music of the lute  
That woke responsive to the quill,  
Loved by the happy, hushed and still?  
My boding spirit gathers hence  
Dire sins of awful consequence,  
And omens, crowding on my sight,  
Weigh down my soul with wild affright  
Scarce shall I find my friends who dwell  
Here in Ayodhyá safe and well:  
For surely not without a cause  
This crushing dread my soul o'erawes.  
   Heart sick, dejected, every sense  
Confused by terror's influence,  
On to the town he quickly swept  
Which King Ikshváku's children kept.  
He passed through Vaijayanta's gate,  
With weary steeds, disconsolate.  
And all who near their station held,  
His escort. crying Victory, swelled,  
With heart distracted still he bowed  
Farewell to all the following crowd,  
Turned to the driver and began  
To question thus the weary man:.  
'Why was I brought, O free from blame,  
So fast, unknown for what I came?  
Yet fear of ill my heart appals,  
And all my wonted courage falls.  
For I have heard in days gone by  
The changes seen when monarchs die;  
And all those signs. O charioteer,  
I see today surround me here:  
Each kinsman's house looks dark and grim,  
No hand delights to keep it trim:  
The beauty vanished. and the pride,  
The doors, unkept, stand open wide.  
No morning rites are offered there,  
No grateful incense loads the air,  
And all therein, with brows o'ercast,  
Sit joyless on the ground and fast.  
Their lovely chaplets dry and dead,  

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>  

Their courts unswept, with dust o'erspread,  
The temples of the Gods to-day  
No more look beautiful and gay.  
Neglected stands each holy shrine,  
Each image of a Lord divine.  
No shop where flowery wreaths are sold  
Is bright and busy as of old.  
The women and the men I mark  
Absorbed in fancies dull and dark,  
Their gloomy eyes with tears bedewed,  
A poor afflicted multitude.'  

His mind oppressed with woe and dread,  
Thus Bharat to his driver said,  
Viewed the dire signs Ayodhyá showed,  
And onward to the palace rode.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_348"></span>[178:1](ry149.htm#fr_348.md) 'The S'atadrú, 'the
hundred-channeled' --the Zaradrus of Ptolemy, Hesydrus of Pliny--is the
Sutlej.' WILSON'S *Vishnu Purána*, Vol. II. p. 130.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[178:2](ry149.htm#fr_349.md) The Sarasvatí or
Sursooty is a tributary of the Caggar or Guggur in Sirhind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LXXII.: Bharat's Inquiry.](ry150.md)
