[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry146)  [Next](ry148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LXIX.: BHARAT'S DREAM.

The night those messengers of state  
Had past within the city's gate,  
In dreams the slumbering Bharat saw  
A sight that chilled his soul with awe.  
The dream that dire events foretold  
Left Bharat's heart with horror cold,  

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>  

And with consuming woes distraught,  
Upon his aged sire he thought.  
His dear companions, swift to trace  
The signs of anguish on his face,  
Drew near, his sorrow to expel,  
And pleasant tales began to tell.  
Some woke sweet music's cheering sound,  
And others danced in lively round.  
With joke and jest they strove to raise  
His spirits, quoting ancient plays;  
But Bharat still, the lofty-souled,  
Deaf to sweet tales his fellows told,  
Unmoved by music, dance, and jest,  
Sat silent, by his woe oppressed,  
To him, begirt by comrades near,  
Thus spoke the friend he held most dear:  
'Why ringed around by friends, art thou  
So silent and so mournful now?'  
'Hear thou,' thus Bharat made reply,  
'What chills my heart and dims mine eye,  
I dreamt I saw the king my sire  
Sink headlong in a lake of mire  
Down from a mountain high in air,  
His body soiled, and loose his hair.  
Upon the miry lake he seemed  
To lie and welter, as I dreamed;  
With hollowed hands full many a draught  
Of oil he took, and loudly laughed.  
With head cast down I saw him make  
A meal on sesamum and cake;  
The oil from every member dripped,  
And in its clammy flood he dipped.  
The ocean's bed was bare and dry,  
The moon had fallen from the sky,  
And all the world lay still and dead,  
With whelming darkness overspread.  
The earth was rent and opened wide,  
The leafy trees were scorched, and died;  
I saw the seated mountains split.  
And wreaths of rising smoke emit.  
The stately beast the monarch rode  
His long tusks rent and splintered showed;  
And flames that quenched and cold hadlain  
Blazed forth with kindled light again.  
I looked, and many a handsome dame,  
Arrayed in brown and sable came  
And bore about the monarch, dressed,  
On iron stool, in sable vest.  
And then the king, of virtuous mind,  
A blood-red wreath around him twined,  
Forth on an ass-drawn chariot sped,  
As southward still he bent his head.  
Then, crimson-clad, a dame appeared  
Who at the monarch laughed and jeered;  
And a she-monster, dire to view,  
Her hand upon his body threw.  
Such is the dream I dreamt by night,  
Which chills me yet with wild affright:  
Either the king or Ráma, I  
Or Lakshman now must surely die.  
For when an ass-drawn chariot seems  
To bear away a man in dreams,  
Be sure above his funeral pyre  
The smoke soon rears its cloudy spire.  
This makes my spirit low and weak.  
My tongue is slow and both to speak:  
My lips and throat are dry for dread,  
And all my soul disquieted.  
My lips, relaxed, can hardly speak,  
And chilling dread has changed my cheek  
I blame myself in aimless fears,  
And still no cause of blame appears,  
I dwell upon this dream of ill  
     Whose changing scenes I viewed,  
   And on the startling horror still  
     My troubled thoughts will brood.  
   Still to my soul these terrors cling,  
     Reluctant to depart,  
   And the strange vision of the king  
     Still weighs upon my heart.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_347"></span>[176:1b](ry146.htm#fr_347) It would be lost
labour to attempt to verify all the towns and streams mentioned in
Cantos LXVIII and LXXII. Professor Wilson observes (*Vishnu Purána*, p.
139. Dr. Hall's Edition) 'States, and tribes, and cities have
disappeared, even from recollection; and some of the natural features of
the country, especially the rivers, have undergone a total alteration.

Notwithstanding these impediments, however, we should be able to
identify at least mountains and rivers, to a much greater extent than is
now practicable, if our maps were not so miserably defective in their
nomenclature. None of our surveyors or geographers have been oriental
scholars. It may be doubted if any of them have been conversant with the
spoken language of the country. They have, consequently, put down names
at random, according to their own inaccurate appreciation of sounds
carelessly, vulgarly, and corruptly uttered; and their maps of India are
crowded with appellations which bear no similitude whatever either to
past or present denominations. "We need not wonder that we cannot
discover Sanskrit names in English maps, when, in the immediate vicinity
of Calcutta, Barnagore represents Barahanagar, Dakshineswar is
metamorphosed into Duckinsore, Ulubaria into Willoughbury.......There is
scarcely a name in our Indian maps that does not afford proof of extreme
indifference to accuracy in nomenclature, and of an incorrectness in
estimating sounds, which is, in some degree, perhaps, a national
defect.'

For further information regarding the road from Ayodhya to Rajagriha,
see *Additional Notes*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LXX.: Bharat's Departure.](ry148)
