[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry172)  [Next](ry174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XCV.: MANDÁKINÍ.

Then Ráma, like the lotus eyed,  
Descended from the mountain side,  
And to the Maithil lady showed  
The lovely stream that softly flowed.  
And thus Ayodhyá's lord addressed  
His bride, of dames the loveliest,  
Child of Videha's king, her face  
Bright with the fair moon's tender grace:  
'How sweetly glides, O darling, look,  
Mandákiní's delightful brook,  
Adorned with islets, blossoms gay,  
And s'arases and swans at play!  

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>  

The trees with which her banks are lined  
Show flowers and fruit of every kind:  
The match in radiant sheen is she  
Of King Kuvera's Nalini.  <span id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_373)  
My heart exults with pleasure new  
The shelving hand and ford to view,  
Where gathering herds of thirsty deer  
Disturb the wave that ran so clear.  
Now look, those holy hermits mark  
In skins of deer and coats of bark;  
With twisted coils of matted hair,  
The reverend men are bathing there,  
And as they lift their arms on high  
The Lord of Day they glorify:  
These best of saints, my large-eyed spouse,  
Are constant to their sacred vows.  
The mountain dances while the trees  
Bend their proud summits to the breeze,  
And scatter many a flower and bud  
From branches that o'erhang the flood.  
There flows the stream like lucid pearl,  
Round islets here the currents whirl,  
And perfect saints from middle air  
Are flocking to the waters there.  
See, there lie flowers in many a heap  
From boughs the whistling breezes sweep,  
And others wafted by the gale  
Down the swift current dance and sail.  
Now see that pair of wild-fowl rise,  
Exulting with their joyful cries:  
Hark, darling, wafted from afar  
How soft their pleasant voices are.  
To gaze on Churakuta's hill,  
To look upon this lovely rill,  
To bend mine eyes on thee, dear wife,  
Is sweeter than my city life.  
Come, bathe we in the pleasant rill  
Whose dancing waves are never still,  
Stirred by those beings pure from sin,  
The sanctities who bathe therein:  
Come, dearest, to the stream descend,  
Approach her as a darling friend,  
And dip thee in the silver flood  
Which lotuses and lilies stud.  
Let this fair hill Ayodhya seem,  
Its silvan things her people deem,  
And let these waters as they flow  
Our own beloved Sarju show.  
How blest, mine own dear love, am I;  
Thou, fond and true, art ever nigh,  
And duteous, faithful Lakshman stays  
Beside me, and my word obeys.  
Here every day I bathe me thrice,  
Fruit, honey, roots for food suffice,  
And ne'er my thoughts with longing stray  
To distant home or royal sway.  
For who this charming brook can see  
Where herds of roedeer wander free,  

And on the flowery-wooded brink  
Apes, elephants, and lions drink,  
   Nor feel all sorrow fly?'  
Thus eloquently spoke the pride  
Of Raghu's children to his bride,  
And wandered happy by her side  
Where Chitrakuta azure-dyed  
   Uprears his peaks on high.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_371"></span>[203:1b](ry172.htm#fr_371) A lake attached
either to Amaravati the residence of Indra, or Alaká that of Kuvera.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[203:2b](ry172.htm#fr_372) The Ganges of
heaven.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[204:1](ry173.htm#fr_373) Nalini, as here, may
be the name of any lake covered with lotuses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XCVI. : The Magic Shaft.](ry174)
