[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry191)  [Next](ry193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO CXIV.: BHARAT'S DEPARTURE.

Deep, pleasant was the chariot's sound  
As royal Bharat, far renowned,  
Whirled by his mettled coursers fast  
Within Ayodhyá's city passed.  
There dark and drear was every home  
Where cats and owls had space to roam,  
As when the shades of midnight fall  
With blackest gloom, and cover all:  
As Rohiní, dear spouse of him  
Whom Rahu  <span id="fr_396"></span>[1](#fn_396.md) hates, grows faint and
dim,  
When, as she shines on high alone  
The demon's shade is o'er her thrown:  
As burnt by summer's heat a rill  
Scarce trickling from her parent hill,  
With dying fish in pools half dried,  
And fainting birds upon her side:  
As sacrificial flames arise  
When holy oil their food supplies,  
But when no more the fire is fed  
Sink lustreless and cold and dead:  
Like some brave host that filled the plain,  
With harness rent and captains slain,  
When warrior, elephant, and steed  
Mingled in wild confusion bleed:  
As when, all spent her store of worth,  
Rocks from her base the loosened earth:  
Like a sad fallen star no more  
Wearing the lovely light it wore:  
So mournful in her lost estate  
Was that sad town disconsolate.  
Then car-borne Bharat, good and brave,  
Thus spake to him the steeds who drave:  
'Why are Ayodhyá's streets so mute!  
Where is the voice of lyre and lute?  
Why sounds not, as of old, to-day  
The music of the minstrel's lay?  

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>  

Where are the wreaths they used to twine?  
Where are the blossoms and the wine?  
Where is the cool refreshing scent  
Of sandal dust with aloe blent?  
The elephant's impatient roar,  
The din of cars, I hear no more:  
No more the horse's pleasant neigh  
Rings out to meet me on my way.  
Ayodhyá's youths, since Ráma's flight,  
Have lost their relish for delight:  
Her men roam forth no more, nor care  
Bright garlands round their necks to wear.  
All grieve for banished Ráma: feast,  
And revelry and song have ceased:  
Like a black night when floods pour down,  
So dark and gloomy is the town.  
When will he come to make them gay  
Like some auspicious holiday?  
When will my brother, like a cloud  
At summer's close, make glad the crowd?'  
   Then through the streets the hero rode,  
And passed within his sire's abode,  
Like some deserted lion's den,  
Forsaken by the lord of men.  
Then to the inner bowers he came,  
Once happy home of many a dame,  
   Now gloomy, sad, and drear,  
Dark as of old that sunless day  
When wept the Gods in wild dismay; <span
id="fr_397"></span>[1](ry193.htm#fn_397.md)  
   There poured he many a tear.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_396"></span>[223:1](ry192.htm#fr_396.md) The spouse of Rohini
is the Moon: Rahu is the demon who causes eclipses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto CXV.: Nandigrám.](ry193.md)
