[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry212)  [Next](ry214.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XV.: PANCHAVATT.

Arrived at Panchavatí's shade  
Where silvan life and serpents strayed,  
Ráma in words like these addressed  
Lakshman of vigour unrepressed:  
   'Brother, our home is here: behold  
The grove of which the hermit told:  
The bowers of Panchavatí see  
Made fair by every blooming tree.  
Now, brother, bend thine eyes around;  
With skilful glance survey the grouud:  
Here be some spot selected, best  
Approved for gentle hermits' rest,  
Where thou, the Maithil dame, and I  
May dwell while seasons sweetly fly.  
Some pleasant spot be chosen where  
Pure waters gleam and trees are fair,  
Some nook where flowers and wood are found  
And sacred grass and springs abound.'  
   Then Lakshman, Sitá standing by,  
Raised reverent hands, and made reply:  
   'A hundred years shall flee, and still  
Will I obey my brothers will:  
Select thyself a pleasant spot;  
Be mine the care to rear the cot.'  
The glorious chieftain, pleased to hear  
That loving speech that soothed his ear,  
Selected with observant care  
A spot with every charm most fair.  
He stood within that calm retreat,  
A shade for hermits' home most meet,  
And thus Sumitrá's son addressed,  
While his dear hand in his he pressed:  
   'See, see this smooth and lovely glade  
Which flowery trees encircling shade:  
Do thou, beloved Lakshman rear  
A pleasant cot to lodge us here.  
I see beyond that feathery brake  
The gleaming of a lilied lake,  
Where flowers in sunlike glory throw  
Fresh odours from the wave below.  
Agastva's words now find we true,  
He told the charms which here we view:  

Here are the trees that blossom o'er  
Godávarí's most lovely shore.  
Whose pleasant flood from side to side  
With swans and geese is beautified,  
And fair banks crowded with the deer  
That steal from every covert near.  
The peacock's cry is loud and shrill  
From many a tall and lovely hill,  
Green-belted by the trees that wave  
Full blossoms o'er the rock and cave.  
Like elephants whose huge fronts glow  
With painted streaks, the mountains show  
Long lines of gold and silver sheen  
With copper's darker hues between.  
With every tree each hill is graced,  
Where creepers blossom interlaced.  
Look where the Sál's long branches sway,  
And palms their fanlike leaves display;  
The date-tree And the Jak are near,  
And their long stems Tamálas rear.  
See the tall Mango lift his head,  
As'okas all their glory spread,  
The Ketak her sweet buds unfold,  
And Champacs hang their cups of gold.  <span
id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_450.md)  
The spot is pure and pleasant here  
Are multitudes of birds and deer.  
O Lakshman, with our father's friend  
What happy hours we here shall spend!'  
   He spoke: the conquering Lakshman heard.  
Obedient to his brother's word.  
Raised by his toil a cottage stood  
To shelter Ráma in the wood  
Of ample size, with leaves o'erlaid,  
Of hardened earth the walls were made.  
The strong bamboos his hands had felled  
For pillars fair the roof upheld,  
And rafter, beam, and lath supplied  
Well interwrought from side to side.  
Then Samí  <span id="fr_451"></span>[2](#fn_451.md) boughs he deftly
spread  
Enlaced with knotted cord o'erhead,  
Well thatched above from ridge to eaves  
With holy grass, and reed, and leaves.  
The mighty chief with careful toil  
Had cleared the ground and smoothed the soil  

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>  

Where now, his loving labour done,  
Rose a fair home for Raghu's son.  
Then when his work was duly wrought,  
Godávarís sweet stream he sought,  
Bathed, plucked the lilies, and a store  
Of fruit and berries homeward bore.  
Then sacrifice he duly paid,  
And wooed the Gods their hopes to aid,  
And then to Ráma proudly showed  
The cot prepared for his abode,  
Then Raghu's son with Sítá gazed  
Upon the home his hands had raised,  
And transport thrilled his bosom through  
His leafy hermitage to view.  
The glorious son of Raghu round  
His brother's neck his arms enwound,  
And thus began his sweet address  
Of deep-felt joy and gentleness:  
'Well pleased am I, dear lord, to see  
This noble work performed by thee.  
For this,--sole grace I can bestow,--  
About thy neck mine arms I throw.  
So wise art thou, thy breast is filled  
With grateful thoughts, in duty skilled,  
Our mighty father, free from stain,  
In thee, his offspring, lives again.'  
   Thus spoke the prince, who lent a grace  
To fortune, pride of Raghu's race;  
Then in that spot whose pleasant shade  
Gave store of fruit, content he stayed.  
With Lakshman and his Maithil spouse  
He spent his day's neath sheltering boughs,  
As happy as a God on high  
Lives in his mansion in the sky.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_450"></span>[247:1](ry213.htm#fr_450.md) The original verses
merely name the trees. I have been obliged to amplify slightly and to
omit some quas versu dicere non est; e.g. the *tinis'a* (Dalbergia
ougeiniensis), *punnága* (Rottleria tinctoria) *tilaka* (not named),
*syandana* (Dalbergia ougeiniensis again) *vandana* (unknown) *nipa*
(Nauclea Kadamba) *lakucha* (Artoearpus lacucha), *dhava* (Grislea
tomentosa), As'vakarna (another name for the Sál), *S'amí* (Acacia Suma)
*khad\*ra* (Mimosa\*catechu) *kins'\*ka* (Buteafrondosa) *pátala*
(Bignonia suaveolens).

<span id="fn_451"></span>[247:2](ry213.htm#fr_451.md) Acacia Suma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XVI.: Winter.](ry214.md)
