[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry209)  [Next](ry211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XII.: THE HEAVENLY BOW.

He spoke: the younger prince obeyed:  
Within the bounds his way he made,  
And thus addressed, whom first he met,  
A pupil of the anchoret:  
   'Brave Ráma, eldest born, who springs,  
From Das'aratha, hither brings  
His wife the lady Sítá: he  
Would fain the holy hermit see.  
Lakshman am I--if happy fame  
E'er to thine ears has brought the name--  
His younger brother, prompt to do  
His will, devoted, fond, and true.  
We, through our royal sire's decree,  
To the dread woods were forced to flee.  
Tell the great Master, I entreat,  
Our earnest wish our lord to greet."  
   He spoke: the hermit rich in store  
Of fervid zeal and sacred lore,  
Sought the pure shrine which held the fire,  
To bear his message to the sire.  
Soon as he reached the saint most bright  
In sanctity's surpassing might,  
He cried, uplifting reverent hands:  
'Lord Ráma near thy cottage stands.'  
Then spoke Agastya's pupil dear  
The message for his lord to hear:  
'Ráma and Lakshman, chiefs who spring  
From Das'aratha, glorious king,  
Thy hermitage e'en now have sought,  
And lady Sítá with them brought.  
The tamers of the foe are here  
To see thee, Master, and revere.  
'Tis thine thy further will to say:  
Deign to command, and we obey.'  
   When from his pupil's lips he knew  
The presence of the princely two.  
And Sítá born to fortune high.  
The glorious hermit made reply:  
'Great joy at last is mine this day  
That Ráma hither finds his way,  
For long my soul has yearned to see  
The prince who comes to visit me.  
Go forth, go forth, and hither bring  
The royal three with welcoming:  
Lead Ráma in and place him near:  
Why stands he not already here?'  
   Thus ordered by the hermit, who,  
Lord of his thought, all dutv knew.  
His reverent hands together laid.  
The pupil answered and obeyed.  
Forth from the place with speed he ran,  

To Lakshman came and thus began:  
'Where is he? let not Ráma wait,  
But speed, the sage to venerate.'  
   Then with the pupil Lakshman went  
Across the hermit settlement,  
And showed him Ráma where he stood  
With Janak's daughter in the wood.  
The pupil then his message spake  
Which the kind hermit bade him take;  
Then led the honoured Ráma thence  
And brought him in with reverence.  
As nigh the royal Ráma came  
With Lakshman and the Maithil dame,  
He viewed the herds of gentle deer  
Roaming the garden free from fear.  
As through the sacred grove he trod  
He viewed the seat of many a God,  
Brahmá and Agni,  <span id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_429) Sun and Moon,  
And His who sends each golden boon;  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[2](#fn_430)  
Here Vishnu's stood, there Bhaga's  <span
id="fr_431"></span>[3](#fn_431) shrine,  
And there Mahendra's Lord divine;  
Here His who formed this earthly frame, <span
id="fr_432"></span>[4](#fn_432)  
His there from whom all beings came.  <span
id="fr_433"></span>[5](#fn_433)  
Váyu's, <span id="fr_434"></span>[6](#fn_434) and His who loves to
hold  
The great noose, Varim  <span id="fr_435"></span>[7](#fn_435)
mighty-souled:  
Here was the Vasus' <span id="fr_436"></span>[8](#fn_436) shrine to
see,  
Here that of sacred Gáyatrí, <span id="fr_437"></span>[9](#fn_437)  
The king of serpents  <span id="fr_438"></span>[10](#fn_438) here had
place,  
And he who rules the feathered race.  <span
id="fr_439"></span>[11](#fn_439)  
Here Kártikeya,  <span id="fr_440"></span>[12](#fn_440) warrior lord,  
And there was Justice' King adored.  
Then with disciples girt about  
The mighty saint himself came out:  
Through fierce devotion bright as flame  
Before the rest the Master came:  
And then to Lakshman, fortune blest,  
Ráma these hasty words addressed:  
'Behold, Agastya's self draws near,  
The mighty saint, whom all revere:  
With spirit raised I meet my lord  
With richest wealth of penance stored.'  
   The strong-armed hero spake, and ran  
Forward to meet the sunbright man.  
Before him, as he came, he bent  
And clasped his feet most reverent,  
Then rearing up his stately height  
Stood suppliant by the anchorite,  
While Lakshman's strength and Sítá's grace  
Stood by the pride of Raghu's race.  

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>  

The sage his arms round Rama threw  
And welcomed him with honours due,  
Asked, was all well, with question sweet.  
And bade the hero to a seat.  
With holy oil he fed the flame,  
He brought the gifts which strangers claim,  
And kindly waiting on the three  
With honours due to high degree,  
He gave with hospitable care  
A simple hermit's woodland fare.  
Then sat the reverend father, first  
Of hermits, deep in duty versed.  
And thus to suppliant Ráma, bred  
In all the lore of virtue, said:  
'Did the false hermit, Prince, neglect  
To hail his guest with due respect,  
He must,--the doom the perjured meet,--  
His proper flesh hereafter eat.  
A car-borne king a lord who sways  
The earth, and virtue's law obeys,  
Worthy of highest honour, thou  
Hast sought, dear guest, my cottage now.'  
He spoke: with fruit and hermit fare,  
With every bloom the branches bare,  
Agastya graceed his honoured guest,  
And thus with gentle words addressed:  
'Accept this mighty bow, divine.  
Whereon red gold and diamonds shine;  
'Twas by the Heavenly Artist planned  
For Vishnu's own almighty hand:  
This God-sent shaft of sunbright hue,  
Whose deadly flight is ever true,  
By Lord Mahendra given of yore:  
This quiver with its endless store.  
Keen arrows hurtling to their aim  
Like kindled fires that flash and flame:  
Accept, in golden sheath encased,  
This sword with hilt of rich gold graced.  
Armed, whilom, with this best of bows  
Lord Vishnu slew his demon foes,  
And mid the dwellers in the skies  
Won brilliant glory for his prize.  
The bow, the quivers, shaft, and sword  
Received from me, O glorious lord:  
These conquest to thine arm shall bring,  
As thunder to the thunder's King.'  
   The splendid hermit bade him take  
The noble weapons as he spake,  
And as the prince accepted each  
In words like these renewed his speech:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_429"></span>[243:1](ry210.htm#fr_429) The God of fire.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[243:2](ry210.htm#fr_430) Kuera, the God of
riches.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[243:3](ry210.htm#fr_431) The Sun.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[243:4](ry210.htm#fr_432) Brahma, the creator.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[243:5](ry210.htm#fr_433) Siva.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[243:6](ry210.htm#fr_434) The Wind-God.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[243:7](ry210.htm#fr_435) The God of the sea.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[243:8](ry210.htm#fr_436) A class of demi-gods,
eight in number.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[243:9](ry210.htm#fr_437) The holiest text of
the Vedas, deified.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[243:10](ry210.htm#fr_438) Vásaki

<span id="fn_439"></span>[243:11](ry210.htm#fr_439) Garnd \*

<span id="fn_440"></span>[243:12](ry210.htm#fr_440) The War-God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XIII.: Agastya's Counsel.](ry211)
