[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry211)  [Next](ry213.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIV.: JATÁYUS.

Then as the son of Raghu made  
His way to Panchavatí's shade,  
A mighty vulture he beheld  
Of size and strength unparalleled.  
The princes, when the bird they saw,  
Approached with reverence and awe,  
And as his giant form they eyed,  
'Tell who thou art,' in wonder cried.  
The bird, as though their hearts to gain,  
Addressed them thus in gentlest strain;  
'In me, dear sons, the friend behold  
Your royal father loved of old.'  
   He spoke: nor long did Ráma wait  
His sire's dear friend to venerate:  

He bade the bird declare his name  
And the high race of which he came.  
When Raghu's son had spoken, he  
Declared his name and pedigree,  
His words prolonging to disclose  
How all the things that be arose:  
   'List while I tell, O Raghu's son,  
The first-born Fathers, one by one,  
Great Lords of Life, whence all in earth  
And all in heaven derive their birth.  
First Kardam heads the glorious race  
Where Vikrit holds the second place,  
With S'esha, Sans'ray next in line,  
And Bahuputra's might divine.  
Then Sthánu and Maríchi came,  
Atri, and Kratu's forceful frame.  
Pulastya followed, next to him  
Angiras' name shall ne'er be dim.  
Prachetas, Pulah next, and then  
Daksha, Vivasvat praised of men:  
Aríshtanemi next, and last  
Kas'yap in glory unsurpassed.  
From Daksha,--fame the tale has told--  
Three-score bright daughters sprang of old.  
Of these fair-waisted nymphs the great  
Lord Kas'yap sought and wedded eight,  
Aditi, Diti, Kálaká,  
Támrá, Danú, and Analá,  
And Krodhavasá swift to ire,  
And Manu  <span id="fr_443"></span>[1b](#fn_443.md) glorious as her sire.  
Then when the mighty Kas'yap cried  
Delighted to each tender bride:  
'Sons shalt thou bear, to rule the three  
Great worlds, in might resembling me,'  

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>  

Aditi, Diti, and Danú  
Obeyed his will as consorts true,  
And Kálaká; but all the rest  
Refused to hear their lord's behest.  
First Aditi conceived, and she,  
Mother of thirty Gods and three,  
The Vasus and A'dityas bare,  
Kudras, and A'svins, heavenly pair.  
Of Diti sprang the Daityas: fame  
Delights to laud their ancient name.  
In days of yore their empire dread  
O'er earth and woods and ocean spread.  
Danú was mother of a child,  
O hero, As'vagríva styled,  
And Narak next and Kálak came  
Of Kálaká, celestial dame.  
Of Támrá, too, five daughters bright  
In deathless glory sprang to light.  
Ennobling fame still keeps alive  
The titles of the lovely five:  
Immortal honour still she claims  
For Kraunchí, Bhasí, S'yení's names.  
And wills not that the world forget  
S'ukí or Dhritaráshtrí yet.  
Then Kraunchí bare the crane and owl,  
And Bhásí tribes of water fowl:  
Vultures and hawks that race through air  
With storm-fleet pinions S'yení bare.  
All swans and geese on mere and brook  
Their birth from Dhritaráshtrí took,  
And all the river-haunting brood  
Of ducks, a countless multitude.  
From S'ukí Nalá sprang, who bare  
Dame Vinatá surpassing fair.  
From fiery Krodhavas'á, ten  
Bright daughters sprang, O King of men:  
Mrigí and Mrigamadá named,  
Hari and Bhadiamadá famed,  
S'árdúlí, S'vetá fair to see,  
Mátangi bright, and Surabhi,  
Surasá marked with each fair sign,  
And Kadrumá, all maids divine.  
Mrigí, O prince without a peer,  
Was mother of the herds of deer,  
The bear, the yak, the mountain roe  
Their birth to Mrigamandá owe;  
And Bhadramadá joyed to be  
Mother of fair Irávatí,  
Who bare Airávat,  <span id="fr_444"></span>[1](#fn_444.md) huge of
mould,  
Mid warders of the earth enrolled,  
From Harí lordly lions trace,  
With monkeys of the wild, their race.  
From the great dame S'árdúlí styled  
Sprung pards, Lángúrs, <span id="fr_445"></span>[2](#fn_445.md) and tigers
wild.  
Mátangi, Prince, gave birth to all  
Mátangas, elephants strong and tall,  

And S'vet'a bore the beasts who stand  
One at each wind, earth's warder band.  <span
id="fr_446"></span>[1b](#fn_446.md)  
Next Surabhí the Goddess bore  
Two heavenly maids, O Prince, of yore,  
Gandharvi--dear \*as fa??\* is she--  
And her sweet sister Rohiní.  
With kine this daughter filled each mead,  
And bright Gandharví bore the steed.  <span
id="fr_447"></span>[2b](#fn_447.md)  
Surasá bore the serpents:  <span id="fr_448"></span>[3b](#fn_448.md) all  
The snakes Kadrú their mother call.  
Then Manu, high-souled Kas'yap's  <span id="fr_449"></span>[4b](#fn_449.md)
wife,  
To all the race of men gave life,  
The Bráhmans first, the Kshatriya caste,  
Then Vais'yas, and the S'údras last.  
Sprang from her mouth the Brahman race;  
Her chest the Kshatriyas' natal place:  
The Vais'yas from her thighs,'tis said,  
The S'údras from her feet were bred.  
From Analá all trees that hang  
Their fair fruit-laden branches sprang.  
The child of beauteous S'ukí bore  
Vinatá, as I taught before:  
And Surasá and Kadrú were  
Born of one dame, a noble pair.  
Kadrú gave birth to countless snakes  
That roam the earth in woods and brakes.  
Arun and Garud swift of flight  
By V'inatá were given to light,  
And sons' of Arun red as morn  
Sampati first, then I was born,  
Me then, O tamer of the toe,  
Jutáyus, son of S'yení, know.  
Thy ready helper will I be,  
And guard thy house, if thou agree:  
When thou and Lakshman urge the chase  
By Sítá's side shall be my place.'  
   With courteous thanks for promised aid,  
     The prince, to rapture stirred,  
   Bent low, and due obeisance paid,  
     Embraced the royal bird.  

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>  

He often in the days gone by  
   Had heard his father tell  
How, linked with him in friendship's tie,  
   He loved Jatáyus well.  
He hastened to his trusted friend  
   His darling to confide,  
And through the wood his steps to bend  
   By strong Jatáyus' side.  
On to the grove, with Lakshman near,  
   The prince his way pursued  
To free those pleasant shades from fear  
   And slay the giant brood.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_442"></span>[245:1](ry211.htm#fr_442.md) The Madhúka, or, as
it is now called, Mahuwá, is the Bassia latifolia, a tree from whose
blossoms a spirit is extracted.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[245:1b](ry212.htm#fr_443.md) 'I should have
doubted whether Manu could have been the right reading here, but that it
occurs again in verse 29, where it is in like manner followed in verse
31 by Analá, so that it would certainly seem that the name Manu is
intended to stand for a female, the daughter of Daksha. The Gauda
recension, followed by Signor Gorresio (III 20, 12), adopts an entirely
different reading at the end of the line, viz. *Balám Atibalám api*,
"Balá and Atibilá," instead of Manu and Analá. I see that Professor Roth
s.v. adduces the authority of the Amara Kosha and of the Commentator on
Pánini for stating that the word sometimes means "the wife of Manu." In
the following text of the Mahábhárata I. 2553. also, Manu appears to be
the name of a female: *Anaradyam, Manum, Vansám, Asurám, Márganapriyám,
Anúpám, Subhagdm, Bhásím iti Prádhá vyajayata*. "Prádhá (daughter of
Daksha) bore Anavadyá, Manu, Vans'á, Márganaprivá, Anúpá, Subhagá. and
Bhásí."' *Muir's Sanskrit Text*, Vol. I. p. 116.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[246:1](ry212.htm#fr_444.md) The elephant of
Indra.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[246:2](ry212.htm#fr_445.md) *Golingúlas*,
described as a kind of monkey, of a black colour, and having a tail like
a cow.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[246:1b](ry212.htm#fr_446.md) Eight elephants
attached to the four quarters and intermediate points of the compass, to
support and guard the earth.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[246:2b](ry212.htm#fr_447.md) Some scholars
identify the centaurs with the Gandharvas.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[246:3b](ry212.htm#fr_448.md) The hooded serpents,
says the commentator Tírtha, were the offspring of Surasá: all others of
Kadrú.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[246:4b](ry212.htm#fr_449.md) The text reads
Kás'yapa, "a descendant of Kas'yapa," who according to Rám. II. l0, 6,
ought to be Vivasvat. But as it is stated in the preceding part of this
passage III. 14, 11 f. that Manu was one of Kasyapa's eight wives, we
must here read Kasyapa. The Ganda recension reads (III, 20, 30) *Manur
manushyams cha tutha janayámása Raghana\*\**, instead of the
corresponding line in the Bombay edition.' *Muir's Sanskrit Text, Vol I,
p. 117.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XV.: Panchavatt.](ry213.md)
