[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry217)  [Next](ry219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XX.: THE GIANTS' DEATH.

Fierce S'úrpanakhá with her train  
To Ráma's dwelling came again,  
And to the eager giants showed  
Where Sítá and the youths abode.  
Within the leafy cot they spied  
The hero by his consort's side,  
And faithful Lakshman ready still  
To wait upon his brother's will.  

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>  

Then noble Ráma raised his eye  
And saw the giants standing nigh,  
And then, as nearer still they pressed.  
His glorious brother thus addressed,  
'Be thine a while, my brother dear,  
To watch o'er Sítá's safety here,  
And I will slay these creatures who  
The footsteps of my spouse pursue.'  
   He spoke, and reverent Lakshman heard  
Submissive to his brother's word.  
The son of Raghu, virtuous-souled,  
Strung his great bow adorned with gold,  
And, with the weapon in his hand,  
Addressed him to the giant band:  
'Ráma and Lakshman we, who spring  
From Das'aratha, mighty King;  
We dwell a while with Sítá here  
In Dandak forest wild and drear.  
On woodland roots and fruit we feed,  
Aud lives of strictest rule we lead.  
Say why would ye our lives oppress  
Who sojourn in the wilderness.  
Sent hither by the hermits' prayer  
With bow and darts unused to spare,  
For vengeance am I come to slay  
Your sinful band in battle fray.  
Rest as ye are: remain content,  
Nor try the battle's dire event.  
Unless your offered lives ye spurn,  
O rovers of the night, return.'  
   They listened while the hero spoke,  
Aud fury in each breast awoke.  
The Bráhman-slayers raised on high  
Their mighty spears and made reply:  
They spoke with eyes aglow with ire,  
While Ráma's burnt with vengeful tire,  
Aud answered thus, in fury wild,  
That peerless chief whose tones were mild:  
   'Nay thou hast angered, overbold,  
Khara our lord, the mighty-souled,  
And for thy sin, in battle strife  
Shalt yield to us thy forfeit life.  
No power hast thou alone to stand  
Against the numbers of our band.  
'Twere vain to match thy single might  
Against us in the front of fight.  
When we equipped for fight advance  
With brandished pike and mace and lance,  
Thou, vanquished in the desperate field,  
Thy bow, thy strength, thy life shalt yield.'  
   With bitter words and threatening mien  
Thus furious spoke the fierce fourteen,  
And raising scymitar and spear  
On Ráma rushed in wild career.  
Their levelled spears the giant crew  
Against the matchless hero threw.  
His bow the son of Raghu bent,  
And twice seven shafts to meet them sent,  
And every javelin sundered fell  
By the bright darts he aimed so well.  
   The hero saw: his anger grew  
To fury: from his side he drew  
Fresh sunbright arrows pointed keen,  
In number, like his foes, fourteen.  
His bow he grasped, the string he drew,  
And gazing on the giant crew,  
As Indra casts the levin, so  
Shot forth his arrrows at the foe.  
The hurtling arrows, stained with gore,  
Through the fiends' breasts a passage tore,  
And in the earth lay buried deep  
As serpents through an ant-hill creep  
Like trees uptorn by stormy blast  
The shattered fiends to earth were cast,  
And there with mangled bodies they,  
Bathed in their blood and breathless, lay.  
   With fainting heart and furious eye  
The demon saw her champions die.  
With drying wounds that scarcely bled  
Back to her brother's home she fled.  
Oppressed with pain, with loud lament  
At Khara's feet the monster bent.  
There like a plant whence slowly come  
The trickling drops of oozy gum,  
With her grim features pale with pain  
She poured her tears in ceaseless rain,  
There routed S'úrpanakhá lay,  
   And told her brother all,  
The issue of the bloody fray,  
   Her giant champions' fall.  

        \* \* \* \* \*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_460"></span>[252:1b](ry217.htm#fr_460) Chitraratha, King of
the Gandharvas.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[252:2b](ry217.htm#fr_461) Titanic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXI.: The Rousing of Khara.](ry219)
