[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry224)  [Next](ry226.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXVII.: THE DEATH OF TRIS'IRAS.

But Tris'iras, <span id="fr_472"></span>[2](#fn_472.md) a chieftain
dread,  
Marked Khara as he onward sped.  
And met his car and cried, to stay  
The giant from the purposed fray:  
'Mine be the charge: let me attack,  
And turn thee from the contest back.  
Let me go forth, and thou shalt see  
The strong-armed Ráma slain by me.  
True are the words I speak, my lord:  
I swear it as I touch my sword:  
That I this Ráma's blood will spill,  
Whom every giant's hand should kill.  
This Ráma will I slay, or he  
In battle fray shall conquer me.  
Restrain thy spirit: check thy car,  
And view tne combat from afar.  
Thou, joying o'er the prostrate foe,  
To Janasthán again shalt go,  
Or, if I fall in battle's chance,  
Against my conqueror advance.'  
   Thus Tris'iras for death who yearned:  
And Khara from the conflict turned,  
'Go forth to battle,' Khara cried;  
And toward his foe the giant hied.  
Borne on a car of glittering hue  
Which harnessed coursers fleetly drew,  
Like some huge hill with triple peak  
He onward rushed the prince to seek,  

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>  

Still, like a big cloud, sending out  
His arrowy rain with many a shout  
Like the deep sullen roars that come  
Discordant from a moistened drum.  
But Raghu's son, whose watchful eye  
Beheld the demon rushing nigh,  
From the great bow he raised and bent  
A shower of shafts to meet him sent.  
Wild grew the fight and wilder yet  
As fiend and man in combat met,  
As when in some dark wood's retreat  
An elephant and a lion meet.  
   The giant bent his bow, and true  
To Ráma's brow three arrows flew.  
Then, raging as he felt the stroke,  
These words in anger Ráma spoke:  
'Heroic chief! is such the power  
Of fiends who rove at midnight hour?  
Soft as the touch of flowers I feel  
The gentle blows thine arrows deal.  
Receive in turn my shafts, and know  
What arrows fly from Ráma's bow.'  
Thus as he spoke his wrath grew hot.  
And twice seven deadly shafts he shot,  
Which, dire as serpent's deadly fang,  
Straight to the giant's bosom sprang.  
Four arrows more,--each shaped to deal  
A mortal wound with barbèd steel,--  
The glorious hero shot, and slew  
The four good steeds the car that drew.  
Eight other shafts flew straight and fleet,  
And hurled the driver from his seat,  
And in the dust the banner laid  
That proudly o'er the chariot played.  
Then as the fiend prepared to bound  
Forth from his useless car to ground,  
The hero smote him to the heart,  
And numbed his arm with deadly smart.  
Again the chieftain, peerless-souled,  
Seat forth three rapid darts, and rolled  
With each keen arrow, deftly sped,  
Low in the dust a monstrous head.  
Then yielding to each deadly stroke,  
Forth spouting streams of blood and smoke,  
The headless trunk bedrenched with gore  
Fell to the ground and moved no more.  
The fiends who yet were left with life,  
Routed and crushed in battle strife,  
To Khara's side, like trembling deer  
Scared by the hunter, fled in fear.  
King Khara saw with furious eye  
His scattered giants turn and fly;  
Then rallying his broken train  
At Raghu's son he drove amain,  
Like Ráhu  <span id="fr_473"></span>[1](#fn_473.md) when his deadly might  
Comes rushing on the Lord of Night.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_471"></span>[260:1](ry224.htm#fr_471.md) Tris'iras.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[260:2](ry225.htm#fr_472.md) The Three-headed.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[261:1](ry225.htm#fr_473.md) The demon who causes
eclipses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXVIII.: Khara Dismounted.](ry226.md)
