[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry277)  [Next](ry279.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO IV: LAKSHMAN'S REPLY.

Cheered by the words that Ráma spoke,  
Joy in the Vánar's breast awoke,  
And, as his friendly mood he knew,  
His thoughts to King Sugriva flew:  
' Again,' he mused,'my high-sou'ed lord  
Shall rule, to kingly state restored;  
Since one so mighty comes to save,  
And freely gives the help we crave."  
Then joyous Hanumán, the best  
Of all the Vánar kind, addressed  
These words to Ráma, trained of yore  
In all the arts of speakers' lore:  <span
id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_550.md)  
'Why do your feet this forest tread  
By silvan life inhabited,  
This awful maze of tree and thorn  
Which Pampá's flowering groves adorn?  
   He spoke: obedient to the eye  
Of Ráma Lakshman made reply,  
The name and fortune to unfold  
Of Raghu's son the lofty-souled:  
'True to the law, of fame unstained,  
The glorious Das'aratha reigned.  
And, steadfast in his duty, long  
Kept the four castes  <span id="fr_551"></span>[2](#fn_551.md)from scathe
and wrong.  
Through his wide realm his will was done,  
And, loved by all, he hated none.  
Just to each creature great and small,  
Like the Good Sire he cared for all.  
The Agnishtom, <span id="fr_552"></span>[3](#fn_552.md) as priests
advised,  

And various rites he solemnized.  
Where ample largess ever paid  
The Brahmans for their holy aid.  
Here Ráma stands, his heir by birth,  
Whose name is glorious in the earth:  
Sure refuge he of all oppressed,  
Most faithful to his sire's behest.  
He, Das'aratha's eldest born  
Whom gifts above the rest adorn,  
Lord of each high imperial sign,  <span
id="fr_553"></span>[1b](#fn_553.md)  
The glory of his kingly line,  
Reft of his right, expelled from home,  
Came forth with me the woods to roam,  
And Sitá too, his faithful dame,  
Forth with her virtuous husband came,  
Like the sweet light when day is done  
Still cleaving to her lord the sun.  
And me his sweet perfections drew  
To follow as his servant true.  
Named Lakshman, brother of my lord  
Of grateful heart with knowledge stored  
Most meet is he all bliss to share,  
Who makes the good of all his care.  
While, power and lordship caat away,  
In the wild wood he chose to stay,  
A giant came,--his name unknown,--  
And stole the princess left alone.  
Then Dití's son  <span id="fr_554"></span>[2b](#fn_554.md) who, cursed of
yore.  
The semblance of a Rakshas wore,  
To King Sugríva bade us turn  
The robber's name and home to learn.  
For he, the Vánar chief, would know  
The dwelling of our secret foe.  
Such words of hope spake Dití's son,  
And sought the heaven his deeds had won.  
Thou hast my tale. From first to last  
Thine ears have heard whate'er has past.  
Rama the mighty lord and I  
For refuge to Sugríva fly.  
The prince whose arm bright glory gained.  
O'er the whole earth as monarch reigned,  
And richest gifts to others gave,  
Is come Sugríva's help to crave;  
Son of a king the surest friend  
Of virtue, him who loved to lend  
His succour to the suffering weak,  
Is come Sugríva's aid to seek.  
Yes, Raghu's son whose matchless hand  
Protected all this sea-girt land,  
The virtuous prince, my holy guide,  
For refuge seeks Sugríva's side.  
His favour sent on great and small  
Should ever save and prosper all.  
He now to win Sugríva's grace  
Has sought his woodland dwelling-place.  

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>  

Son of a king of glorious fame;--  
Who knows not Das'aratha's name?--  
From whom all princes of the earth  
Received each honour due to worth;--  
Heir of that best of earthly kings,  
Ráma the prince whose glory rings  
Through realms below and earth and skies,  
For refuge to Sugríva flies.  
Nor should the Vánar king refuse  
The boon for which the suppliant sues,  
But with his forest legions speed  
To save him in his utmost need.  
   Sumitrá's son, his eyes bedewed  
With piteous tears, thus sighed and sued.  
Then, trained in all the arts that guide  
The speaker, Hanumán replied:  
   'Yea, lords like you of wisest thought,  
Whom happy fate has hither brought,  
Who vanquish ire and rule each sense,  
Must of our lord have audience.  
Reft of his kingdom, sad, forlorn,  
Once Báli's hate now Báli's scorn,  
Defeated, severed from his spouse,  
Wandering under forest boughs,  
Child of the Sun, our lord and king  
Sugríva will his succours bring,  
And all our Vánar hosts combined  
Will trace the dame you long to find.'  
   With gentle tone and winning grace  
Thus spake the chief of Vánar race,  
And then to Raghu's son he cried:  
'Come, haste we to Sugrivá's side.'  
   He spoke, and for his words so sweet  
Good Lakshman' paid all honour meet;  
Then turned and cried to Raghu's son:  
'Now deem thy task already done,  
Because this chief of Vánar kind,  
Son of the God who rules the wind,  
Declares Sugríva's self would be  
Assisted in his need by thee.  
Bright gleams of joy his cheek o'erspread  
As each glad word of hope he said;  
And ne'er will one so valiant deign  
To cheer our hearts with hope in vain.'  
   He spoke, and Hanúmán the wise  
Cast off his mendicant disguise,  
And took again his Vánar form,  
Son of the God of wind and storm.  
High on his ample back in haste  
Baghu's heroic sons he placed.  
And turned with rapid steps to find  
The sovereign of the Vánar kind.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_550"></span>[327:1](ry278.htm#fr_550.md) "In our own metrical
romances, or wherever a poem is meant not for readers but for chanters
and oral reciters, these *formulae*, to meet the same recurring case,
exist by scores. Thus every woman in these metrical romances who happens
to be young, is described as "so bright of ble," or complexion; always a
man goes "the mountenance of a mule" before he overtakes or is
overtaken. And so on through. a vast bead-roll of cases. In the same
spirit Homer has his eternal δ᾽αῤ ὑποδρα ιδων, or τον δ᾽απαμειβομενος
προσεφη, &c.

To a reader of sensibility, such recurrences wear an air of child-like
simplicity, beautifully recalling the features of Homer's primitive age.
But they would have appeared faults to all commonplace critics in
literary ages."

DE QUINCEY. *Homer and the Homeridæ*.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[327:2](ry278.htm#fr_551.md) Brahmans the
sacerdotal caste. Kshatriyas the royal and military, Vaisyas the
mercantile, and Sudras the servile.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[327:3](ry278.htm#fr_552.md) A protracted
sacrifice extending over several days. See Book I. p, 21 Note.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[327:1b](ry278.htm#fr_553.md) Possessed of all the
auspicious personal marks that indicate capacity of universal
sovereignty. See Book I. p. 2, and, Note 3.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[327:2b](ry278.htm#fr_554.md) Kabandha. See Book
III. Canto LXXlII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto V.: The League.](ry279.md)
