[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry278)  [Next](ry280.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO V.: THE LEAGUE.

From Rishyamáka's rugged side  
To Malaya's hills the Vánar hied  

And to his royal chieftain there  
Announced the coming of the pair:  
'See here with Lakshman' Ráma stands  
Illustrious in a hundred lands.  
Whose valiant heart will never quail  
Although a thousand foes assail;  
King Das'aratha's son, the grace  
And glory of Ikshváku's race.  
Obedient to his father's will  
He cleaves to sacred duty still.  
With rites of royal pomp and pride  
His sire the Fire-God gratified;  
Ten hundred thousand kine he freed,  
And priests enriched with ample meed;  
And the broad land protected, famed  
For truthful lips and passions tamed.  
Through woman's guile his son has made  
His dwelling in the forest shade,  
Where, as he lived with every sense  
Subdued in hermit abstinence,  
Fierce Rávan' stole his wife, and he  
Is come a suppliant, lord, to thee.  
Now let all honour due be paid  
To these great chiefs who seek thine aid.'  
   Thus spake the Vánar prince, and, stirred  
With friendly thoughts, Sugríva heard.  
The light of joy his face o'erspread,  
And thus to Raghu's son he said:  
'O Prince, in rules of duty trained,  
Caring for all with love unfeigned,  
Hanúmán's tongue has truly shown  
The virtues that are thine alone.  
My chiefest glory, gain, and bliss,  
O stranger Prince, I reckon this,  
That Raghu's son will condescend  
To seek the Vánar for his friend.  
If thou my true ally wouldst be  
Accept the pledge I offer thee,  
This hand in sign of friendship take,  
And bind the bond we ne'er will break.'  
   He spoke, and joy thrilled Ráma's breast;  
Sugríva's hand he seized and pressed  
And, transport beaming from his eye,  
Held to his heart his new ally.  
In wanderer's weed disguised no more,  
His proper form Hanúmán wore.  
Then, wood with wood engendering, <span id="fr_555"></span>[1](#fn_555.md)
came  
Neath his deft hands the kindled flame.  
Between the chiefs that fire he placed  

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>  

With wreaths of flowers and worship graced.  
And round its blazing glory went  
The friends with slow steps reverent.  
   Thus each to other pledged and bound  
In solemn league new transport found.  
And bent upon his dear ally  
The gaze he ne'er could satisfy.  
'Friend of my soul art thou: we share  
Each other's joy, each other's care;'  
To us the bliss that thrilled his breast  
Sugriva Raghu's son addressed.  
From a high Sál a branch he tore  
Which many a leaf and blossom bore,  
And the fine twigs beneath them laid  
A seat for him and Ráma made.  
Then Hanumán with joyous mind,  
Son of the God who rules the wind,  
To Lakshman gave, his seat to be,  
The gay branch of a Sandal tree.  
Then King Sugriva with his eyes  
Still trembling with the sweet surprise  
Of the great joy he could not hide,  
To Raghu's noblest scion cried:  
'O Ráma, racked with woe and fear,  
Spurned by my foes, I wander here.  
Reft of my spouse, forlorn I dwell  
Here in my forest citadel.  
Or wild with terror and distress  
Roam through the distant wilderness.  
Vext by my brother Báli long  
My soul has borne the scathe and wrong.  
Do thou, whose virtues all revere,  
Release me from my woe and fear.  
From dire distress tby friend to free  
Is a high task and worthy thee.'  
   He spoke, and Raghu's son who knew  
All sacred duties men should do.  
The friend of justice, void of guile,  
Thus answered with a gentle smile:  
'Great Vánar, friends who seek my aid  
Still find their trust with fruit repaid.  
Báli, thy foe, who stole away  
Thy wife this vengeful hand shall slay.  
These shafts which sunlike flash and burn,  
Winged with the feathers of the \*ern,  
Each swift of flight and sure and dread,  
With even knot and pointed head,  
Fierce as the crashing fire-bolt sent  
By him who rules the firmament, <span id="fr_556"></span>[1](#fn_556.md)  
Shall reach thy wicked foe and like  

Infuriate serpents hiss and strike.  
Thou, Vánar King, this day shalt see  
The foe who long has injured thee  
Lie, like a shattered mountain, low,  
Slain by the tempest of my bow.'  
   Thus Ráma spake: Sugriva heard,  
And mighty joy his bosom stirred:  
As thus his champion he addressed:  
'Now by thy favour, first and best  
Of heroes, shall thy friend obtain  
His realm and darling wife again  
   Recovered from the foe.  
Check thou mine elder brother's might;  
That ne'er again his deadly spite  
May rob me of mine ancient right,  
   Or vex my soul with woe.'  
The league was struck, a league to bring  
To Sítá fiends, and Vánar king  <span
id="fr_557"></span>[1b](ry280.htm#fn_557.md)  
   Apportioned bliss and bale.  
Through her left eye quick throbbings shot, <span
id="fr_558"></span>[2b](ry280.htm#fn_558.md)  
Glad signs the lady doubted not,  
   That told their hopeful tale.  
The bright left eye of Báli felt  
An inauspicious throb that dealt  
   A deadly blow that day.  
The fiery left eyes of the crew  
Of demons felt the throb, and knew  
   The herald of dismay.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_555"></span>[328:1](ry279.htm#fr_555.md) Fire for sacred
purposes is produced by the attrition of two pieces of wood. In marriage
and other solemn covenants fire is regarded as the holy witness in whose
presence the agreement is made. Spenser in a description of a marriage,
has borrowed from them the Roman rite what he (*illegible*) sacrificial
fire: <span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

  

"His owne two hands the holy knots did knit  
That none but death forever can divide.  
His owne two hands, for such a turn most fit,  
The \*ing fire did kindle and provide.'  
   Faery Queen, Book 1 XII. 37  

<span id="fn_556"></span>[329:1](ry279.htm#fr_556.md) Indra

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VI.: The Tokens.](ry280.md)
