[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry295)  [Next](ry297.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXII.: BÁLI DEAD.

There breathing still with slow faint sighs  
Lay Báli on the ground: his eyes,  

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>  

Damp with the tears of death, he raised,  
On conquering Sugríva gazed,  
And then in clearest speech expressed  
The tender feelings of his breast;  
'Not to my charge, Sugríva, lay  
Thine injuries avenged to-day;  
But rather blame resistless Fate  
That urged me on infuriate.  
Fate ne'er agreed our lives to bless  
With simultaneous happiness:  
To dwell like brothers side by side  
In tender love was still denied.  
The Vánars' realm is thine to-day:  
Begin, O King, thy rightful sway;  <span
id="fr_605"></span>[1](#fn_605.md)  
for I must go at Yama's call  
To sojourn in his gloomy hall;  
Must part and leave this very hour  
My life, my realm, my kingly power,  
And go instead of these to gain  
Bright glory free from spot and stain.  
Now at thy hands one boon I seek  
With the last words my lips shall speak,  
And, though it be no easy thing,  
perform the task I give thee, King.  
This son of mine, no foolish boy,  
Worthy of bliss and nursed in joy,--  
See, prostrate on the ground he lies,  
The hot tears welling from his eyes--  
The child I love so well, more sweet  
Than life itself, for woe unmeet,--  
To him be kindly favour shown:  
O guard and keep him as thine own.  
Retain him ever by thy side,  
His father, helper, friend, and guide.  
From fear and woe his young life save,  
And give him all his father gave.  
Then Tárá's son in time shall be  
Brave, resolute, and famed like thee,  
And march before thee to the fight  
Where stricken fiends shall own his might.  
While yet a tender stripling, fame  
Shall bruit abroad his warrior name,  
And brigbtlv shall his glory shine  
For exploits worthy of his line.  
Child of Sushen, <span id="fr_606"></span>[2](#fn_606.md) my Tárá well  
Obscurest lore can read and tell;  
And, trained in wondrous art, divines  
Each mystery of boding signs.  
Her solemn warning ne'er despise,  
Do boldly what her lips advise;  
For things to come her eye can see,  
And with her words events agree.  
And for the son of Raghu's sake  
The toil and danger undertake:  

For breach of faith were grievous wrong,  
Nor wouldst thou be unpunished long.  
Now, brother, take this chain of gold,  
Gift of celestial hands of old,  
Or when I die its charm will flee,  
And all its might be lost with me.'  

The loving speech Sugríva heard.  
And all his heart with woe was stirred.  
Remorse and gentle pity stole  
Each thought of triumph from his soul:  
Thus fades the light when Ráhu <span id="fr_607"></span>[1b](#fn_607.md)
mars  
The glory of the Lord of Stars. <span id="fr_608"></span>[2b](#fn_608.md)  
All angry thoughts were staved and stilled  
And kindly love his bosom filled.  
His brother's word the chief obeyed  
And took the chain as Báli prayed.  
On little Angad standing nigh  
The dying hero fixed his eye,  
And, ready from this world to part,  
Spoke the fond utterance of his heart:  

'Let time and place thy thoughts employ:  
In woe be strong, he meek in joy.  
Accept both pain and pleasure, still  
Obedient to Sugríva's will.  
Thou hast, my darling, from the first  
With tender care been softly nursed;  
But harder days, if thou wouldst win  
Sugríva's love, must now begin.  
To those who hate him ne'er incline,  
Nor count his foe a friend of thine.  
In all thy thoughts his welfare seek,  
Obedient, lowly, faithful, meek.  
Let no rash suit his bosom pain,  
Nor yet from due requsts abstain.  <span
id="fr_609"></span>[3b](#fn_609.md)  
Each is a grievous fault, between  
The two is round the happy mean.'  

Then Báli ceased: his eyeballs rolled  
In stress of anguish uncontrolled  
His massive teeth were bared to view,  
And from the frame the spirit flew.  
Their lord and leader dead, the crowd  
Of noblest Vánars shrieked aloud:  
'Since thou, O King, hast sought the skies  
All desolate Kishkindhá lies.  
Her woods, where Vánars loved to rove,  
Are empty now, and hill and grove.  
From every eye the light is fled,  
Since thou, our mighty lord, art dead.  
Thine was the unwearied arm that bore  
The brunt of deadly fight of yore  
With Golabh the Gandharva, when,  
Lasting through five long years and ten,  

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>  

The dreadful conflict knew no stay  
In gloom of night, in glare of day;  
And when the fifteenth year had past  
Thy dire opponent fell at last.  
If such a foeman fell beneath  
Our hero's arm and awful teeth  
Who freed us from our terror, how  
Is conquering Báli fallen now?'  

Then when they saw their leader slain  
Great anguish seized the Vánar train,  
Weeping their mighty chief, as when  
In pastures near a lion's den  
The cows by sudden fear are stirred,  
Slain the bold bull who led the herd.  
And hapless Tárá sank below  
The whelming waters of her woe,  
Looked upon Báli's face and fell  
Beside him whom she loved go well,  
Like a young creeper clinging round  
A tall tree prostrate on the ground.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_604"></span>[350:1b](ry295.htm#fr_604.md) Sugríva and Angad.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[351:1](ry296.htm#fr_605.md) Angad himself, being
too young to govern, would be Yuvarája or heir- apparent.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[351:2](ry296.htm#fr_606.md) Sushena was the son
of Varuna the God of the sea,

<span id="fn_607"></span>[351:1b](ry296.htm#fr_607.md) A demon with the
tail of a dragon, that causes eclipses by endeavouring to swallow the
sun and moon.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[351:2b](ry296.htm#fr_608.md) The Lord of Stars is
the Moon.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[351:3b](ry296.htm#fr_609.md) Or the passage may
be interpreted: 'Be neither to obsequious or affectionate, nor wanting
in due respect of love.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXIII.: Tárá's Lament.](ry297.md)
