[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry301)  [Next](ry303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXVIII.: THE RAINS.

'See, brother, see' thus Ráma cried  
On Mályavat's  <span id="fr_619"></span>[1](#fn_619) dark-wooded side,  
'A chain of clouds. like lofty hills,  
The sky with gathering shadow fills.  
Nine months those clouds have borne the load  
Conceived from sunbeams as they glowed,  
And, having drunk the seas, give birth,  
And drop their offspring on the earth.  
Easy it seems at such a time  
That flight of cloudy stairs to climb,  
And, from their summit, safely won,  
Hang flowery wreaths about the sun.  
Bee how the flash of evening's red  
Fringes the fleecy clouds o'erhead  
Till all the sky is streaked and lined  
With bleeding wounds incarnadined,  
Or the wide firmament above  
Shows like a lover sick with love  
And, pale with cloudlets, heaves a sigh  
ln the soft breeze that wanders by.  
See, by the fervent heat embrowned,  
How drenched with recent showers, the ground  
Pours out in floods her gushing tears,  
Like Sítá wild with torturing fears.  
So softly blows this cloud-borne breeze  
Cool through the boughs of camphor trees  
That one might hold it in the cup  
Of hollowed hands and drink it up.  
See, brother, where that rocky steep,  
Where odorous shrubs in rain-drops weep,  
Shows like Sugríva when they shed  
Tne royal balm upon his head.  
Like students at their task appear  
These hills whose misty peaks are near:  
Black deerskin  <span id="fr_620"></span>[2](#fn_620) garments wrought
of cloud  
Their forms with fitting mantles shroud,  
Each torrent from the summit poured  
Supplies the place of sacred cord.  <span
id="fr_621"></span>[3](#fn_621)  
And winds that in their caverns moan.  

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>  

Sound like the voice's undertone.  <span
id="fr_622"></span>[1](#fn_622)  
From east to west red lightnings flash,  
And, quivering neath the golden lash,  
The great sky like a generous steed  
Groans inly at each call to speed  
Yon lightning, as it flashes through  
The giant cloud of sable hue,  
Recalls my votaress Sítá pressed  
Mid struggles to the demon's breast.  
See, on those mountain ridges stand  
Sweet shrubs that bud and bloom expand.  
The soft ram ends their pangs of grief.  
And drops its pearls on flower and leaf.  
But all their raptures stab me through  
And wake my pining love anew.  <span id="fr_623"></span>[2](#fn_623)  
Now through the air no wild bird flies,  
Each lily shuts her weary eyes;  
And blooms of opening jasmin show  
The parting sun has ceased to glow  
No captain now for conquest burns,  
But homeward with his host returns;  
For roads and kings' ambitious dreams  
Have vanished neath descending streams.  
This is the watery month <span id="fr_624"></span>[3](#fn_624) wherein  
The Sáman's  <span id="fr_625"></span>[4](#fn_625) sacred chants
begin.  
Áshádha  <span id="fr_626"></span>[5](#fn_626) past, now Kosal's lord
 <span id="fr_627"></span>[6](#fn_627)  
The harvest of the spring has stored,  <span
id="fr_628"></span>[7](#fn_628)  
And dwells within his palace freed  

From every care of pressing need  
Full is the moon, and fierce and strong  
Impetuous Sarjú  <span id="fr_629"></span>[1b](ry303.htm#fn_629) roars
along  
As though Ayodhyá's crowds ran out  
To greet their king with echoing shout.  
In this sweet time of ease and rest  
No care disturbs Sugríva's breast,  
The foe that marred his peace o'erthrown,  
And queen and realm once more his own.  
Alas, a harder fate is mine,  
Reft both of realm and queen to pine,  
And, like the bank which floods erode,  
I sink beneath my sorrow's load.  
Sore on my soul my miseries weigh,  
And these long rains our action stay,  
While Rávan seems a mightier foe  
Than I dare hope to overthrow.  
I saw the roads were barred by rain,  
I knew the hopes of war were vain;  
Nor could I bid Sugríva rise,  
Though prompt to aid my enterprise.  
E'en now I scarce can urge my friend  
On whom his house and realm depend,  
Who, after toil and peril past,  
Is happy with his queen at last.  
Sugríva after rest will know  
The hour is come to strike the blow,  
Nor will his grateful soul forget  
My succour, or deny the debt  
I know his generous heart, and hence  
Await the time with confidence  
When he his friendly zeal will show,  
And brooks again untroubled flow.'  <span
id="fr_630"></span>[2b](ry303.htm#fn_630)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_619"></span>[358:1](ry302.htm#fr_619) Mályavat: "The name
of this mountain appears to me to be erroneous, and I think that instead
o£ Mályavat should be read Malayavat, Malaya is a group of mountains
situated exactly in that southern part of India where Ráma now was.
while Mályavat is placed to the north east." GORRESIO.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[358:2](ry302.htm#fr_620) Mantles of the skin
of the black antelope were the prescribed dress of ascetics and
religious students.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[358:3](ry302.htm#fr_621) The sacred cord worn
as the badge of religious initiation by men of the three twice-born
castes.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[359:1](ry302.htm#fr_622) The hum with which
students con their tasks.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[359:2](ry302.htm#fr_623) I omit here a long
general description of the rainy season which (*is*?) not found in the
Bengal recension and appears to have been interpolated by a far inferior
and much later hand than Valmiki's. It is composed in a metre different
from that of the rest of the Canto, and contains figures of poetical
rhetoric and commonplaces which are the delight of more recent poets.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[359:3](ry302.htm#fr_624) Praushthapada or
Bhadra, the modern \*Bhaden\*, corresponds to half of August and half of
September.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[359:4](ry302.htm#fr_625) The Sáman or
Sáma-veda, the third of the four Vedas, is really merely a reproduction
of parts of the Rig-veda, transposed and scattered about piece-meal,
only 78 verses in the whole being, it is said, untraceable to the
present recension of the Rig-veda.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[359:5](ry302.htm#fr_626) Áshádha is the month
corresponding to parts of June and July.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[359:6](ry302.htm#fr_627) Bharat, who was
regent during Ráma's absence.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[359:7](ry302.htm#fr_628) Or with Goriesio,
following the gloss of another commentary: "Has completed every holy
rite and accumulated stores of merit."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXIX.: Hanumán's Counsel.](ry303)
