[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry310)  [Next](ry312.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXXVII.: THE GATHERING.

He ceased: and King Sugriva cried  
To sage Hanúmán  <span id="fr_644"></span>[1](#fn_644.md) by his side:  
'Summon the Vánar legions, those  
Who dwell about the Lord of Snows:  
Those who in Vindhyan groves delight,  
Kailása's, or Mahendra's height,  
Dwell on the Five bright Peaks, or where  
Mandar's white summit cleaves the air:  

Wherever they are wandring free  
In highlands by the western sea,  
On that east hill whence springs the sun,  
Or where he sinks when day is done.  
Call the great chiefs whose legions till  
The forests of the Lotus Hill,  <span id="fr_645"></span>[1b](#fn_645.md)  
Where every one in strength and size  
With the stupendous Anjan  <span id="fr_646"></span>[2b](#fn_646.md)
vies.  
Call those, with tints ot burnished gold  
Whom Mahás'aila's caverns hold:  
Those who on Dhúnira roam, or hide  
In the wild woods on Meru's side.  
Call those who, brilliant as the sun,  
On high Mahárun leap and run,  
Quaffing sweet juices that distil  
From odorous trees upon the hill,  
Call those whom tranquil haunts delight  
Where dwell the sage and anchorite  
In groves that through their wide extent  
Exhale a thousand blossoms' scent.  
Send out, send out: from coast to coast  
Assemble all the Vánar host:  
With force, with words, with gifts of price  
Compel, admonish and entice.  
Already envoys have been sent  
To warn them of their lord's intent.  
Let others urged by thee repeat  
My mandate that their steps be fleet.  
Those lords who yielding to the sway  
Of love's delight would fain delay,  
Urge hither with the utmost speed,  
Or with thee to my presence lead:  
And those who linger to the last  
Until ten days be come and passed,  
And dare their sovereign to defy.  
For their offence shall surely die.  
Thousands, yea millions, shall there be,  
Obedient to their king's decree,  
The lions of the Vánar race,  
Assembled from each distant place.  
Forth shall they haste like hills in size,  
Or mighty clouds that veil the skies,  
And swiftly speeding on their way  
Bring all our legions in array.'  

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>  

He ceased: the son of Váyu  <span id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_647.md)
heard,  
Submissive to his sovereign's word;  
And sent his rapid envoys forth  
To east and west and south and north.  
They bent their airy course afar  
Along the paths of bird and star,  
And sped through ether farther yet  
Where Vishnu's splendid sphere is set. <span
id="fr_648"></span>[2](#fn_648.md)  
By sea, on hill, by wood and lake  
They called to arms for Ráma's sake,  
As each with terror in his breast  
Obeyed his awful king's behest.  
Three million Vánars, fierce and strong  
As Anjan's self, a wondrous throng.  
Sped from the spot where Ráma still  
Gazed restless from the woody hill.  
Ten million others, brave and bold,  
With coats that shone like burning gold,  
Came flying from the mountain crest  
Where sinks the weary sun to rest.  
Impetuous from the northern skies,  
Wnere Mount Kailása's summits rise,  
Ten hundred millions hasted, hued  
Like manes of lions, ne'er subdued:  
The dwellers on Himálaya's side,  
Whose food his roots and fruit supplied,  
With rangers of the Vindhyan chain  
And neighbours of the Milky Main.  <span
id="fr_649"></span>[3](#fn_649.md)  
Some from the palm groves where they fed,  
Some from the woods of betel sped:  
In countless numbers, fierce and brave,  
They came from mountain, lake, and cave.  
   As on their way the Vánars went  
To rouse each distant armament,  
They chanced that wondrous tree to view  
That on Himálaya's summit grew.  
Of old upon that sacred height  
Was wrought Mahes'var's  <span id="fr_650"></span>[4](#fn_650.md) glorious
rite,  
Which every God in heaven beheld,  
And his glad heart with triumph swelled.  
There from pure seed at random sown  
Bright plants with luscious fruit had grown,  
And, sweet as Amrit to the taste,  
The summit of the mountain graced.  
Who once should eat the virtuous fruit  
That sprang from so divine a root,  
One whole revolving moon should be  
From every pang of hunger free.  

The Vánars culled the fruit they found  
Ripe on the sacrificial ground  
With rare celestial odours sweet,  
To lay them at Sugríva's feet.  
Those noble envoys scoured the land  
To summon every Vánar band  
Then swiftly homeward at the head  
Of countless armaments they sped.  
They gathered by Kishkindhá's wall.  
They thronged Sugríva's palace hall,  
And, richly laden, bare within  
That fruit of heavenly origin.  
Their gifts before their king they spread,  
And thus in tones of triumph said:  
'Through every land our way we took  
To visit hill and wood and brook,  
And all thy hosts from east to west  
Flock hither at their lord's behest.'  
Sugríva with delighted look  
The present of his envoys took.  
Then bade them go, with gracious speech  
Rewarding and dismissing each.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_644"></span>[368:1](ry311.htm#fr_644.md) Válmíki and
succeeding poets make the second vowel in this name long or Short at
their pleasure.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[368:1b](ry311.htm#fr_645.md) Some of the
mountains here mentioned are fabulous and others it is impossible to
identify. Sugríva means to include all the mountains of India from
Kailás the residence of the God Kuvera, regarded as one of the loftiest
peaks of the Himálayas, to Mabendra in the extreme south, from the
mountain in the east where the sun is said to rise to Astáchal or the
western mountain where he sets. The commentators give little assistance:
that Mahás'aila, &c. are certain mountains is about all the information
they give.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[368:2b](ry311.htm#fr_646.md) One of the celestial
elephants of the Gods who protect the four quarters and intermediate
points of the compass.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[369:1](ry311.htm#fr_647.md) Va'yu or the Wind was
the father of Hanumán.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[369:2](ry311.htm#fr_648.md) The path or station
of Vishnu is the space between the seven Risbis or Ursa Major, and
Dhruva or the polar star.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[369:3](ry311.htm#fr_649.md) One of the seven seas
which surround the earth in concentric circles.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[369:4](ry311.htm#fr_650.md) The title of
Mahes'var \* or Mighty Lord is sometimes given to Indra, but more
generally to S'iva whom it here denotes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXXVIII.: Sugríva's Departure.](ry312.md)
