[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry313)  [Next](ry315.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XL.: THE ARMY OF THE EAST.

With practiced eye the king reviewed  
The Vánars' counties multitude,  
And, joying that his hest was done,  
Thus spake to Raghu's mighty son:  
'See, all the Vánar hosts who fear  
My sovereign might are gathered here.  
Chiefs strong as Indra's self, who speed  
Wher'er they list, these armies lead.  
Fierce and terrific to the view  
As Daityas or the Dánav <span id="fr_661"></span>[2b](#fn_661.md) crew,  

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>  

Famed in all lands for souls afire  
With lofty thoughts, they never tire,  
O'er hill and vale they wander free,  
And islets of the distant sea.  
And these gathered myriads, all  
Will serve thee, Ráma, at thy call.  
Whate'er thy heart advises, say:  
Thy mandates will the host obey.'  
   Then answered Ráma, as he pressed  
The Vánar monarch to his breast:  
'O search for my lost Sítá, strive  
To find her if she still survive:  
And in thy wondrous wisdom trace  
Fierce Rávan to his dwelling-place.  
And when by toil and search we know  
Where Sítá lies and where the foe,  
With thee, dear friend, will I devise  
Fit means to end the enterprise.  
Not mine, not Lakshman's is the power  
To guide us in the doubtful hour.  
Thou, sovereign of the \*Vanars, thou  
Must be our hope and leader now.'  
   He ceased: at King Sugríva's call  
Near came a Vánar strong and tall.  
Huge as a towering mountain, loud  
As some tremendous thunder cloud,  
A prince who warlike legions led:  
To him his sovereign turned and said:  
'Go, take ten thousand  <span id="fr_662"></span>[1](#fn_662.md) of our
race  
Well trained in lore of time and place,  
And search the eastern region; through  
Groves, woods, and hills thy way pursue,  
There seek for Sítá, trace the spot  
Where Rávan hides, and weary not.  
Search for the captive in the caves  
Of mountains, and by woods and waves.  
To Surjú, <span id="fr_663"></span>[2](#fn_663.md) Kauá\*ikí, <span
id="fr_664"></span>[3](#fn_664.md) repair,  
Bhagírath's daughter <span id="fr_665"></span>[4](#fn_665.md) fresh and
fair.  
Search mighty \*Yámun's <span id="fr_666"></span>[5](#fn_666.md) peak,
explore  
Swift Yamu\*ná's <span id="fr_667"></span>[6](#fn_667.md) delightful
shore,  
Sarasvati <span id="fr_668"></span>[7](#fn_668.md) and Sindhu's <span
id="fr_669"></span>[8](#fn_669.md) tide,  

And rapid S'ona's <span id="fr_670"></span>[1b](#fn_670.md) pebbly side.  
Then roam afar by Mahí's <span id="fr_671"></span>[2b](#fn_671.md) bed  
Where Kálamahí's groves are spread.  
Go where the silken tissue shines,  
Go to the land of silver mines. <span id="fr_672"></span>[3b](#fn_672.md)  
Visit each isle and mountain steep  
And city circled by the deep,  
And distant villages that high  
About the peaks of Mandar lie.  
Speed over Yavadwipa's land, <span id="fr_673"></span>[4b](#fn_673.md)  
And see Mount S'is'ir <span id="fr_674"></span>[5b](#fn_674.md) proudly
stand  
Uplifting to the skies his head  
By Gods and Dánavs visited.  
Search each ravine and mountain pass,  
Each tangled thicket deep in grass.  
Search every cave with utmost care  
If haply Ráma's queen be there.  
Then pass beyond the sounding sea  
Where heavenly beings wander free,  
And S'ona's <span id="fr_675"></span>[6b](#fn_675.md) waters swift and
strong  
With ruddy billows foam along.  
Search where his shelving banks descend,  
Search where the hanging woods extend  
Try if the pathless thickets screen  
The robber and the captive queen.  
Search where the torrent floods that rend  
The mountain to the plains descend:  
Search dark abysses where they rave,  
Search mountain slope and wood and cave  
Then on with rapid feet and gain  
The inlands of the fearful main  
Where, tortured by the tempest's lash,  
Against rude rocks the billows d\*ash:  
An ocean like a sable cloud,  
Whose margent monstrous serpents crowd;  

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>  

An ocean rising with a roar  
To beat upon an iron shore.  
On, onward still! your feet shall tread  
Shores of the sea whose waves are red,  
Where spreading wide your eyes shall see  
The guilt-tormenting cotton tree  <span
id="fr_676"></span>[1](#fn_676.md)  
And the wild spot where Garud  <span id="fr_677"></span>[2](#fn_677.md)
dwells  
Which gems adorn and ocean shells,  
High as Kallása, nobly decked,  
Wrought by the heavenly architect.  <span
id="fr_678"></span>[3](#fn_678.md)  
Hnge giants named Mandehas  <span id="fr_679"></span>[4](#fn_679.md)
there  
In each foul shape they love to wear,  
Numbing the soul with terror's chill,  
Hang from the summit of the hill.  
When darts the sun his earliest beam  
They plunge them in the ocean stream,  
New vigour from his rays obtain,  
And hang upon the rocks again  
Speed onward still: your steps shall be  
At length beside the Milky Sea  
Whose everv ripple as it curls  
Gleams glorious with its wealth of pearls.  
Amid that sea like pale clouds spread  
The white Mount Rishabh  <span id="fr_680"></span>[5](#fn_680.md) rears his
head.  
About the mountain's glorious waist  
Woods redolent of bloom are braced.  
A lake where lotuses unfold  
Their silver buds with threads of gold,  
Sudar\*s'an ever bright and fair  
Where white swans sport, lies gleaming there,  
The wandering Kinnar's  <span id="fr_681"></span>[6](#fn_681.md) dear
resort,  
Where heavenly nymphs and Yakshas  <span id="fr_682"></span>[7](#fn_682.md)
sport.  

On! leave the Milky Sea behind:  
Another flood your search shall find,  
A waste of waters, wild and drear.  
That chills each living heart with fear.  
There see the horse's awful head,  
Wrath-born, that flames in Ocean's bed. <span
id="fr_683"></span>[1b](#fn_683.md)  
There rises up a fearful cry  
From the sea things that move thereby,  
When, helpless, powerless for flight,  
They gaze upon the horrid sight.  
Past to the northern shore, and then  
Beyond the flood three leagues and ten  
Your wondering glances will behold  
Mount Játarúpa  <span id="fr_684"></span>[2b](#fn_684.md) bright with
gold.  
There like the young moon pale of hue  
The monstrous serpent  <span id="fr_685"></span>[3b](#fn_685.md) will ye
view,  
The earth's supporter, whose bright eyes  
Resemble lotus leaves in size.  
He rests upon the mountain's brow,  
And all the Gods before him bow.  
Ananta with a thousand heads  
His length in robes of azure spreads.  
A triple-headed palm of gold--  
Meet standard for the lofty-souled--  
Springs towering from the mountain's crest  
Beneath whose shade he loves to rest,  
So that in eastern realms each God  
May use it as a measuring-rod.  
Beyond, with burning gold aglow,  
The eastern steep his peaks will show,  
Which in unrivalled glory rise  
A hundred leagues to pierce the skies,  
And all the neighbouring air is bright  
With golden trees that clothe the height.  
A lofty peak uprises there  
Ten leagues in height and one league square  
\*Saumanas\*, wrought of glistering gold,  
Ne'er to be loosened from its hold.  
There his first step Lord Vishnu placed  
When through the universe he paced,  
And with his second lightly pressed  
The loftiest peak of Meru's crest.  
When north of Jambudwíp  <span id="fr_686"></span>[4b](#fn_686.md) the
sun  

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>  

A portion of his course has run.  
And hangs above this mountain height,  
Then creatures see the genial light.  
Vaikhánases, <span id="fr_687"></span>[1](#fn_687.md) saints far
renowned,  
And Bálaklulvas, <span id="fr_688"></span>[2](#fn_688.md) love the ground  
Where in their glory half divine.  
Touched by the morning glow, they shine  
The light that flashes from that steep  
Illumines all Sudars'andwip, <span id="fr_689"></span>[3](#fn_689.md)  
And on each creature, as it glows,  
The sight and strength of life bestows.  
Search well that mountain's woody side  
If Rávan there his captive hide.  
The rising sun, the golden hill  
The air with growing splendours fill,  
Till flashes from the east the red  
Of morning with the light they shed.  
This, where the sun begins his state,  
Is earth and heaven's most eastern gate.  
Through all the mountain forest seek  
By waterfall and cave and peak.  
Search every nook and bosky dell,  
If Rávan there with Sítá dwell.  
There, Vánars, there your steps must stay:  
No farther eastward can ye stray.  
Beyond no sun, no moon given light,  
But all is sunk in endless night.  
Thus far, O Vánar lords, may you  
O'er sea and land your search pursue.  
But wild and dark and known to none  
Is the drear space beyond the sun.  
That mountain whence the sun ascends  
Your long and weary journey ends. <span
id="fr_690"></span>[4](#fn_690.md)  
Now go, and in a month return,  
And let success my praises earn,  
He who beyond tho month shall stay  
Will with his life the forfeit pay.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span
id="fn_660"></span>[ÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌ1b:1b](ry313.htm#fr_660.md)
Gandhamádana, Angad, Tára, Indrajánu, Rambha, Durmukha, Hanumán, Nala,
Da mukha, S'arabha, Kumuda, Vahni.

<span
id="fn_661"></span>[ÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌÌ2b:2b](ry314.htm#fr_661.md)
Daityas and Dánavas are fiends and enemies of the Gods, life the Titans
of Greek mythology.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[372:1](ry314.htm#fr_662.md) I reduce the unwieldy
numbers of the original to more modest figures.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[372:2](ry314.htm#fr_663.md) Sarayú now Sarjú is
the river on which Ayodhyá was built.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[372:3](ry314.htm#fr_664.md) Kaus'iki is a river
which flows through Behar, commonly called Kosi.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[372:4](ry314.htm#fr_665.md) Bhagirath's daughter
is Ganga or the Ganges. The legend is told at length in Book I. Canto
XLIV *The Descent of Gangá*.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[372:5](ry314.htm#fr_666.md) A mountain not
identified.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[372:6](ry314.htm#fr_667.md) The Jumna. The river
is personified as the twin sister of Yama, and hence regarded as the
daughter of the Sun.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[372:7](ry314.htm#fr_668.md) The Sarasvatí
(corruptly called Sursooty, is supposed to join the Ganges and Jumna at
Prayág or Allahabad. It rises in the mountains bounding the north-east
part of the province of Delhi, and running in a south-westerly direction
becomes lost in the sands of the great desert.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[372:8](ry314.htm#fr_669.md) The Sindhu is the
Indus, the Sanskrit *s* becoming *h* in Persian and being in this
instance dropped by the Greeks.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[372:1b](ry314.htm#fr_670.md) The Sone which rises
in the district of Nagpore and falls into the Ganges above Patna.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[372:2b](ry314.htm#fr_671.md) Mahi\* is a river
rising in Malwa and falling into the gulf of Cambay after a westerly
course of 280 miles.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[372:3b](ry314.htm#fr_672.md) There is nothing to
show what parts of the country the poet intended to denote as
silk-producing and silver-producing.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[372:4b](ry314.htm#fr_673.md) Yavadwipa means the
island of Yava, wherever that may be.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[372:5b](ry314.htm#fr_674.md) S'is'ir is said to
be a mountain ridge projecting from the base of Meru on the south.
WILSON'S *Vishnu Purána*, ed. Hall, Vol. II. p. 117.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[372:6b](ry314.htm#fr_675.md) This appears to be
some mythical stream and not the well-known Sone. The name means
red-coloured.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[373:1](ry314.htm#fr_676.md) A fabulous thorny rod
of the cotton tree used for torturing the wicked in hell. The tree gives
its name, Sálmali, to one of the seven Dwípas, or great divisions of the
known continent: and also to a hell where the wicked are tormented with
the pickles of the tree.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[373:2](ry314.htm#fr_677.md) The king of the
feathered creation.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[373:3](ry314.htm#fr_678.md) Vis´vakarmá, the
Muleiher of the Indian heaven.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[373:4](ry314.htm#fr_679.md) "The terrific fiends
named Mandehas attempt to devour the sun: for Brahmá denounced this
curse upon them, that without the power to perish they should die every
day (and revive by night) and therefore a fierce contest occurs (daily)
between them and the sun."

WILSON'S Vishnu Purána. Vol.II. p. 250.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[373:5](ry314.htm#fr_680.md) Said in the Vishnu
Purána to be a ridge projecting from the base of Meru to the north.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[373:6](ry314.htm#fr_681.md) Kinnars are centaurs
reversed, beings with equine head and human bodies.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[373:7](ry314.htm#fr_682.md) Yakshas are demi-gods
attendant on "Ruyera"\* the God of wealth.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[373:1b](ry314.htm#fr_683.md) Aurva was one of the
descendants of Bhrigu From his wrath proceeded a flame that threatened
to destroy the world, had not Aurva cast it into the ocean where it
remained concealed, and having the face of a horse. The legend is told
in the *Mahábharat*. I. 6\*3\*02.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[373:2b](ry314.htm#fr_684.md) The word Játarupa
means gold.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[373:3b](ry314.htm#fr_685.md) The celebrated
mythological serpent king Sesha, called also Ananta or the infinite,
represented as bearing the earth on one of his thousand heads.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[373:4b](ry314.htm#fr_686.md) Jambudwípa is in the
centre of the seven great *dwípas* or continents into which the world is
divided, and in the centre of Jambudwípa is the golden <span
id="page_374">p. 374</span> mountain Meru 84,000 yojans high, and
crowned by the great city of Brahmá, Sse WILSON'S *Vishnu Purána*, Vol
II, p. 110.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[374:1](ry314.htm#fr_687.md) Vaikhánases are a
race of hermit saints said to have sprung from the nails of Prajápati.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[374:2](ry314.htm#fr_688.md) "The wife of Eratu,
Samnnti, brought forth the sixty thousand Válakhilyas, pigmy sages, no
bigger than a joint of the thumb, chaste, pious, resplendent as the rays
of the Sun" WlLSOK'S *Vishnu Purána*.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[374:3](ry314.htm#fr_689.md) The continent in
which Sudarsan or Meru stands, *i. e.* Jambudwip.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[374:4](ry314.htm#fr_690.md) The names of some
historical peoples which occur in this Canto and in the Cantos
describing the south and north will he found in the ADDITIONAL NOTES.
They are bare lists, not susceptible of a metrical version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLI.: The Army of The South.](ry315.md)
