[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry312)  [Next](ry314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXXIX.: THE VÁNAR HOST.

Then Ráma, best of all who guide  
Their steps by duty, thus replied:  
'What marvel if Lord Indra send  
The kindly rain, O faithful friend?  
If, thousand-rayed, the God of Day  
Drive every darksome cloud away?  
Or, rising high, the Lord of Night  
Flood the broad heaven with silver light?  
What marvel, King, that one like thee  
The glory of his friends.should be?  
No marvel, O my lord, that thou  
Hast shown thy noble nature now.  
Thy heart, Sugriva, well I know:  
Naught from thy lips but truth may flow,  
With thee for friend and champion all  
My foes beneath my arm will fall.  
The Rákshas, when my queen he stole,  
Brought sure destruction on his soul,  
Like Anuhláda  <span id="fr_653"></span>[2b](#fn_653.md) who beguiled  
Queen Sachí called Puloma's child.  
Yes, near, Sugriva, is the day  
When I my demon foe shall slay,  
As conquering Indra in his ire  
Slew Queen Paulomi's haughty sire.' <span
id="fr_654"></span>[3b](#fn_654.md)  

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>  

   He ceased: thick clouds of dust rose high  
To every quarter of the sky:  
The very sun grew faint and pale  
Behind the darkly-gathering veil.  
The mighty clouds that hung o'erhead  
From east to west thick darkness spread,  
And earth to her foundations shook  
With hill and forest, lake and brook.  
Then hidden was the ground beneath  
Fierce warriors armed with fearful teeth,  
Hosts numberless, each lord in size  
A match for him who rules the skies:  
From many a sea and distant hill,  
From rock and river, lake and rill.  
Some like the morning sun were bright.  
Some, like the moon, were silver white:  
These green as lotus fibres, those  
White-coated from their native snows. <span
id="fr_655"></span>[1](#fn_655.md)  
Then S'atabali came in view  
Girt by a countless retinue.  
Like some gold mountain high in air  
Tárá's illustrious sire <span id="fr_656"></span>[2](#fn_656.md) was
there.  
There Rumá's father, <span id="fr_657"></span>[3](#fn_657.md)
far-renowned,  
With tens of thousands ranged around.  
There, tinted like the tender green  
Of lotus filaments, was seen,  
Compassed by countless legions, one  
Whose face was as the morning sun,  
Hanúmán's father good and great,  
Kesarí, <span id="fr_658"></span>[4](#fn_658.md) wisest in debate.  
There the proud king Gaváksha, feared  
For his strong warrior arm, appeared.  
There Dhúmra, mighty lord, the dread  
Of foes, his ursine legions led.  
There Panas, first for warlike fame,  
With twenty million warriors came.  
There glorious Níla, dark of hue,  
Arrayed his countless troops in view.  
There moved lord Gavaya brave and bold,  
Resplendent like a hill of gold,  
And near him Darímukha stood  
With millions from the hill and wood  
And \*Dwivid famed for strength and speed,  
And Mamda, both of Asvin seed.  
There Gaja, strong and glorious, led  
The countless troops around him spread,  
And Jámbaván <span id="fr_659"></span>[5](#fn_659.md) the king whose sway  
The bears delighted to obey,  

With swarming myriads onward pressed  
True to his lord Sugríva's hest;  
And princely Ruman, dear to fame,  
Led millions whom no hosts could tame,  
All these and many a chief beside <span
id="fr_660"></span>[1b](ry314.htm#fn_660.md)  
Came onward fierce in warlike pride.  
They covered all the plain, and still  
Pressed forward over wood and hill.  
In rows for many a league around  
They rested on the grassy ground;  
Or to Sugríva made their way.  
Like clouds about the Lord of Day,  
And to the king their proud heads bent  
In power and might preeminent.  
Sugríva then to Ráma sped.  
And raised his reverent hands, and said  
That every chief from coast to coast  
Was present with his warrior host.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_652"></span>[370:1b](ry312.htm#fr_652.md) The numbers are
unmanageable in English verse. The poet speaks of hundreds of *arbudas*;
and an *arbuda* is a hundred millions.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[370:2b](ry313.htm#fr_653.md) Anuhláda or Anuhráda
is one of the four sons of the mighty Hiranyakasipu, an Asur or a Daitya
son of Kasyapa and Diti and killed by Vishnu in his incarnation of the
Man-Lion *Narasinha*. According to the Bhágavata Purána the Daitya or
Asur Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyáksha his brother, both killed by Vishnu,
were born again as Rávan and Kumbhakarna his brother.'

<span id="fn_654"></span>[370:3b](ry313.htm#fr_654.md) Putoma, a demon, was
the father-in-law of Indra who destroyed him in order to avert an
imprecation. Paulomit is a patronymic denoting Sachi the daughter of
Puloma.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[371:1](ry313.htm#fr_655.md) "Observe the variety
of colours which the poem attributes to all these inhabitants of the
different mountainous regions, some white, others yellow, &c. Such dif-
ferent colours were perhaps peculiar and distinctive characteristics of
those various races." GORRESSIO.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[371:2](ry313.htm#fr_656.md) Sushen.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[371:3](ry313.htm#fr_657.md) Tara.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[371:4](ry313.htm#fr_658.md) Kesari was the
husband of Hanumnán's mother, and is here called his father.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[371:5](ry313.htm#fr_659.md) "I here unite under
one heading two animals of <span id="page_372">p. 372</span> but which
from some gross resemblances, probably helped by an equivoque in the
language, are closely affiliated in the Hindoo myth.....a reddish colour
of the skin, want of symmetry and ungainliness of form, strength in
hugging with the fore paws or arms, the faculty of climbing, shortness
of tail(?), sensuality, capacity of instruction in dancing and in music,
are all characteristics which more or less distinguish and meet in bears
as well as in monkeys In the *Rámáyanam*, the wise Jámnavant, the
Odysseus of the expedition of Lanká, is called now king of the bears
(rikshaparthivah), now great monkey (*Mahákapih*). DeGubernatis:
*Zoological Mythology*, Vol. II. p. 97.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XL.: The Army of The East.](ry314.md)
