[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry316)  [Next](ry318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLIII.: THE ARMY OF THE NORTH.

Forth went the legions of the west:  
And wise Sugríva addressed  
S'atabal, summoned from the crowd.  
To whom the sovereign cried aloud:  
'Go forth, O Vánarf, go forth,  
Explore the regions of the north.  
Thy host a hundred thousand be,  
And Yama's sons  <span id="fr_735"></span>[4b](#fn_735) attend on
thee.  
With dauntless courage, strength, and skill  
Search every river, wood, and hill.  
Through every land in order go  
Right onward to the Hills of Snow.  
Search mid the peaks that shine afar,  
In woods of Lodh and Deodár. <span id="fr_736"></span>[5b](#fn_736)  
Search if with Janak's daughter, screened  
By sheltering rocks, there lie the fiend  

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>  

The holy grounds of Soma tread  
By Gods and minstrels visited.  
Reach Kála's mount, and flats that lie  
Among the peaks that tower on high.  
Then leave that hill that gleams with ore,  
And fair Sudars'an's heights explore.  
Then on to Devasakhát <span id="fr_737"></span>[1](#fn_737) hie.  
Loved by the children of the sky.  
A dreary land you then will see  
Without a hill or brook or tree,  
A hundred leagues, bare, wild, and dread  
In lifeless desolation, spread.  
Pursue your onward way, and haste  
Through the dire horrors of the waste  
Until triumphant with delight  
You reach Kailása'stering height.  
There stands a palace decked with gold,  
For King Kuvera  <span id="fr_738"></span>[2](#fn_738) wrought of old,  
A home the heavenly artist planned  
And fashioned with his cunning hand.  
There lotuses adorn the flood  
With full-blown flower and opening bud  
Where swans and mallards float, and gay  
Apsarases  <span id="fr_739"></span>[3](#fn_739) come down to play.  
There King Vaisravan's  <span id="fr_740"></span>[4](#fn_740) self, the
lord  
By all the universe adored,  
Who golden gifts to mortals sends,  
Lives with the Guhyakas  <span id="fr_741"></span>[5](#fn_741) his
friends.  
Search every cavern in the steep,  
And green glens where the moonbeams sleep.  
If haply in that distant ground  
The robber and the dame be found.  
Then on to Krauncha's hill,  <span id="fr_742"></span>[6](#fn_742) and
through  
His fearful pass your way pursue:  
Though dark and terrible the vale  
Your wonted courage must not fail.  
There through abyss and cavern seek,  
On lofty ridge, and mountain peak.  
On, on! pursue your journey still  
By valley, lake, and towering hill.  
Reach the North Kurus' land, where rest  
The holy spirits of the blest;  
Where golden buds of lilies gleam  
Resplendent on the silver stream,  

And leaves of azure turkis throw  
Soft splendour on the waves below.  
Bright as the sun at early morn  
Fair pools that happy clime adorn,  
Where shine the loveliest flowers on stems  
Of crystal and all valued gems.  
Blue lotuses through all the land  
The glories of their blooms expand,  
And the resplendent earth is strown  
With peerless pearl and precious stone.  
There stately trees can scarce uphold  
The burthen of their fruits of gold,  
And ever flaunt their gay attire  
Of flower and leaf like flames of fire.  
All there sweet lives untroubled spend  
In bliss and joy that know not end,  
While pearl-decked maidens laugh, or sing  
To music of the silvery string.  <span
id="fr_743"></span>[1b](ry318.htm#fn_743)  
Still on your forward journey keep,  
And rest you by the northern deep,  
Where springing from the billows high  
Mount Somagiri  <span id="fr_744"></span>[2b](ry318.htm#fn_744) seeks
the sky,  
And lightens with perpetual glow  
The sunless realm that lies below.  
There, present through all life's extent,  
Dwells Brahmá Lord preeminent,  
And round the great God, manifest  
In Rudra  <span id="fr_745"></span>[3b](ry318.htm#fn_745) forms high
sages rest.  
Then turn, O Vánarsrch no more,  
Nor tempt the sunless, boundless shore.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_732"></span>[377:1b](ry316.htm#fr_732) One of the oldest
and mightiest of the Vedic deities; in later mythology regard ed as the
God of the sea.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[377:2b](ry316.htm#fr_733) The knotted noose
with which he seizes and punishes transgressors.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[377:3b](ry316.htm#fr_734) Sávarni Manu,
Manuspring of the Sun by Chháyá.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[377:4b](ry317.htm#fr_735) The poet has not
said who the sons of Yama are.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[377:5b](ry317.htm#fr_736) The Lodhra or Lodh
(Symplocoa Racemosa) and the DevadárueodaDeodar are well known trees.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[378:1](ry317.htm#fr_737) The hills mentioned
are not identifiable. Soma means the Moon. Kála, black; Sudaras'an, fair
to see; and Devasakhá friend of the Gods

<span id="fn_738"></span>[378:2](ry317.htm#fr_738) The God of Wealth.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[378:3](ry317.htm#fr_739) The nymphs of
Paradise.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[378:4](ry317.htm#fr_740) Kuvera the son of
Vis'ravas.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[378:5](ry317.htm#fr_741) A class of demigods
who, like the Yakshas, are the attendants of Kuvera, and the guardians
of his treasures.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[378:6](ry317.htm#fr_742) Situated in the
eastern part of the Himálaya chain, on the north of Assam. The mountain
was torn asunder and the pass formed by the War-God Kártikeya and
Paras'uráma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLIV.: The Ring.](ry318)
