[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry315)  [Next](ry317.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLII.: THE ARMY OF THE WEST.

Then to Sushen Sugríva bent,  
And thus addressed him reverent:  
'Two hundred thousand of our best  
With thee, my lord, shall seek the west.  
Explore Suráshtra's <span id="fr_716"></span>[3](#fn_716.md) distant
plain,  
Explore Váhlíka's <span id="fr_717"></span>[4](#fn_717.md) wild domain,  
And all the pleasant brooks that flee  
Through mountains to the western sea.  
Search clustering groves on mountain  
heights,  
And woods the whom of anchorites.  
Search where the breezy hills are high,  
Search where the desert regions lie.  
Search all the western land beset  

With woody mountains like a net.  
The country's farthest limit reach,  
And stand upon the ocean beach.  
There wander through the groves of palm  
Where the soft air is full of balm.  
Through grassy dell and dark ravine  
Seek Rávan and the Maithil queen.  
Go visit Somagiri's <span id="fr_718"></span>[1b](#fn_718.md) steep  
Where Sindhu <span id="fr_719"></span>[2b](#fn_719.md) mingles with the
deep.  
There lions, borne on swift wings, roam  
The levels of their mountain home,  
And elephants and monsters bear,  
Caught from the ocean, to their lair.  
You Vánars, changing forms at will.  
With rapid search must scour the hill,  
And his sky-kissing peak of gold  
Where loveliest trees their blooms unfold.  
There golden-peaked, ablaze with light,  
Uprises Páriyátra's <span id="fr_720"></span>[3b](#fn_720.md) height  
Where wild Gandharvas, fierce and fell,  
In bands of countless myriads dwell.  
Pluck ye no fruit within the wood;  
Beware the impious neighbourhood,  
Where, very mighty, strong, and hard  
To overcome, the fruit they guard.  
Yet search for Janak's daughter still,  
For Vánars there need fear no ill.  
Near, bright as turkis, Vajra <span id="fr_721"></span>[4b](#fn_721.md)
named,  
There stands a hill of diamond framed.  
Soaring a hundred leagues in pride,  
With trees and creepers glorified.  
Search there each cave and dark abyss  
By waterfall and precipice.  
Far in that sea the wild waves beat  
On Chakraván's <span id="fr_722"></span>[5b](#fn_722.md) firm-rooted
feet.  
Where the great discus, <span id="fr_723"></span>[6b](#fn_723.md) thousand
rayed,  
By Vísvakarmá's <span id="fr_724"></span>[7b](#fn_724.md) art was made.  
When Panchajan <span id="fr_725"></span>[8b](#fn_725.md) the fiend was
slain.  
And Hayagríva, <span id="fr_726"></span>[9b](#fn_726.md) fierce in vain,  

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>  

Thence taking shell and discus went  
Lord Vishnu, God preeminent.  
On sixty thousand hills of gold  
With wondering eyes shall ye behold,  
Where in his glory every one  
Is brilliant as the morning sun.  
Full in the midst King Meru, <span id="fr_727"></span>[1](#fn_727.md)
best  
Of mountains, lifts his lofty crest,  
On whom of yore, as all have heard,  
The sun well-pleased this boon conferred:  
'On thee, O King, on thee and thine  
Light, day and night, shall ever shine.  
Gandharvas, Gods who love thee well  
And on thy sacred summits dwell,  
Undimmed in lustre, bright and fair,The golden sheen shall ever
share.'  
The Vis'vas, <span id="fr_728"></span>[2](#fn_728.md) Vasus <span
id="fr_729"></span>[3](#fn_729.md) they who ride  
The tempest, <span id="fr_730"></span>[4](#fn_730.md) every God beside,  
Draw nigh to Meru's lofty crest  
When evening darkens in the west,  
And to the parting Lord of Day  
The homage of their worship pay,  
Ere yet a while, unseen of all,  
Behind Mount Asta's  <span id="fr_731"></span>[5](#fn_731.md) peaks he
fall.  
Wrought by the heavenly artist's care  
A glorious palace glitters there,  
And round about it sweet birds sing  
Where the gay trees are blossoming:  

The home of Varun  <span id="fr_732"></span>[1b](ry317.htm#fn_732.md) high
souled-lord,  
Wrist-girded with his deadly cord. <span
id="fr_733"></span>[2b](ry317.htm#fn_733.md)  
With ten tall stems, a palm between  
Meru and Asta's hill is seen:  
Pure silver from the base it springs,  
And far and wide its lustre flings.  
Seek Rávanthe dame by brook,  
In pathless glen, in leafy nook  
On Meru's crest a hermit lives  
Bright with the light that penance gives:  
Sávarni  <span id="fr_734"></span>[3b](ry317.htm#fn_734.md) is he named,
renowned  
As Brahmá's peer, with glory crowned.  
There bowing down in reverence speak  
And ask him of the dame you seek.  
Thus far the splendid Lord of Day  
Pursues through heaven his ceaseless way,  
Shedding on every spot his light;  
Then sinks behind Mount Asta's height,  
Thus far advance: the sunless sea  
Beyond is all unknown to me.  
Sushen of mighty arm, long tried  
In peril, shall your legions guide,  
Receive his words with high respect,  
And ne'er his lightest wish neglect.  
He is my consort's sire, and hence  
Deserves the utmost reverence.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_714"></span>[376:1](ry315.htm#fr_714.md) S'ailúsha, Gramini,
Siksha, Suka, Babhru.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[376:2](ry315.htm#fr_715.md) The distant south
beyond the confines of the earth is the home of departed spirits and the
city of Yama the God of Death.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[376:3](ry316.htm#fr_716.md) Suráshtra, the 'good
country,' is the modern Surat.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[376:4](ry316.htm#fr_717.md) A country north-west
of Afghanistan, Baíkh

<span id="fn_718"></span>[376:1b](ry316.htm#fr_718.md) The Moon-mountain
here is mythical.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[376:2b](ry316.htm#fr_719.md) Sindhu is the Indus.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[376:3b](ry316.htm#fr_720.md) Páriyátra, or as
more usually written Páripátra, is the central or western portion of the
Vindhya chain which skirts the province of Malwa.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[376:4b](ry316.htm#fr_721.md) Vajra means both
diamond and thunderbolt, the two substances being supposed to be
identical.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[376:5b](ry316.htm#fr_722.md) Chakraván means the
discus-bearer.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[376:6b](ry316.htm#fr_723.md) The discus is the
favourite weapon of Vishnu

<span id="fn_724"></span>[376:7b](ry316.htm#fr_724.md) The Indian
Hephaistos or Vulcan.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[376:8b](ry316.htm#fr_725.md) Panchajan was a
demon who lived in the sea in the form of a conch shell. WILSON'S Vishnu
Pura'na,\* V. 21.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[376:9b](ry316.htm#fr_726.md)
Hayagríva,Horse-necked, is the name of a Daitya who at the dissolution
of the universe caused by Brahmá's sleep, seized and carried off the
Vedas. Vishnu slew him and recovered the sacred treasures.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[377:1](ry316.htm#fr_727.md) Meru stands in the
centre of Jambudwípa and consequently of the earth. "The sun travels
round the world, keeping Meru always on his right. To the spectator who
fronts him, therefore, as he rises Meru must be always on the north; and
as the sun's rays do not penetrate beyond the centre of the mountain,
the regions beyond, or to the north of it must be in darkness, whilst
those on the south of it must be in light: north and south being
relative, not absolute, terms, depending on the position of the
spectator with regard to the Sun and Meru." WILSON'S *Vishnu Pura'na*,
Vol. II. p. 243. Note.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[377:2](ry316.htm#fr_728.md) The Vis'vadevas are a
class of deities to whom sacrifices should be daily offered, as part of
the ordinary worship of the householder. According to the *Váyun Purána*
this is a privilege conferred on them by Brahmá and the Pitris as a
reward for religious austerities practised by them upon Himálaya.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[377:3](ry316.htm#fr_729.md) The eight Vasus were
originally personifications like other Vedic deities, of natural
phenomena, such as Fire, Wind, &c. Their appellations are variously
given by different authorities.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[377:4](ry316.htm#fr_730.md) The Maruts or
Storm-Gods, frequently addressed and worshipped as the attendants and
allies of Indra.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[377:5](ry316.htm#fr_731.md) The mountain behind
which the sun sets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLIII.: The Army of The North.](ry317.md)
