[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry327)  [Next](ry329.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LIV.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.

But Hanumán, while Tára, best  
Of splendid chiefs his thought expressed,  
Perceived that Báli's princely son  
A kingdom for himself had won.  <span id="fr_759"></span>[1b](#fn_759.md)  
His keen eye marked in him combined  
The warrior's arm, the ruler's mind,  
And every noble gift should grace  
The happy sovereign of his race:  
Marked how he grew with ripening age  
More glorious and bold and sage,--  
Like the young moon that night by night  
Shines on with ever waxing light,--  
Brave as his royal father, wise  
As he who counsels in the skies:  <span
id="fr_760"></span>[2b](#fn_760.md)  
Marked how, forwearied with the quest,  
He heeded not his liege's hest,  
But Tára's every word obeyed  
Like Indra still by Sukra  <span id="fr_761"></span>[3b](#fn_761.md)
swayed.  
Then with his prudent speech he tried  
To better thoughts the prince to guide,  
And by division's skilful art  
The Vánars and the youth to part:  
'Illustrious Angad, thou in fight  
Hast far surpassed thy father's might,  
Most worthy, like thy sire of old,  
The empire of our race to hold.  
The Vánars' fickle people range  
From wish to wish and welcome change.  
Their wives and babes they will not leave  
And to their new-made sovereign cleave.  
No art, no gifts will draw away  
The Vánars from Sugríva's sway,  
Through hope of wealth, through fear of pain  
Still faithful will they all remain.  
Thou fondly hopest in this cave  
The vengeance of the foe to brave.  
But Lakshman's arm a shower will send  
Of deadly shafts those walls to rend.  
Like Indra's bolts his shafts have power  
To cleave the mountain like a flower.  
O Angad, mark my counsel well:  
If in this cave thou choose to dwell,  

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_759"></span>[384:1b](ry328.htm#fr_759.md) Perceived that Angad
had secured, through the love of the Vánars, the reversion of Sugríva's
kingdom; or, as another commentator explains it, perceived that Angad
had obtained a new kingdom in the enchanted cave which the Vánars,
through love of him, would consent to occupy.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[384:2b](ry328.htm#fr_760.md) Váchaspati, Lord of
Speech, the Preceptor of the Gods.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[384:3b](ry328.htm#fr_761.md) Sukra is the regent
of the planet Venus, and the preceptor of the Daítyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LVI:](ry329.md)
