[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry324)  [Next](ry326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LI.: SVAYAMPRABHÁ

'Assailed by thirst and hunger, dame,  
Within a gloomy vault we came.  
We saw the cavern opening wide,  
And straight within its depths we hied.  
But utterly amazed are we  
At all the marvels that we see.  
Whose are the golden trees that gleam  
With splendour like the morning's beam?  
These cates of noblest sort? these roots?  
This wondrous store of rarest fruits?  
Whose are these calm and cool retreats,  
These silver homes and golden seats,  
And lattices of precious stones?  
Who is the happy lord that owns  
The golden trees, of rarest scent,  
Neath loads of fruit and blossom bent?  
Who, strong in holy zeal, had power  
To deck the streams with richest dower,  
And bade the lilies bright with gold  
The glory of their blooms unfold,  

Where fish in living gold below  
The sheen of changing colours show?  
Thine is the holy power, I ween,  
That beautified the wondrous scene;  
But if another's, lady, deign  
To tell us, and the whole explain.'  
To him the lady of the cave  
In words like, these her answer gave:  
'Skilled Maya framed in days of old  
This magic wood of growing gold.  
The chief artificer in place  
Was he of all the Dánav.  
He, for his wise enchantments famed,  
This glorious dwelling planned and framed  
He for a thousand years endured  
The sternest penance, and secured  
From Brahmá of all boons the best,  
The knowledge Us'anas  <span id="fr_754"></span>[1b](#fn_754)
possessed.  
Lord, by that boon, of all his will,  
He fashioned all with perfect skill;  
And, with his blissful state content,  
In this vast grove a season spent.  
By Indra's jealous bolt he fell  
For loving Hemá's <span id="fr_755"></span>[2b](#fn_755) charms too
well.  
And Brahmá on that nymph bestowed  
The treasures of this fair abode,  
Wherein her tranquil days to spend  
In happiness that ne'er may end.  
Sprung of a lineage old and high,  
Merusávarni's  <span id="fr_756"></span>[3b](#fn_756) daughter, I  
Guard ever for that heavenly dame  
This home, Svayamprabhát <span id="fr_757"></span>[4b](#fn_757) my
name,-  
For I have loved the lady long,  
So skilled in arts of dance and song.  
But say what cause your steps has led  
The mazes of this grove to tread.  

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>  

How, strangers did ye chance to spy  
The wood concealed from wanderer's eye?  
Tell clearly why ye come: but first  
Eat of this fruit and quench your thirst.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_753"></span>[382:1](ry324.htm#fr_753) The skin of the black
antelope was the ascetic's proper garb.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[382:1b](ry325.htm#fr_754) Us'anas is the name
of a sage mentioned in the Vedas. In the epic poems he is identified
with S'ukra, the regent of the planet Venus, and described as the
preceptor of the Asuras or Daityas, and possessor of vast knowledge.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[382:2b](ry325.htm#fr_755) Hemáne of the nymphs
of Paradise.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[382:3b](ry325.htm#fr_756) Merusávarni general
name for the last four of the fourteen Manus.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[382:4b](ry325.htm#fr_757) Svayamprabhá
"self-luminous" is according to DE GUBERNATIS the moon: "In the
*Svayamprabhátoo*, we meet with the moon as a good fairy who, from the
golden palace which she reserves for her friend Hemá golden one:) is
during a month the guide, in the vast cavern of Hanumant and his
companions, who have lost their way in the search of the dawn Sitáis is
not quite accurate: HanumHanumán and his companions wander for a month
in the cavern without a guide, and then Svayamprabhás them out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LII.: The Exit.](ry326)
