[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry344)  [Next](ry346) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO II.: LANKÁ.

The glorious sight a while he viewed,  
Then to the town his way pursued.  
Around the Vanar as he went  
Breathed from the wood delicious scent,  
And the soft grass beneath his feet  
With gem-like flowers was bright and sweet.  
Still as the Vanar nearer drew  
More clearly rose the town to view  
The palm her fan-like leaves displayed,  
Priyálas  <span id="fr_804"></span>[1](#fn_804) lent their pleasant
shade,  
And mid the lower greenery far  
Conspicuous rose the Kovidár  <span id="fr_805"></span>[2](#fn_805).  
A thousand trees mid flowers that glowed  
Hung down their fruit's delicious load  <span
id="fr_806"></span>[3](#fn_806),  
And in their crests that rocked and swayed  
Sweet birds delightful music made.  
And there were pleasant pools whereon  
The glories of the lotus shone;  
And gleams of sparkling fountains, stirred  
By many a joyous water-bird.  

Around, in lovely gardens grew  
Blooms sweet of scent and bright of hue,  
And Lanká, seat of Rávan's sway,  
Before the wondering Vánar lay:  
With stately domes and turrets tall,  
Encircled by a golden wall,  
And moats whose waters were aglow  
With lily blossoms bright below:  
For Sitá's sake defended well  
With bolt and bar and sentinel,  
And Rakshases who roamed in bands  
With ready bows in eager hands.  
He saw the stately mansions rise  
Like pale-hued clouds in autumn skies;  
Where noble streets were broad and bright,  
And banners waved on every height.  
Her gates were glorious to behold  
Rich with the shine of burnished gold:  
A lovely city planned and decked  
By heaven's creative arhitect  <span id="fr_807"></span>[1b](#fn_807),  
Fairest of earthly cities meet  
To be the Gods' celestial seat.  
The Vánar by the northern gate  
Thus in his heart began debate  
'Our mightiest host would strive in vain  
To take this city on the main:  
A city that may well defy  
The chosen warriors of the sky;  
A city never to be won  
E'en by the arm of Raghu's son.  
Here is no hope by guile to win  
The hostile hearts of those within.  
'Twere vain to war, or bribe, or sow  
Dissension mid the Vánar foe.  
But now my search must I pursue  
Until the Maithil queen I view:  
And, when I find the captive dame,  
Make victory mine only aim.  
But, if I wear my present shape,  
How shall I enter and escape  
The Rákshas troops, their guards and spies,  
And sleepless watch of cruel eyes?  
The fiends of giant race who hold  
This mighty town are strong and bold;  
And I must labour to elude  
The fiercely watchful multitude.  
I in a shape to mock their sight  
Must steal within the town by night,  
Blind with my art the demons' eyes,  
And thus achieve my enterprise.  
How may I see, myself unseen  
Of the fierce king, the captive queen.  
And meet her in some lonely place,  
With none beside her, face to face?'  

When the bright sun had left the skies  
The Vánar dwarfed his mighty size,  

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>  

And, in the straitest bounds restrained,  
The bigness of a cat retained.  <span
id="fr_808"></span>[1](ry346.htm#fn_808)  
Then, when the moon's soft light was spread,  
Within the city's walls he sped.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_804"></span>[397:1](ry345.htm#fr_804) The Buchanania
Latifolia.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[397:2](ry345.htm#fr_805) The Bauhinia
Variegata.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[397:3](ry345.htm#fr_806) Through the power
that Rávan's stern mortifications had won for him his trees bore flowers
and fruit simultaneously.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[397:1b](ry345.htm#fr_807) Vis'vakarmá is the
architect of the Gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto III.: The Guardian Goddess.](ry346)
