[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry348)  [Next](ry350) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO VII.: RAVAN'S PALACE.

He passed within the walls and gazed  
On gems and gold that round him blazed,  
And many a latticed window bright  
With turkis and with lazulite.  

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>  

Through porch and ante-rooms he passed  
Each richer, fairer thau the last;  
And spacious halls were lances lay.  
And bows and shells, in fair array:  
A glorious house that matched in show  
All Paradise displayed below.  
Upon the polished floor were spread  
Fresh buds and blossoms white and red,  
And women shone, a lovely crowd,  
As lightning flashes through a cloud:  
A palace splendid as the sky  
Which moon and planets glorify:  
Like earth whose towering hills unfold  
Their zones and streaks of glittering gold;  
Where waving on the mountain brows  
The tall trees bend their laden boughs,  
And every bough and tender spray  
With a bright load of bloom is gay,  
And every flower the breeze has bent  
Fills all the region with its scent.  
Near the tall palace pale of hue  
Shone lovely lakes where lilies blew,  
And lotuses with flower and bud  
Gleamed on the bosom of the flood.  
There shone with gems that flashed afar  
The marvel of the Flower-named  <span
id="fr_815"></span>[1](ry350.htm#fn_815) car,  
Mid wondrous dwellings still confessed  
Supreme and nobler than the rest.  
Thereon with wondrous art designed  
Were turkis birds of varied kind.  
And many a sculptured serpent rolled  
His twisted coil in burnished gold.  
Aud steeds were there of noblest form  
With flying feet as fleet as storm:  
And elephants with deftest skill  
Stood sculptured by a silver rill,  
Each bearing on his trunk a wreath  
Of lilies from the flood beneath.  
There Lakshmi,  <span id="fr_816"></span>[2](ry350.htm#fn_816) beauty's
heavenly queen,  
Wrought by the artist's skill, was seen  
Beside a flower-clad pool to stand  
Holding a lotus in her hand.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_811"></span>[399:1b](ry348.htm#fr_811) One of the Rákshas
lords.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[399:2b](ry348.htm#fr_812) The brother Rávan.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[399:3b](ry348.htm#fr_813) Indra's elephant.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[399:4b](ry348.htm#fr_814) Rávan's palace
appears to have occupied the whole extent of ground, and to uave
contained within its outer walls the mansions of all the great Rakshas
chiefs. Ravan's own dwelling seems to have been situated within the
enchanted chariot Pushpak: but the description is involved and confused,
and it is difficult to say whether the chariot was inside the palace or
the palace inside the chariot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VIII.: The Enchanted Car.](ry350)
