[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry343)  [Next](ry345) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO I.: HANUMÁN'S LEAP.

Thus Rávan's foe resolved to trace  
The captive to her hiding-place  
Through airy pathways overhead  
Which heavenly minstrels visited.  
With straining nerve aud eager brows,  
Like some strong husband of the cows,  
In ready might he stood prepared  
For the bold task his soul has dared.  
O'er gem-like grass that flashed and glowed  
The Vánar like a lion strode.  
Roused by the thunder of his tread,  
The beasts to shady coverts fled.  
Tall trees he crushed or hurled aside,  
And every bird was terrified.  
Around him loveliest lilies grew,  
Pale pink, and red, and white, and blue,  
And tints of many a metal lent  
The light of varied ornament.  
Gandharvas, changing forms at will.  
And Yakshas roamed the lovely hill,  
Aud countless Serpent-Gods were seen  
Where flowers and grass were fresh and green.  
As some resplendent serpent takes  
His pastime in the best of lakes,  
So on the mountain's woody height  
The Vánar wandered with delight.  
Then, standing on tne flowery sod,  
He paid his vows to saint and God.  
Swayambhu  <span id="fr_790"></span>[2](#fn_790) and the Sun he
prayed,  
And the swift Wind to lend him aid,  
And Indra, sovereign of the skies,  
To bless his hardy enterprise.  
Then once again the chief addressed  
The Vánars from tke mountain crest:  
'Swift as a shaft from Ráma's bow  

To Rávan's city will I go,  
And if she be not there will fly  
And seek the lady in the sky;  
Or, if in heaven she be not found,  
Will hither bring the giant bound.'  
   He ceased; and mustering his might  
Sprang downward from the mountain height,  
While, shattered by each mighty limb,  
The trees unrooted followed him.  
The shadow on the ocean cast  
By his vast form, as on he passed,  
Flew like a ship before the gale  
When the strong breeze has tilled the sail,  
And where his course the Vánar held  
The sea beneath him raged and swelled.  
Then Gods and all the heavenly train  
Poured flowerets down in gentle rain;  
Their voices glad Gandharvas raised,  
And saints in heaven the Vánar praised.  
Fain would the Sea his succour lend  
And Raghu's noble son befriend.  
He, moved by zeal for Ráma's sake,  
The hill Maináka  <span id="fr_791"></span>[1b](#fn_791) thus bespake:  
'O strong Maináka, heavens decree  
In days of old appointed thee  
To be the Asurs bar, and keep  
The rebels in the lowest deep.  
Thou guardest those whom heaven has cursed  
Lest from their prison-house they burst,  
And standest by the gates of hell  
Their limitary\* sentinel.  
To thee is given the power to spread  
Or spring above thy watery bed.  
Now, best of noble mountains, rise  
And do the thing that I advise,  
E'en now above thy buried crest  
Flies mighty Hanumán, the best  
Of Van\*sis, moved for Ráma's sake  
A wonderous deed to undertake.  
Lift up thy head that he may stay  
And rest him on his weary way.'  
   He heard, and from his watery abroud,  
As bursts the sun from \*\*\*\*\* cloud,  
Rose swifty. Crowned with plant and tree,  
And stood above the foamy\* sea.  <span
id="fr_792"></span>[2b](#fn_792)  
There with his lofty peaks apraised  
Bright as a hundred suns he blazed,  
And crest and crag of burnished gold  
Flashed on the flood that round him rolled,\*  

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>  

The Vánar thought the mountain rose  
A hostile bar to interpose,  
And, like a wind-swept cloud, o'erthrew  
The glittering mountain as he flew.  
Then from the falling hill rang out  
A warning voice and joyful shout.  
Again he raised him high in air  
To meet the flying Vánar there,  
And standing on his topmost peak  
In human form began to speak: <span id="fr_793"></span>[1](#fn_793)  
'Best of the Vánars' noblest line,  
A mighty task, O chief, is thine.  
Here for a while, I pray thee, light  
And rest upon the breezy height.  
A prince of Raghu's line was he  
Who gave his glory to the Sea, <span id="fr_794"></span>[2](#fn_794)  
Who now to Rama's envoy shows  
High honour for the debt he owes.  
He bade me lift my buried head  
Uprising from my watery bed,  
And woo the Vanar chief to rest  
A moment on my glittering crest,  
Refresh thy weary limbs, and eat  
My mountain fruits for they are sweet.  
I too, O chieftain, know thee well;-  
Three worlds thy famous virtues tell;  
And none, I ween, with thee may vie  
Who spring impetuous through the sky.  
To every guest, though mean and low.  
The wise respect and honour show;  
And how shall I neglect thee, how  
Slight the great guest so near me now?  
Son of the Wind,'tis thine to share  
The might of him who shakes the air;  
And,--for he loves his offspring,--he  
Is honoured when I honour thee.  
Of yore, when Krita's age  <span id="fr_795"></span>[3](#fn_795) was
new,  
The little hills and mountains flew  
Where'er they listed, borne on wings  
More rapid the feathered king's. <span id="fr_796"></span>[4](#fn_796)  
But mighty terror came on all  
The Gods and saints who feared their fall.  

And Indra in his anger rent  
Their pinions with the bolts he sent.  
When in his ruthless fury he  
Levelled his flashing bolt at me,  
The great-souled Wind inclined to save,  
And laid me neath the ocean's wave.  
Thus by the favour of the sire  
I kept my cherished wings entire;  
And for this deed of kindness done  
I honour thee his noble son.  
O come, thy weary limbs relieve,  
And honour due from me receive.'  
'I may not rest,' the Vanar cried;  
'I must not stay or turn aside.  
Yet pleased am I, thou noblest hill,  
And as the deed accept thy will.'  
   Thus as he spoke he lightly pressed  
With his broad hand the mountain's crest.  
Then bounded upward to the height  
Of heaven, rejoicing in his might,  
And through the fields of boundless blue,  
The pathway of his father, flew.  
Gods, saints, and heavenly bards beheld  
That flight that none had paralleled,  
Then to the Nagas' mother  <span id="fr_797"></span>[1b](#fn_797) came  
And thus addressed the sun-bright dame:  
'See, Hauum'an with venturous leap  
Would spring across the mighty deep,-  
A Viinar prince, the Wind-God's seed:  
Come, Suras'a, his course impede.  
In Rakshas form thy shape disguise,  
Terrific, like a hill in size:  
Let thy red eyes with fury glow,  
And high as heaven thy body grow.  
With fearful tusks the chief defy.  
That we his power and strength may try.  
He will with guile thy hold elude,  
Or own thy might, by thee subdued.'  
   Pleased with the grateful honours paid,  
The godlike dame their words obeyed,  
Clad in a shape of terror she  
Sprang from the middle of the sea,  
And, with fierce accents that appalled  
All creatures, to the Vanar called:  
'Come, prince of Vanars, doomed to be  
My food this day by heaven's decree.  
Such boon from ages long ago  
To Brahma's favouring will I owe.'  
   She ceased, and Hanuman replied,  
By shape and threat unterrified:  
'Brave Rama with his Maithil spouse  
Lodged in the shade of Dandak's boughs.  
Thence Ravan king of giants stole  
Sita the joy of Rama's soul.  

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>  

By Ráma's high behest to her  
I go a willing messenger;  
And never shouldst them hinder one  
Who toils for Das'aratha's son.  
First captive Sítá will I see,  
And him who sent and waits for me,  
Then come and to thy will submit,  
Yea, by my truth I promise it.'  
'Nay, hope not thus thy life to save;  
Not such the boon that Brahma gave.  
Enter my mouth,' was her reply,  
'Then forward on thy journey hie!'  <span
id="fr_798"></span>[1](#fn_798)  

'Stretch, wider stretch thy jaws,' exclaimed  
The Vánar chief, to ire inflamed;  
And, as the Rákshas near him drew,  
Ten leagues in height his stature grew.  
Then straight, her threatening jaws between,  
A gulf of twenty leagues was seen.  
To fifty leagues he waxed, and still  
Her mouth grew wider at her will.  
Then smaller than a thumb became,  
Shrunk by his power, the Vánar's frame.  <span
id="fr_799"></span>[2](#fn_799)  
He leaped within, and turning round  
Sprang through the portal at a bound.  
Then hung in air a moment, while  
He thus addressed her with a smile:  
'O Daksha's child,  <span id="fr_800"></span>[3](#fn_800) farewell at
last!  
For I within thy mouth have passed.  
Thou hast the gift of Brahmá's grace:  
I go, the Maithil queen to trace.'  
Then, to her former shape restored,  
She thus addressed the Vánar lord:  
'Then forward to the task, and may  
Success and joy attend thy way!  
Go, and the rescued lady bring  
In triumph to her lord and king.'  

Then hosts of spirits as they gazed  
The daring of the Vánar praised.  
Through the broad fields of ether, fast  
Garud's royal self, he passed,  
The region of the cloud and rain,  
Loved by the gay Gandharva train,  
Where mid the birds that came and went  
Shone Indra's glorious bow unbent,  
And like a host of wandering stars  
Flashed the high Gods' celestial cars.  
Fierce Sinhiká  <span id="fr_801"></span>[1b](#fn_801) who joyed in
ill  
And changed her form to work her will,  
Descried him on his airy way  
And marked the Vánar for her prey.  
'This day at length,' the demon cried,  
'My hunger shall be satisfied,'  
And at his passing shadow caught  
Delighted with the cheering thought.  
The Vánar felt the power that stayed  
And held him as she grasped his shade,  
Like some tall ship upon the main  
That struggles with the wind in vain.  
Below, above, his eye he bent  
And scanned the sea and firmament.  
High from the briny deep upreared  
The monster's hideous form appeared,  
'Sugríva's tale,' he cried,'is true:  
This is the demon dire to view  
Of whom the Vánar monarch told,  
Whose grasp a passing shade can hold.'  
Then, as a cloud in rain-time grows.  
His form, dilating, swelled and rose.  
Wide as the space from heaven to hell  
Her jaws she opened with a yell,  
And rushed upon her fancied prey  
With cloud-like roar to seize and slay.  
The Vánar swift as thought compressed  
His borrowed bulk of limb and chest,  
And stood with one quick bound inside  
The monstrous mouth she opened wide.  
Hid like the moon when Ráhu  <span id="fr_802"></span>[2b](#fn_802)
draws  
The orb within his ravening jaws.  
Within that ample cavern pent  
The demon's form he tore and rent,  
And, from the mangled carcass freed,  
Came forth again with thought-like speed.  <span
id="fr_803"></span>[3b](#fn_803)  

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>  

Thus with his skill the fiend he slew,  
Then to his wonted stature grew.  
The spirits saw the demon die.  
And hailed the Vánar from the sky:  
'Well hast thou fought a wondrous fight  
Nor spared the fiend's terrific might,  
On, on! perform the blameless deed,  
And in thine every wish succeed.  
Ne're can they fail in whom combine  
Such valour; thought, and skill as thine.'  

Pleased with their praises as they sang,  
Again through fields of air he sprang,  
And now, his travail wellnigh done,  
The distint shore was almost won,  
Before him on the margent stood  
In long dark line a waving wood,  
And the fair island, bright and green  
With flowers and trees, was clearly seen,  
And every babbling brook that gave  
Her lord the sea a tribute wave.  
He lighted down on Lamba's peak  
Which tinted metals stain and streak,  
And looked where Lanká's splendid town  
Shone on the mountain like a crown.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_789"></span>[394:1](ry343.htm#fr_789) This Book is called
Sundar or the Beatiful. To a European taste it is the most intolerably
tedious of the whole poem, abounding in repetition, overloaded
description, and long aud useless speeches which impede the action of
the poem. Manifest interpolations of whole Cantos also occur. I have
omitted none of the action of the Book, but have occasionally omitted
long passages of common-place description, lamentation, and long stories
which have been again and again repeated.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[394:2](ry344.htm#fr_790) Brahmá the
Self-Existent.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[394:1b](ry344.htm#fr_791) Maináka was the son
of Rimálaya\* and Mená or Menaka.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[394:2b](ry344.htm#fr_792) Thus Milton makes
the hills of heaven self-moving at command:

'At his comma\*d the uprooted hiils retired Each to his place, they
heard his voice and went Obsequious'

<span id="fn_793"></span>[395:1](ry344.htm#fr_793) The spirit of the
mountain is separable from the mountain. Himalaya has also been
represented as standing in human on one of his own peaks.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[395:2](ry344.htm#fr_794) Sagar or the Sea is
said to have derived its name from Sagar. The story is fully told in
Book I, Cantos XLII, XLIII, and XLlV.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[395:3](ry344.htm#fr_795) Kritu is the first of
the four ages of the world, the golden age, also called Satya.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[395:4](ry344.htm#fr_796) *Parvata* means a
mountain and in the Vedas a cloud. Hence in later mythology the mountain
have taken the place of the clouds as the objects of the attacks of
Indra the Sun-God. The feathered king is Garuda.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[395:1b](ry344.htm#fr_797) "The children of
Surasa were a thousand mighty many-headed serpents, traversing the sky."
WlLSON'S *Vishnu Purana*, Vol.II. p.73.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[396:1](ry344.htm#fr_798) She means, says the
Commentator, pursue thy journey if thou can.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[396:2](ry344.htm#fr_799) If Milton's spirits
are allowed the power of infinite self-extension and compression the
same must be conceded to Válmíki's supernatural beings. Given the power
as in Milton the result in Válmíki is perfectly consistent.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[396:3](ry344.htm#fr_800) "Daksha is the son of
Brahmá and one of the Prajápatis or divine progenitors. He had sixty
daughters, twenty-seven of whom married to Kas'yapa produced, according
to one of the Indian cosmogonies, all mundane beings. Does the epithet,
Descendant of Daksha, given to Surasá, mean that she is one of those
daughters? I think not. This epithet is perhaps an appellation common to
all created beings as having sprung from Daksha." GORRESIO.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[396:1b](ry344.htm#fr_801) Sinhiká is the
mother of Ráhu the dragon's head or ascending node, the chief agent in
eclipses.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[396:2b](ry344.htm#fr_802) Ráhu is the demon
who causes eclipses by attempting to swallow the sun and moon.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[396:3b](ry344.htm#fr_803) According to De
Gubernatis, the author of the very learned, ingenious, and interesting
though too fanciful *Zoological Mythology.* Hanuman here represents the
sun entering into and escaping from a cloud. The biblical Jonah,
according to him, typifies the same phenomenon. Sádi, <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> speaking of sunset, says *Yùnas
andar-i-dihán-i máhi shud*: Jonas was within the fish's mouth. See
ADDITIONAL NOTES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto II.: Lanká.](ry345)
