[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry351)  [Next](ry353.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO X.: RÁVAN ASLEEP.

Apart a dais of crystal rose  
With couches spread for soft repose.  
Adorned with gold and gems of price  
Meet for the halls of Paradise.  
A canopy was o'er them spread  
Pale as the light the moon beams shed,  
And female figures, <span id="fr_820"></span>[1](#fn_820.md) deftly
planned,  
The faces of the sleepers fanned,  
There on a splendid couch, asleep  
On softest skins of deer and sheep.  
Dark as a cloud that dims the day  
The monarch of the giants lay,  
Perfumed with sandal's precious scent  
And gay with golden ornament.  

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>  

His fiery eyes in slumber closed,  
In glittering robes the king reposed  
Like Mandar's mighty hill asleep  
With flowery trees that clothe his steep.  
Near and more near the Vánar  
The monarch of the fiends to view,  
And saw the giant stretched supine  
Fatigued with play and drunk with wine.  
While, shaking all the monstrous frame,  
His breath like hissing serpents' came.  
With gold and glittering bracelets gay  
His mighty arms extended lay  
Huge as the towering shafts that bear  
The flag of Indra high in air.  
Scars by Airávat's impressed  
Showed red upon his shaggy breast.  
And on his shoulders were displayed  
The dints the thunder-bolt had made.  <span
id="fr_821"></span>[1](ry353.htm#fn_821.md)  
The spouses of the giant king  
Around their lord were slumbering,  
And, gay with sparkling earrings, shone  
Fair as the moon to look upon.  
There by her husband's side was seen  
Mandodarífavourite queen,  
The beauty of whose youthful face  
Beamed a soft glory through the place.  
The Vánared the dame more fair  
Than all the royal ladies there,  
And thought, 'These rarest beauties speak  
The matchless dame I come to seek.  
Peerless in grace and splendour, she  
The Maithil queen must surely be.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_820"></span>[401:1](ry352.htm#fr_820.md) Women, says Válmíki.
But the commentator says that automatic figures only are meant. Women
would have seen Hanumán and given the alarm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XI.: The Banquet Hall.](ry353.md)
