[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry355)  [Next](ry357.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIV.: THE AS'OKA GROVE.

He cleared the barrier at a bound;  
He stood within the pleasant ground,  

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>  

And with delighted eyes surveyed  
The climbing plants and varied shade,  
He saw unnumbered trees unfold  
The treasures of their pendent gold,  
As, searching for the Maithil queen,  
He strayed through alleys soft and green;  
And when a spray he bent or broke  
Some little bird that slept awoke.  
Whene'er the breeze of morning blew,  
Where'er a startled peacock flew,  
The gaily coloured branches shed  
Their flowery rain upon his head  
That clung around the Vánar till  
He seemed a blossom-covered hill,  <span
id="fr_826"></span>[1](ry357.htm#fn_826.md)  
The earth, on whose fair bosom lay  
The flowers that fell from every spray,  
Was glorious as a lovely maid  
In all her brightest robes arrayed,  
He saw the breath of morning shake  
The lilies on the rippling lake  
Whose waves a pleasant lapping made  
On crystal steps with gems inlaid.  
Then roaming through the enchanted ground,  
A pleasant hill the Vánar found,  
And grottoes in the living stone  
With grass and flowery trees o'ergrown.  
Through rocks and boughs a brawling rill  
Leapt from the bosom of the hill,  
Like a proud beauty when she flies  
From her love's arms with angry eyes.  
He clomb a tree that near him grew  
And leafy shade around him threw.  
'Hence,' thought the Vánar, 'shall I see  
The Maithil dame, if here she be,  
These lovely trees, this cool retreat  
Will surely tempt her wandering feet.  
Here the sad queen will roam apart.  
And dream of Ráma in her heart,'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_822"></span>[403:1](ry355.htm#fr_822.md) The Vasus are a class
of eight deities, originally personifications of natural phenomena.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[403:2](ry355.htm#fr_823.md) The Maruts are the
winds or Storm-Gods.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[403:3](ry355.htm#fr_824.md) The Ádityas
originally seven deities of the heavenly sphere of whom Varuna is the
chief. The name Áditya was afterwards given to any God, specially to
Súrya the Sun.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[403:4](ry355.htm#fr_825.md) The As'vins are the
Heavenly Twins, the Castor and Pollux of the Hindus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XV.: Sítá.](ry357.md)
