[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry360)  [Next](ry362) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIX.: SÍTA'S FEAR.

Then o'er the lady's soul and frame  
A sudden fear and trembling came,  
When, glowing in his youthful pride,  
She saw the monarch by her side.  
Silent she sat, her eyes depressed,  
Her soft arms folded o'er her breast,  
And,--all she could,--her beauties screened  
From the bold gazes of the fiend.  
There where the wild she-demons kept  
Their watch around, she sighed and wept.  
Then, like a severed bough, she lay  
Prone on the bare earth in dismay.  
The while her thoughts on love's fleet wings  
Flew to her lord the best of kings.  
She fell upon the ground, and there  
Lay struggling with her wild despair,  
Sad as a lady born again  
To misery and woe and pain,  
Now doomed to grief and low estate,  
Once noble fair and delicate:  
Like faded light of holy lore,  
Like Hope when all her dreams are o'er;  
Like ruined power and rank debased,  
Like majesty of kings disgraced:  
Like woman \*\*\* led by erring slips,  
The moon that labors in eclipse  
A pool with all her lillies\* dead  
An army when its king has fled:  
So sad and helpless wan and worn,  
She lay among the fiends forlorn.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_831"></span>[406:1](ry360.htm#fr_831) Rávan is one of those
beings who can 'limb\* them as they will' and can of course assume the
loveliest form to please human eyes as well as the terrific\* shape that
sits \* the king of the Rákshas.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[406:2](ry360.htm#fr_832) White and lovely as
the Arant or nectar recovered from the depths of the Milky Sea when
churned by the assembled Gods. See Book I. Canto XLV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XX.: Rávan's Wooing.](ry362)
