[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry359)  [Next](ry361) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XVIII.: RÁVAN.

While from his shelter in the boughs  
The Vánar looked on Ráma's spouse  
He heard the gathered giants raise  
The solemn hymn of prayer and praise.--  
Priests skilled in rite and ritual, who  
The Vedas and their branches  <span id="fr_829"></span>[1b](#fn_829)
knew.  
Then, as loud strains of music broke  
His sleep, the giant monarch woke.  
Swift to his heart the thought returned  
Of the fair queen for whom he burned;  
Nor could the amorous fiend control  
The passion that absorbed his soul.  
In all his brightest garb arrayed  
He hastened to that lovely shade.  
Where glowed each choicest flower and fruit.  
And the sweet birds were never mute.  
And tall deer bent their heads to drink  
On the fair streamlet's grassy brink.  
Near that As'oka grove he drew,--  
A hundred dames his retinue.  
Like Indra with the thousand eyes  
Girt with the beauties of the skies.  
Some walked beside their lord to hold  
The chouries, fans, and lamps of gold.  
And others purest water bore  
In golden urns, and paced before.  
Some carried, piled on golden plates.  
Delicious food of dainty cates;  
Some wine in massive bowls whereon  
The fairest gems resplendent shone.  
Some by the monarch's side displayed,  
Wrought like a swan, a silken shade:  
Another beauty walked behind,  
The sceptre to her care assigned.  
Around the monarch gleamed the crowd  
As lightnings flash about a cloud.  
And each made music as she went  
With zone and tinkling ornament.  
Attended thus in royal state  
The monarch reached the garden gate,  
While gold and silver torches, fed  
With scented oil a soft light shed.  <span
id="fr_830"></span>[2b](#fn_830)  

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>  

He, while the flame of fierce desire  
Burnt in his eyes like kindled fire,  
Seemed Love incarnate in his pride,  
His bow and arrows laid aside.  <span
id="fr_831"></span>[1](ry361.htm#fn_831)  
His robe, from spot and blemish free  
Like Amrit foamy from the sea,  <span
id="fr_832"></span>[2](ry361.htm#fn_832)  
Hung down in many a loosened fold  
Inwrought with flowers and bright with gold.  
The Vánar from his station viewed,  
Amazed, the wondrous multitude,  
Where, in the centre of that ring  
Of noblest women, stood the king,  
As stands the full moon fair to view,  
Girt by his starry retinue.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_829"></span>[405:1b](ry360.htm#fr_829) The six *Angas* or
subordinate branches of the Vedas are 1. *Sikshá*, the science of proper
articulation and pronunciation: 2. *Chhandas*,metre: 3. *Vyakarana*,
linguistic analysis or grammar: 4. *Nirukta*, explanation of difficult
Vedic words: 5. *Jyotisha*, Astronomy, or rather the Vedic Calendar: 6.
*Kalpa*, ceremonial.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[405:2b](ry360.htm#fr_830) There appears to be
some confusion, of time here. It was already morning when Hanumán
entered the grove, and the torches would be needless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XIX.: Síta's Fear.](ry361)
