[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry370)  [Next](ry372) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXXI.: HANUMÁN'S SPEECH.

Then in sweet accents low and mild  
The Vánar spoke to Janak's child:  
'A noble king, by sin unstained,  
The mighty Das'aratha reigned.  
Lord of the warrior's car and steed,  
The pride of old Ikshváku's seed.  
A faithful friend, a blameless king.  
Protector of each living thing.  
A glorious monarch, strong to save,  
Blest with the bliss he freely gave,  
His son, the best of all who know  
The science of the bended bow,  
Was moon-bright Ráma, brave and strong  
Who loved the right and loathed the wrong  
Who ne'er from kingly duty swerved,  
Loved by the lands his might preserved.  
His feet the path of law pursued;  
His arm rebellious foes subdued.  
His sire's command the prince obeyed  
And, banished, sought the forest shade,  
Where with his wife and brother he  
Wandered a saintly devotee.  
There as he roamed the wilds he slew  
The bravest of the Rákshas crew.  
The giant king the prince beguiled,  
And stole his consort, Janak's child.  
Then Ráma roamed the country round,  
And a firm friend, Sugríva, found,  
Lord of the Vánar race, expelled  
From his own realm which Báli held,  
He conquered Báli and restored  
The kingdom to the rightful lord.  
Then by Sugríva's high decree  
The Vánarlegions searched for thee,  
Sampáti's counsel bade me leap  
A hundred leagues across the deep.  
And now my happy eyes have seen  
At last the long-sought Maithil queen.  
Such was the form, the eye, the grace  
Of her whom Ráma bade me trace.'  

He ceased: her flowing locks she drew  
To shield her from a stranger's view;  
Then, trembling in her wild surprise,  
Raised to the tree her anxious eyes.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXXII.: Sítá's Doubt.](ry372)
