[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry369)  [Next](ry371) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXX. <span id="fr_851"></span>[3](#fn_851): HANUMÁN'S DELIBERATION.

The Vánar watched concealed: each word  
Of Sítá and the fiends he heard,  

And in a maze of anxious thought  
His quick-conceiving bosom wrought.  
'At length my watchful eyes have seen,  
Pursued so long, the Maithil queen,  
Sought by our Vánar hosts in vain  
From east to west, from main to main,  
A cautious spy have I explored  
The palace of the Rákhshas lord,  
And thoroughly learned, concealed from sight,  
The giant monarch's power and might.  
And now my task must be to cheer  
The royal dame who sorrows here.  
For if I go, and sooth her not,  
A captive in this distant spot,  
She, when she finds no comfort nigh,  
Will sink beneath her woes and die.  
How shall my tale, if unconsoled  
I leave her. be to Ráma told?  
How shall I answer Raghu's son,  
'No message from my darling, none!'  
The husband's wrath, to fury fanned,  
Will scorch me lifeless where I stand,  
Or if I urge my lord the king  
To Lanká's isle his hosts to bring,  
In vain will be his zeal, in vain  
The toil, the danger, and the pain.  
Yea, this occasion must I seize  
That from her guard the lady frees,  <span
id="fr_852"></span>[1b](#fn_852)  
To win her ear with soft address  
And whisper hope in dire distress.  
Shall I, a puny Vánar, choose  
The Sanskrit men delight to use?  
If. as a man of Bráhman kind,  
I speak the tongue by rules refined.  
The lady, yielding to her fears,  
Will think 'tis Rávan's voice she hears.  
I must assume my only plan--  
The language of a common  <span id="fr_853"></span>[2b](#fn_853) man.  
Yet, if the lidy sees me nigh,  

second passage, may perhaps be understood  
not a language in which words different  
from Sanskrit were used, but the employment  
of formal and elaborate diction,  
MUIR'S *Sanskrit Texts*, Part II. p. 166.}  

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>  

In terror she will start and cry;  
And all the demon band, alarmed,  
Will come with various weapons armed.  
With their wild shouts the grove will fill.  
And strive to take me, or to kill.  
And, at my death or capture, dies  
The hope of Ráma's enterprise.  
For none can leap, save only me,  
A hundred leagues across the sea.  
It is a sin in me, I own,  
To talk with Janak's child alone.  
Yet greater is the sin if I  
Be silent, and the lady die.  
First I will utter Ráma's name.  
And laud the hero's gifts and fame.  
Perchance the name she holds so dear  
Will soothe the faithful lady's fear.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_849"></span>[411:1](ry369.htm#fr_849) In the south is the
region of Yama the God of Death, the place of departed spirits.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[411:2](ry369.htm#fr_850) Kumbhakarna was one
of Rávan's brothers.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[411:3](ry370.htm#fr_851) I omit the 28th and
29th Cantos as an unmistakeable interpolation. Instead of advancing the
story it goes back to Canto XVII. containing a lamentation of Sítá after
Rávan has left her, and describes the the auspicious signs sent to cheer
her, the throbbing of her left eye, arm, and side. The Canto is found in
the Bengal recension. Gorresio translates it. and observes: "I think
that Chapter XXVIII.--The Auspicious Signs--is an addition, a later
interpolation by the Rhapsodists. It has no bond of connexion either
with what precedes or follows it, and may be struck out not only without
injury to, but positively to the advantage of the poem. The metre in
which this chapter is written differs from that which is generally
adopted in the course of the poem.'

<span id="fn_852"></span>[411:1b](ry370.htm#fr_852) The guards are still
in the grove, but they are asleep; and Sítá has crept to a tree at some
distance from them.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[411:2b](ry370.htm#fr_853) "As the reason
assigned in these passages for not addressing Sítá in Sanskrit such as a
Bráhman would use is not that she would not understand it, but that it
would alarm her and be unsuitable to the speaker, we must take them as
indicating that Sanskrit, if not spoken by women of the upper classes at
the time when the Rámáyana was written (whenever that may have been),
was at least understood by them, and was commonly spoken by men of the
priestly class, and other educated persons, By the Sanskrit proper to
<span id="page_412">p. 412</span> an \[ordinary

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXXI.: Hanumán's Speech.](ry371)
