[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry372)  [Next](ry374) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XXXIII.: THE COLLOQUY.

Down from the tree Hanumán came  
And humbly stood before the dame.  
Then joining reverent palm to palm  
Addressed her thus with words of balm:  
'Why should the tears of sorrow rise,  
Sweet lady, to those lovely eyes,  
As when the wind-swept river floods  
Two half expanded lotus buds?  
Who art thou, O most fair of face?  
Of Asur, <span id="fr_856"></span>[1](#fn_856) or celestial race?  
Did Nága mother give thee birth?  
For sure thou art no child of earth.  
Do Rudras  <span id="fr_857"></span>[2](#fn_857) claim that heavenly
form?  
Or the swift Gods  <span id="fr_858"></span>[3](#fn_858) who ride the
storm?  
Or art thou Rohiní  <span id="fr_859"></span>[4](#fn_859) the blest,  
That star more lovely than the rest,--  
Reft from the Moon thou lovest well  
And doomed a while on earth to dwell?  
Or canst thou, fairest wonder, be  
The starry queen Arundhatí, <span id="fr_860"></span>[5](#fn_860)  
Fled in thy wrath or jealous pride  
From her dear lord Vas'ishtha's side?  
Who is the husband, father, son  
Or brother, O thou loveliest one,  
Gone from this world in heaven to dwell,  
For whom those eyes with weeping swell?  
Yet, by the tears those sweet eyes shed,  
Yet, by the earth that bears thy tread, <span
id="fr_861"></span>[6](#fn_861)  
By calling on a monarch's name,  
No Goddess but a royal dame.  
Art thou the queen, fair lady, say,  
Whom Rávan stole and bore away?  
Yea, by that agony of woe,  
That form unrivalled here below,  
That votive garb, thou art, I ween,  
King Janak's child and Ráma's queen.'  

Hope at the name of Ráma woke,  
And thus the gentle lady spoke:  
'I am that Sítá wooed and won  
By Das'aratha's royal son,  
The noblest of Ikshváku's line;  
And every earthly joy was mine.  
But Ráma left his royal home  
In Dandak's tangled wilds to roam.  
Where with Sumitrá's son and me,  
He lived a saintly devotee.  
The giant Rávan came with guile  
And bore me thence to Lanká's isle.  
Some respite yet the fiend allows,  
Two months of life, to Ráma's spouse.  
Two moons of hopeless woe remain.  
And then the captive will be slain.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_856"></span>[413:1](ry373.htm#fr_856) The Asurs were the
fierce enemies of the Gods.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[413:2](ry373.htm#fr_857) The Rudras are
manifestations of S'iva.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[413:3](ry373.htm#fr_858) The Maruts or Storm
Gods.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[413:4](ry373.htm#fr_859) Rohiní is an asterism
personified as the daughter of Daksha and the favourite wife of the
Moon. The chief star in the constellation is Aldebaran.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[413:5](ry373.htm#fr_860) Arundhatí was the
wife of the great sage Vas'ishtha, and regarded as the pattern of
conjugal excellence. She was raised to the heavens as one of the
Pleiades.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[413:6](ry373.htm#fr_861) The Gods do not shed
tears; nor do they touch the ground when they walk or stand. Similarly
Milton's angels marched above the ground and "the passive air upbore
their nimble tread."

Virgil's 'vera incessu patuit dea' may refer to the same belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XXXIV.: Hanumán's Speech.](ry374)
