[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry378)  [Next](ry380) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLI. <span id="fr_876"></span>[1](#fn_876): THE RUIN OF THE GROVE.

Dismissed with every honour due  
The Vánar from the spot withdrew.  
Then joyous thought the Wind-God's son:  
'The mighty task is wellnigh done.  
The three expedients I must leave;  
The fourth alone can I achieve.  <span id="fr_877"></span>[2](#fn_877)  
These dwellers in the giants' isle  
No arts of mine can reconcile.  
I cannot bribe: I cannot sow  
Dissension mid the Rákshas foe.  
Arts, gifts, address, these fiends despise;  
But force shall yet their king chastise.  
Perchance he may relent when all  
The bravest of his chieftains fall.  
This lovely grove will I destroy,  
The cruel Rávan's pride and joy.  
The garden where he takes his ease  
Mid climbing plants and flowery trees  
That lift their proud tops to the skies,  
Dear to the tyrant as his eyes.  
Then will he rouse in wrath, and lead  
His legions with the car and steed  
And elephants in long array,  
And seek me thirsty for the fray.  
The Rákshas legions will I meet,  
And all his bravest host defeat;  
Then, glorious from the bloody plain,  
Turn to my lord the king again.'  
   Then every lovely tree that bore  
Fair blossoms, from the soil he tore,  
Till each green bough that lent its shade  
To singing birds on earth was laid.  
The wilderness he left a waste,  
The fountains shattered and defaced:  
O'erthrew and levelled with the ground  
Each shady seat and pleasure-mound.  
Each arbour clad with climbing bloom,  
Each grotto, cell, and picture room,  
Each lawn by beast and bird enjoyed,  
Each walk and terrace was destroyed.  

And all the place that was so fair  
Was left a ruin wild and bare,  
As if the fury of the blast  
Or raging fire had o'er it passed.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_876"></span>[417:1](ry379.htm#fr_876) I omit two Cantos of
dialogue. Sítá tells Hanumán again to convey her message to Ráma and bid
him hasten to rescue her. Hanumán replies as before that there is no one
on earth equal to Ráma, who will soon come and destroy Rávan. There is
not a new idea in the two Cantos: all is reiteration.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[417:2](ry379.htm#fr_877) The expedients to
vanquish an enemy or to make him come to terms are said to be four:
conciliation, gifts, disunion, and force or punishment. Hanumán
considers it useless to employ the first three and resolves to punish
Rávan by destroying his pleasure-grounds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLII.: The Giants Roused.](ry380)
