[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry386)  [Next](ry388) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLIX.: RÁVAN.

On the fierce king Hanúmán turned  
His angry eyes that glowed and burned.  
He saw him decked with wealth untold  
Of diamond and pearl and gold,  
And priceless was each wondrous gem  
That sparkled in his diadem.  
About his neck rich chains were twined,  
The best that fancy e'er designed,  
And a fair robe with pearls bestrung  
Down from his mighty shoulders hung.  
Ten heads he reared,  <span id="fr_887"></span>[2](#fn_887) as Mandar's
hill  

Lifts woody peaks which tigers fill.  
Bright were his eyes, and bright, beneath,  
The flashes of his awful teeth.  
His brawny arms of wondrous size  
Were decked with rings and scented dyes  
His hands like snakes with five long heads  
Descending from their mountain beds.  
He sat upon a crystal throne  
Inlaid with wealth of precious stone,  
Whereon, of noblest work, was set  
A gold-embroidered coverlet,  
Behind the monarch stood the best  
Of beauteous women gaily dressed.  
And each her giant master fanned,  
Or waved a chourie in her hand.  
Four noble courtiers  <span id="fr_888"></span>[1b](ry388.htm#fn_888)
wise and good  
In counsel, near the monarch stood,  
As the four oceans ever stand  
About the sea-encompassed land.  
Still, though his heart with rage was fired,  
The Vánar marvelled and admired:  
'O what a rare and wondrous sight!  
What beauty, majesty, and might!  
All regal pomp combines to grace  
This ruler of the Rákshas race.  
He, if he scorned not right aud law,  
Might guide the world with tempered awe:  
Yea, Indra and the Gods on high  
Might on his saving power rely.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_886"></span>[421:1](ry386.htm#fr_886) The *sloka* which
follows is probably an interpolation, as it is inconsistent w?th the
questioning in Canto L.: He looked on Ravan in his pride, And boldly to
the monarch cried: 'I came an envoy to this place From him who rules the
Vánar race.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[421:2](ry387.htm#fr_887) The ten heads of
Rávan have provoked much ridicule from European critics. It should be
remembered that Spenser tells us of "two brethren giants" "The one of
which had two heads, the other three;" and Milton speaks of the
"four-fold visaged Four," the four Cherubic shapes each of which had
four faces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto L.: Prahasta's Questions.](ry388)
