[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry405)  [Next](ry407) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO VII.: RÁVAN ENCOURAGED.

He ceased: they scorned, with blinded eyes,  
The foeman and his bold allies,  
Raised reverent bands with one accord,  
And thus made answer to their lord:  
'Why yield thee, King, to causeless fear?  
A mighty host with sword and spear  
And mace and axe and pike and lance  
Waits but thy signal to advance.  
Art thou not he who slew of old  
The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold;  
Scaled Mount Kailása and o'erthrew  
Kuvera  <span id="fr_920"></span>[1](#fn_920) and his Yaksha crew,  

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>  

Compelling S'iva's haughty friend  
Beneath a mightier arm to bend?  
Didst thou not bring from realms afar  
The marvel of the magic car,  
When they who served Kuvera fell  
Crushed in their mountain citadel?  
Attracted by thy matchless fame  
To thee, a suppliant, Maya came,  
The lord of every Dánav band,  
And won thee with his daughter's hand.  
Thy arm in hell itself was felt,  
Where Vásuki <span id="fr_921"></span>[1](#fn_921) and S'ankha dwelt,  
And they and Takshak, overthrown,  
Were forced thy conquering might to own.  
The Gods in vain their blessing gave  
To heroes bravest of the brave,  
Who strove a year and, sorely pressed,  
Their victor's peerless might confessed.  
In vain their magic arts they tried,  
In vain thy matchless arm defied.  
King Varun's sons with fourfold force,  
Cars, elephants, and foot, and horse,  
But for a while thy power withstood,  
And, conquered, mourned their hardihood.  
Thou hast encountered, face to face,  
King Yama <span id="fr_922"></span>[2](#fn_922) with his murdering
mace.  
Fierce as the wild tempestuous aea,  
What terror had his wrath for thee,  
Though death in every threatening form,  
And woe and torment, urged the storm?  
Thine arm a glorious victory won  
O'er the dread king who pities none;  
And the three worlds, from terror freed,  
In joyful wonder praised thy deed.  
The tribe of Warriors, strong and dread  
As Indra's self, o'er earth had spread;  
As giant trees that towering stand  
ln mountain glens, they filled the land.  
Can Raghu's son encounter foes  
Fierce, numerous, and strong as those?  
Yet, trained in war and practised well,  
O'ermatched by thee, they fought and fell,  
Stay in thy royal home, nor care  
The battle and the toil to share;  
But let the easy fight be won  
By Indrajit <span id="fr_923"></span>[3](#fn_923) thy matchless son.  
All, all shall die, if thou permit,  
Slain by the hand of Indrajit.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_920"></span>[431:1](ry406.htm#fr_920) The God of Riches,
brother and enemy of Rávan and first possessor of Pushpak the flying
car.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[432:1](ry406.htm#fr_921) King of the Serpents.
S'ankha and Takshak are two of the eight Serpent Chiefs.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[432:2](ry406.htm#fr_922) The God of Death, the
Pluto of the Hindus.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[432:3](ry406.htm#fr_923) Literally Indra's
conqueror, so called from his victory over that God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto VIII.: Prahasta's Speech.](ry407)
