[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry408)  [Next](ry410.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO X.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.

Soon as the light of morning broke,  
Vibhíshan from his slumber woke,  
And, duty guiding every thought,  
The palace of his brother sought.  
Vast as a towering hill that shows  
His peaks afar, that palace rose.  
Here stood within the monarch's gate  
Sage nobles skilful in debate.  
There strayed in glittering raiment through  
The courts his royal retinue,  
Where in wild measure rose and fell  
The music of the drum and shell,  
And talk grew loud, and many a dame  
Of fairest feature went and came  
Through doors a marvel to behold,  
With pearl inlaid on burning gold:  
Therein Gandharvas or the fleet  
Lords of the storm might joy to meet.  
He passed within the wondrous pile,  
Chief glory of the giants' isle:  
Thus, ere his fiery course be done,  
An autumn cloud admits the sun.  

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>  

He heard auspicious voices raise  
With loud accord the note of praise,  
And sages, deep in Scripture, sing  
Each glorious triumph of the king.  
He saw the priests in order stand,  
Curd, oil, in every sacred hand;  
And by them flowers were laid and grain,  
Due offerings to the holy train.  
Vibhíshan to the monarch bowed,  
Raised on a throne above the crowd:  
Then, skilled in arts of soft address,  
He raised his voice the king to bless,  
And sate him on a seat where he  
Full in his brother's sight should be.  
The chieftain there, while none could hear,  
Spoke his true speech for Rávan's ear,  
And to his words of wisdom lent  
The force of weightiest argument:  
  'O brother, hear! since Ráma's queen  
A captive in thy house has been,  
Disastrous omens day by day  
Have struck our souls with wild dismay.  
No longer still and strong and clear  
The flames of sacrifice appear,  
But, restless with the frequent spark,  
Neath clouds of smoke grow faint and dark.  
Our ministering priests turn pale  
To see their wonted offerings fail,  
And ants and serpents creep and crawl  
Within the consecrated hall. <span id="fr_926"></span>[1](#fn_926.md)  
Dried are the udders of our cows,  
Our elephants have juiceless brows, <span
id="fr_927"></span>[2](#fn_927.md)  
Nor can the sweetest pasture stay  
The charger's long unquiet neigh.  
Big tears from mules and camels flow  
Whose staring coats their trouble show,  
Nor can the leech's art restore  
Their health and vigour as before.  
Rapacious birds are fierce and bold:  
Not single hunters as of old,  
In banded troops they chase the prey,  
Or gathering on our temples stay.  
Through twilight hours with shriek and howl  
Around the city jackals prowl,  
And wolves and foul hyaenas wait  
Athirst for blood at every gate.  
One sole atonement still may cure  
These evils, and our weal assure.  
Restore the Maithil dame, and win  
An easy pardon for thy sin.'  

The Rákshas monarch heard, and moved  
To sudden wrath his speech reproved:  
   'No danger, brother, can I see:  
The Maithil dame I will not free.  
Though all the Gods for Ráma fight,  
He yields to my superior might.'  
Thus the tremendous king who broke  
The ranks of heavenly warriors spoke,  
And, sternly purposed to resist,  
His brother from the hall dismissed.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_926"></span>[434:1](ry409.htm#fr_926.md) The *Agnisálá* or
room where the sacrificial fire was kept.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[434:2](ry409.htm#fr_927.md) The exudation of a
fragrant fluid from the male elephant's temples, especially at certain
seasons, is frequently spoken of in Sanskrit poetry. It is said to
deceive and attract the bees, and is regarded as a sign of health and
masculine vigour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XI.: The Summons.](ry410.md)
