[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry400)  [Next](ry402.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO II.: SUGRÍVA'S SPEECH.

He ceased: and King Sugríva tried  
To calm his grief, and thus replied:  
'Be to thy nobler nature true,  
Nor let despair thy soul subdue.  
This cloud of causeless woe dispel,  
For all as yet has prospered well,  
And we have traced thy queen, and know  
The dwelling of our Rákshas foe.  
Arise, consult: thy task must be  
To cast a bridge athwart the sea,  
The city of our foe to reach  
That crowns the mountain by the beach;  

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>  

And when our feet that isle shall tread,  
Rejoice and deem thy foeman dead.  
The sea unbridged, his walls defy  
Both fiends and children of the sky,  
Though at the fierce battalions' head  
Lord Indra's self the onset led.  
Yea, victory is thine before  
The long bridge touch the farther shore,  
So fleet and fierce and strong are these  
Who limb them as their fancies please.  
Away with grief and sad surmise  
That mar the noblest enterprise,  
And with their weak suspicion blight  
The sage's plan, the hero's might.  
Come, this degenerate weakness spurn,  
And bid thy dauntless heart return,  
For each fair hope by grief is crossed  
When those we love are dead or lost.  
Arise, O best of those who know,  
Arm for the giant's overthrow.  
None in the triple world I see  
Who in the fight may equal thee;  
None who before thy face may stand  
And brave the bow that arms thy hand,  
Trust to these mighty Vánars: they  
With full success thy trust will pay,  
When thou shalt reach the robber's hold,  
And loving arms round Sítá fold.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_905"></span>[427:1b](ry399.htm#fr_905.md) The Sixth Book is
called in Sanskrit *Yuddha-Kánda* or *The War*, and *Lanká-Kánda*. It is
generally known at the present day by the latter title.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[427:2b](ry400.htm#fr_906.md) Váyu is the God of
Wind.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[427:3b](ry400.htm#fr_907.md) Garuda the King of
Birds.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[427:4b](ry400.htm#fr_908.md) Serpent-Gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto III.: Lanká.](ry402.md)
