[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry417)  [Next](ry419.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIX.: VIBHÍSHAN'S COUNSEL.

When Raghu's son had owned his claim  
Down from the air Vibhíshan came,  
And with his four attendants bent  
At Ráma's feet most reverent.  
   'O Ráma,' thus he cried, 'in me  
Vibhíshan, Rávan's brother see.  
By him disgraced thine aid I seek,  
Sure refuge of the poor and weak.  
From Lanká, friends, and wealth I fly.  
And reft of all on thee rely.  
On thee, the wretch's firmest friend,  
My kingdom, joys, and life depend.'  
   With glance of favour Ráma eyed  
The Rákshas chief and thus replied:  
   'First from thy lips I fain would hear  
Each brighter hope, each darker fear.  
Speak, stranger, that I well may know  
The strength and weakness of the foe.'  
   He ceased: the Rákshas chief obeyed,  
And thus in turn his answer made:  
   'O Prince, the Self-existent gave  
This boon to Rávan; he may brave  
All foes in fight; no fiend or snake,  
Gandharva, God, his life may take.  
His brother Kumbhakarna vies  
In might with him who rules the skies.  
The captain of his armies--fame  
Perhaps has taught the warrior's name--  
Is terrible Prahanta, who  
King Manibhadra's  <span id="fr_940"></span>[1](#fn_940.md) self
o'erthrew.  
Where is the warrior found to face  
Young Indrajit, when armed with brace  
And guard  <span id="fr_941"></span>[2](#fn_941.md) and bow he stands in
mail  
And laughs at spear and arrowy hail?  
Within his city Lanká dwell  
Ten million giants fierce and fell,  
Who wear each varied shape at will  
And eat the flesh of those they kill.  
These hosts against the Gods he led.  
And heavenly might discomfited.'  
   Then Ráma cried: 'I little heed  
Gigantic strength or doughty deed.  
In spite of all their might has done  
The king, the captain, aud the son  
Shall fall beneath my fury dead,  
And thou shalt reign in Rávan's stead.  
He, though in depths of earth he dwell,  
Or seek protection down in hell,  

Or kneel before the Sire supreme,  
His forfeit life shall ne'er redeem.  
Yea, by my brothers' lives I swear,  
I will not to my home repair  
Till Rávan and his kith and kin  
Have paid in death the price of sin.'  
   Vibhíshan bowed his head and cried:  
'Thy conquering army will I guide  
To storm the city of the foe,  
And aid the tyrant's overthrow.'  
Thus spake Vibhíshan: Ráma pressed  
The Rákshas chieftain to his breast,  
And cried to Lakshman:'Haste and bring  
Sea-water for the new-made king.'  
He spoke, and o'er Vibhíshan's head  
The consecrating drops were shed  
Mid shouts that hailed with one accord  
The giants' king and Lanká's lord,  
   'Is there no way,' Hanúmán cried,  
'No passage o'er the boisterous tide?  
How may we lead the Vánar host  
In triumph to the farther coast?  
'Thus,' said Vibhíshan, 'I advise:  
Let Raghu's son in suppliant guise  
Entreat the mighty Sea to lend  
His succour and this cause befriend.  
His channels, as the wise have told,  
By Sagar's sons were dug of old,  <span
id="fr_942"></span>[1b](ry419.htm#fn_942.md)  
Nor will high-thoughted Ocean scorn  
A prince of Sagar's lineage born.'  
   He ceased; the prudent counsel won  
The glad assent of Raghu's son.  
Then on the ocean shore a bed  
Of tender sacred grass was spread,  
Where Ráma at the close of day  
Like fire upon an altar lay.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_940"></span>[441:1](ry418.htm#fr_940.md) A King of the
Yakshas, or Kuvera himself, the God of Gold.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[441:2](ry418.htm#fr_941.md) The brace protects
the left arm from injury from the bow-string, and the guard protects the
fingers of the right hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XX.: The Spies.](ry419.md)
