[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry412)  [Next](ry414.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XIV.: VIBHÍSHAN'S SPEECH.

He ceased: Vibhíshan ill at ease  
Addressed the king in words like these:  
   O Rávan, O my lord, beware  
Of Sitá dangerous as fair,  
Nor on thy heedless bosom hang  
This serpent with a deadly fang.  
O King, the Maithil dame restore  
To Raghu's matchlees son before  
Those warriors of the woodlands, vast  
As mountain peaks, approaching fast,  
Armed with fierce teeth and claws, enclose  
Thy city with unsparing foes.  
O, be the Maithil dame restored  
Ere loosened from the clanging cord  

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>  

The vengeful shafts of Ráma fly,  
And low in death thy princes lie.  
In all thy legions hast thou one  
A match in war for Raghu's son?  
Can Kumbhakarna's self withstand,  
Or Indrajit, that mighty hand?  
In vain with Ráma wilt thou strive:  
Thou wilt not save thy soul alive  
Though guarded by the Lord of Day  
And Storm-Gods' terrible array,  
In vain to Indra wilt thou fly,  
Or seek protection in the sky,  
In Yama's gloomy mansion dwell,  
Or hide thee in the depths of hell.'  
   He ceased; and when his lips were closed  
Prahasta thus his rede opposed:  
   'O timid heart, to counsel thus!  
What terrors have the Gods for us?  
Can snake, Gandharva, fiend appal  
The giants' sons who scorn them all?  
And shall we now our birth disgrace,  
And dread a king of human race?'  
Thus fierce Prahasta counselled ill;  
But sage Vibhíshan's constant will  
The safety of the realm ensued;  
Who thus in turn his speech renewed:  
   'Yes, when a soul defiled with sin  
Shall mount to heaven and enter in,  
Then, chieftain, will experience teach  
The truth of thy disdainful speech.  
Can I, or thou, or these or all  
Our bravest compass Ráma's fall,  
The chief in whom all virtues shine,  
The pride of old Ikshváku'a line,  
With whom the Gods may scarce compare  
In skill to act, in heart to dare?  
Yea, idly mayst thou vaunt thee, till  
Sharp arrows winged with matchless skill  
From Ráma's bowstring, fleet and fierce  
As lightning's flame, thy body pierce.  
Nikumbha shall not save thee then,  
Nor Rávan, from the lord of men.  
O Monarch, hear my last appeal,  
My counsel for thy kingdom's weal,  
This sentence I again declare:  
O giant King, beware, beware!  
Save from the ruin that impends  
Thy town, thy people, and thy friends;  
O hear the warning urged once more:  
To Raghu's son the dame restore.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_932"></span>[436:1](ry412.htm#fr_932.md) One of the Nymphs of
Indra's heaven.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[436:2](ry412.htm#fr_933.md) The Lotus River, a
branch of the heavenly Gangá.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XV.: Indrajit's Speech.](ry414.md)
