[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry443)  [Next](ry445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO XLV.: INDRAJIT'S VICTORY.

Brave Ráma, burning still to know  
The station of his artful foe,  

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>  

Gave to ten chieftains, mid the best  
Of all the host, his high behest.  
Swift rose in air the Vánar band:  
Each region of the sky they scanned:  
But Rávan's son by magic skill  
Checked them with arrows swifter still,  
When streams of blood from chest and side  
The dauntless Vánars' limbs had dyed.  
The giant in his misty shroud  
Showed like the sun obscured by cloud.  
Like serpents hissing through the air,  
His arrows smote the princely pair;  
And from their limbs at every rent  
A stream of rushing blood was sent.  
Like Kins'uk trees they stood, that show  
In spring their blossoms' crimson glow.  
Then Indrajit with fury eyed  
Ikshváku's royal sons, and cried:  

'Not mighty Indra can assail  
Or see me when I choose to veil  
My form in battle: and can ye,  
Children of earth, contend with me?  
The arrowy noose this hand has shot  
Has bound you with a hopeless knot;  
And, slaughtered by my shafts and bow,  
To Yama's hall this hour ye go.'  

He spoke, and shouted. Then anew  
The arrows from his bowstring flew,  
And pierced, well aimed with perfect art,  
Each limb and joint and vital part.  
Transfixed with shafts in every limb.  
Their strength relaxed, their eyes grew dim.  
As two tall standards side by side,  
With each sustaining rope untied.  
Fall levelled by the howling blast,  
So earth's majestic lords at last  
Beneath the arrowy tempest reeled,  
And prostrate pressed the battle field.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_962"></span>[460:1b](ry443.htm#fr_962) Yajnas'atru,
Maháphráva, Mahodar, Vajradanshtra, S'uka, and Sáran.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[460:2b](ry443.htm#fr_963) Angad.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[460:3b](ry443.htm#fr_964) A mysterious weapon
consisting of serpents transformed to arrows which deprived the wounded
object of all sense and power of motion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto XLVI.: Indrajit's Triumph.](ry445)
