[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry458)  [Next](ry460) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO LXIII.: KUMBHAKABNA'S BOAST.

Then Kumbhakarna laughed aloud  
And cried; 'O Monarch, once so proud,  

We warned thee, but thou wouldst not hear  
And now the fruits of sin appear.  
We warned thee, I, thy nobles, all  
Who loved thee, in thy council hall.  
Those sovereigns who with blinded eyes  
Neglect the foe their hearts despise,  
Soon, falling from the their high estate  
Bring on themselves the stroke of fate.  
Accept at length, thy life to save,  
The counsel sage Vibhíshan gave,  
The prudent counsel spurned before,  
And Sita to her lord restore.'  <span id="fr_989"></span>[1](#fn_989)  
The monarch frowned, by passion moved  
And thus in angry words reproved:  
' Wilt thou thine elder brother school,  
Forgetful of the ancient rule  
That bids thee treat him as the sage  
Who guides thee with the lore of age?  
Think on the dangers of the day,  
Nor idly throw thy words away:  
If, led astray, by passion stirred,  
I in the pride of power have erred;  
If deeds of old were done amiss.  
No time for vain reproach is this.  
Up, brother; let thy loving care  
The errors of thy king repair.'  
   To calm his wrath, his soul to ease,  
The younger spake in words like these:  
' Yea, from our bosoms let us cast  
All idle sorrow for the past.  
Let grief and anger be repressed:  
Again be firm and self-possessed.  
This day, O Monarch, shalt thou see  
The Vánar legions turn and flee,  
And Ráma and his brother slain  
With their hearts' blood shall dye the plain  
Yea, if the God who rules the dead,  
And Varun their battalions led;  
If Indra with the Storm-Gods came  
Against me, and the Lord of Flame,  
Still would I fight with all and slay  
Thy banded foes, my King, to-day.  
If Raghu's son this day withstand  
The blow of mine uplifted hand.  
Deep in his breast my darts shall sink,  
And torrents of his life-blood drink.  
O fear not, in my promise trust;  
This arm shall lay him in the dust,  
Shall leave the fierce Sugríva dyed  
With gore, and Lakshman by his side,  
And strike the great Hanúmán down.  
The spoiler of our glorious town.'  <span
id="fr_990"></span>[2](#fn_990)  

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_989"></span>[475:1](ry459.htm#fr_989) I omit a tedious
sermon on the danger of rashness and the advantages of prudence,
sufficient to irritate a less passionate hearer than Rávan.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[475:2](ry459.htm#fr_990) The Bengal recension
assigns a very different speech to Kumbhakarna and makes him say that
Nárad the messenger of the Gods had formerly told him that <span
id="page_473">p. 473</span> Vishn'u himself incarnate as Das'aratha's
son should come to destroy Rávan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto LXIV.: Mahodar's Speech.](ry460)
