[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry489)  [Next](ry491.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO CXIX.: GLORY TO VISHNU.

The shrill cry pierced through Ráma's ears  
And his sad eyes o'erflowed with tears,  
When lo, transported through the sky  
A glorious band of Gods was nigh.  
Ancestral shades,  <span id="fr_1039"></span>[1](#fn_1039.md) by men
revered,  
In venerable state appeared.  
And he from whom all riches flow,  <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[2](#fn_1040.md)  
And Yama Lord who reigns below:  
King Indra, thousand-eyed, and he  
Who wields the sceptre of the sea.  <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[3](#fn_1041.md)  
The God who shows the blazoned, bull, <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[4](#fn_1042.md)  
And Brahmá Lord most bountiful  
By whose command the worlds were made  
All these on radiant cars conveyed,  

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>  

Brighter than sun-beams, sought the place  
Where stood the prince of Raghu's race,  
And from their glittering seats the best  
Of blessed Gods the chief addressed:  

'Couldst thou, the Lord of all, couldst thou,  
Creator of the worlds, allow  
Thy queen, thy spouse to brave the fire  
And give her body to the pyre?  
Dost thou not yet, supremely wise,  
Thy heavenly nature recognize?  
They ceased: and Ráma thus began:  
'I deem myself a mortal man.  
Of old Ikshváku's line, I spring  
From Das'aratha Kosal's king.'  
He ceased: and Brahmá's self replied:  
'O cast the idle thought aside.  
Thou art the Lord Náráyan, thou  
The God to whom all creatures bow.  
Thou art the saviour God who wore  
Of old the semblance of a boar;  
Thou he whose discus overthrows  
All present, past and future foes;  
Thou Brahmá, That whose days extend  
Without beginning, growth or end;  
The God, who, bears the bow of horn,  
Whom four majestic arms adorn;  
Thou art the God who rules the sense  
And sways with gentle influence;  
Thou all-pervading Vishnu Lord  
Who wears the ever-conquering sword;  
Thou art the Guide who leads aright,  
Thou Krishna of unequalled might.  
Thy hand, O Lord, the hills and plains,  
And earth with all her life sustains;  
Thou wilt appear in serpent form  
When sinks the earth in fire and storm.  
Queen Sítá of the lovely brows  
Is Lakshmí thy celestial spouse.  
To free the worlds from Rávan thou  
Wouldst take the form thou wearest now.  
Rejoice: the mighty task is done:  
Rejoice, thou great and glorious one.  
The tyrant, slain, thy labours end:  
Triumphant now to heaven ascend.  
High bliss awaits the devotee  
Who clings in loving faith to thee,  
Who celebrates with solemn praise  
The Lord of ne'er beginning days.  
On earth below, in heaven above  
Great joy shall crown his faith and love.  
And he who loves the tale divine  
Which tells each glorious deed of thine  
Through life's fair course shall never know  
The fierce assault of pain and woe.' <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1](#fn_1043.md)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[498:1](ry490.htm#fr_1039.md) The Pitris or
Manes, the spirits of the dead.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[498:2](ry490.htm#fr_1040.md) Kuvera, the God of
Wealth.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[498:3](ry490.htm#fr_1041.md) Varun, God of the
sea.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[498:4](ry490.htm#fr_1042.md) Máhadeva or S'iva
whose ensign is a bull.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[499:1](ry490.htm#fr_1043.md) The Address to
Ráma, both text and commentary, will be found literally translated in
the Additional Notes. A paraphrase of a portion is all that I have
attempted here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto CXX.: Sítá Restored.](ry491.md)
