[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry498)  [Next](ry500) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO CXXVIII.: HANUMÁN'S STORY.

'In doubt and fear long years have passed  
And glorious tidings come at last.  
True, true is now the ancient verse  
Which men in time of bliss rehearse:  
Once only in a hundred years  
Great joy to mortal men appears.  
But now his woes and triumph tell,  
And loss and gain as each befell.'  
He ceased: Hanumán mighty-souled  
The tale of Ráma's wanderings told  
From that first day on which he stood  
In the drear shade of Dandak wood.  
He told how fierce Virádha fell;  
He told of S'arabhanga's cell  
Where Ráma saw with wondering eyes  
Indra descended from the skies.  
He told how Súrpanukhi came,  
Her soul aglow with amorous flame,  
And fled repulsed, with rage and tears,  
Reft of her nose and severed ears.  
He told how Ráma's might subdued  
The giants' furious multitude;  
How Khara with the troops he led  
And Tris'iras and Dúshan bled:  
How Ráma, tempted from his cot,  
The golden deer pursued and shot,  
And Rávan came and stole away  
The Maithil queen his hapless prey,  
When, as he fought, the dame to save,  
His noble life Jatáyus gave:  
How Ráma still the the search renewed,  
The robber to his hold pursued,  
Bridging the sea from shore to shore,  
And found his queen to part no more.  <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[1](#fn_1048)  

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[504:1](ry499.htm#fr_1048) I have abridged
Hanuman's outline of Ráma's adventures, with the details of which we are
already sufficiently acquainted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto CXXIX.: The Meeting With Bharat.](ry500)
