[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry495)  [Next](ry497.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO CXXV.: THE RETURN.

Then Ráma, speeding through the skies,  
Bent on the earth his eager eyes:  
'Look, Sítá, see, divinely planned  
And built by Vis'vakarmá's hand,  
Lanká the lovely city rest  
Enthroned on Mount Trikúta's crest  
Behold those fields, ensanguined yet,  
Where Vánar hosts and giants met.  
There, vainly screened by charm and spell,  
The robber Rávan fought and fell.  
There knelt Mandodari  <span id="fr_1044"></span>[1](#fn_1044.md) and
shed  
Her tears in floods for Rávan dead.  
And every dame who loved him sent  

From her sad heart her wild lament.  
There gleams the margin of the deep,  
Where, worn with toil, we sank to sleep.  
Look, love, the unconquered sea behold,  
King Varun's home ordained of old,  
Whose boundless waters roar and swell  
Rich with their store of pearl and shell.  
O see, the morning sun is bright  
On fair Hiranyanábha's  <span id="fr_1045"></span>[1b](#fn_1045.md)
height,  
Who rose from Ocean's sheltering breast  
That Hanumán might stay and rest.  
There stretches, famed for evermore,  
The wondrous bridge from shore to shore.  
The worlds, to life's remotest day.  
Due reverence to the work shall pay,  
Which holier for the laps of time  
Shall give release from sin and crime.  
Now thither bend, dear love, thine eyes  
Where green with groves Kishkindhá lies,  
The seat of King Sugríva's reign,  
Where Báli by this hand was slain.  <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[2b](#fn_1046.md)  
There Ríshyamúka's hill behold  
Bright gleaming with embedded gold.  
There too my wandering foot I set,  
There King Sugríva first I met.  
And, where yon trees their branches wave,  
My promise of assistance gave.  
There, flushed with lilies, Pampá shines  
With banks which greenest foliage lines,  
Where melancholy steps I bent  
And mourned thee with a mad lament.  
There fierce Kabandha, spreading wide  
His giant arms, in battle died.  
Turn, Sítá, turn thine eyes and see  
In Janasthán that glorious tree:  
There Rávan, lord of giants slew  
Our friend Jatáyas brave and true,  
Thy champion in the hopless\* strife,  
Who gave for thee his noble life.  
Now mark that glade amid the trees  
Where once we lived as devotees.  
See, see our leafy cot between  
Those waving boughs of densest green,  
Where Rávan seized his prize and stole  
My love the darling of my soul.  
O, look again: beneath thee gleams  
Godávari the best of streams,  
Whose lucid waters sweetly glide  
By lilies that adorn her side.  
There dwelt Agastya, holy sage,  
In plantain-sheltered hermitage.  
See S'arabhanga's humble shed  

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>  

Which sovereign Indra visited.  
See where the gentle hermits dwell  
Neath Atri's rule who loved us well;  
Where once thine eyes were blest to see  
His sainted dame who talked with thee.  
Now rest thine eyes with new delight  
On Chitrakúta's woody height,  
See Jumna flashing in the sun  
Through groves of brilliant foliage run.  
Screened by the shade of spreading boughs  
There Bharadvája keeps his vows,  
There Gangá, river of the skies,  
Bolls the sweet wave that purifies,  
There S'ringavera's towers ascend  
Where Guha reigns, mine ancient friend.  
I see, I see thy glittering spires,  
Ayodhyá, city of my sires.  
Bow down, bow down thy head, my sweet,  
Our home, our long-lost home to greet.'  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[502:1](ry496.htm#fr_1044.md) Ravan's queen.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[502:1b](ry496.htm#fr_1045.md) Or Maináka.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[502:2b](ry496.htm#fr_1046.md) Here, in the
North-west recension, Sítá expresses a wish that Tará and the wives of
the Vánar chiefs should be invited to accompany her to Ajodhyá. The car
descends, and the Vánar matrons are added to the party. The Bengal
recension ignores this palpable interruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto CXXVI.: Bharat Consoled.](ry497.md)
