[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry500)  [Next](ry502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CANTO CXXX.: THE CONSECRATION.

Then, reverent hand to hand applied,  
Thus Bharat to his brother cried:  
'Thy realm, O King, is now restored,  
Uninjured to the rightful lord.  
This feeble arm with toil and pain,  
The weighty charge could scarce sustain.  
And the great burthen wellnigh broke  
The neck untrained to bear the yoke.  
The royal swan outspeeds the crow:  
The steed is swift, the mule is slow,  
Nor can my feeble feet be led  
O'er the rough ways where thine should tread.  
Now grant what all thy subjects ask:  
Begin, O King, thy royal task.  
Now let our longing eyes behold  
The glorious rite ordained of old,  
And on the new-found monarch's head  
Let consecrating drops be shed.'  
   He ceased: victorious Ráma bent  
His head in token of assent.  
He sat, and tonsors trimmed with care  
His tangles of neglected hair  
Then, duly bathed, the hero shone  
With all his splendid raiment on.  
And Sitá with the matrons' aid  
Her limbs in shining robes arrayed,  
Sumantra then, the charioteer,  
Drew, ordered by S'atrughnu near,  
And stayed within the hermit grove  
The chariot and the steeds he drove.  
Therein Sugríva's consorts, graced  
With gems, and Ráma's queen were placed,  
All fain Ayodhyá to behold:  
And swift away the chariot rolled.  
Like Indra Lord of Thousand Eyes,  
Drawn by fleet lions through the skies,  
Thus radiant in his glory showed  
King Ráma as he homeward rode,  
In power and might unparalleled.  
The reins the hand of Bharat held.  
Above the peerless victor's head  
The snow-white shade S'atrughna spread,  
And Lakshman's ever-ready hand  
His forehead with a chourie fanned.  
Vibhishan close to Lakshman's side  
Sharing his task a chourie plied.  
Sugríva on S'atrunjay came,  
An elephant of hugest frame:  
Nine thousand others bore, behind,  
The chieftains of the Vánar kind  
All gay, in forms of human mould,  
With rich attire and gems and gold.  

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>  

Thus borne along in royal state  
King Rama reached Ayodhya's gate  
With merry noise of shells and drums  
And joyful shouts, He comes, he comes,  
A Brahman host with solemn tread,  
And kine the long procession led,  
And happy maids in ordered bands  
Threw grain and gold with liberal hands.  
Neath gorgeous flags that waved in rows  
On towers and roofs and porticoes.  
Mid merry crowds who sang and cheered  
The palace of the king they neared.  
Then Raghu's son to Bharat, best  
Of duty's slaves, these words addressed:  
'Pass onward to the monarch's hall.  
The high-souled Vánars with thee call,  
And let the chieftains, as is meet,  
The widows of our father greet.  
And to the Vánar king assign  
Those chambers, best of all, which shine  
With lazulite and pearl inlaid,  
And pleasant grounds with flowers and shade,'  
He ceased: and Bharat bent his head;  
Sugriva by the hand he led  
And passed within the palace where  
Stood couches which S'atrughna's care,  
With robes and hangings richly dyed,  
And burning lamps, had seen supplied.  
Then Bharat spake: 'I pray thee, friend,  
Thy speedy messengers to send,  
Each sacred requisite to bring  
That we may consecrate our king.'  
Sugriva raised four urns of gold,  
The water for the rite to hold,  
And bade four swiftest Vánars flee  
And fill them from each distant sea.  
Then east and west and south and north  
The Vánar envoys hastened forth.  
Each in swift flight an ocean sought  
And back through air his treasure brought,  
And full five hundred floods beside  
Pure water for the king supplied.  
Then girt by many a Bráhman sage,  
Vasishtha, chief for reverend age,  
High in a throne with jewels graced  
King Ráma and his Sitá placed.  
There by Jábáli, far revered,  
Vijay and Kasyap's son appeared;  
By Gautam's side Kátváyan stood,  
And Vámadeva wise and good,  
Whose holy hands in order shed  
The pure sweet drops on Ráma's head.  
Then priests and maids and warriors, all  
Approaching at Vasishtha's call,  
With sacred drops bedewed their king,  
The centre of a joyous ring,  
The guardians of the worlds, on high,  
And all the children of the sky  
From herbs wherewith their hands were filled  
Bare juices on his brow distilled.  
His brows were bound with glistering gold  
Which Manu's self had worn of old,  
Bright with the flash of many a gem.  
His sire's ancestral diadem.  
Satrughna lent his willing aid  
And o'er him held the regal shade:  
The monarchs whom his arm had saved  
The chouries round his forehead waved.  
A golden chain, that flashed and glowed  
With gems the God of Wind bestowed:  
Mahendra gave a glorious string  
Of fairest pearls to deck the king,  
The skies with acclamation rang,  
The gay nymphs danced, the minstrels sang.  
On that blest day the joyful plain  
Was clothed anew with golden grain.  
The trees the witching influence knew,  
And bent with fruits of loveliest hue,  
And Rama's consecration lent  
New sweetness to each flowret's scent.  
The monarch, joy of Raghu's line,  
Gave largess to the Bráhmans, kine  
And steeds unnumbered, wealth untold  
Of robes and pearls and gems and gold.  
A jewelled chain, whose lustre passed  
The glory of the sun, he cast  
About his friend Sugriva's neck;  
And, Angad Báli's son to deck,  
He gave a pair of armlets bright  
With diamond and lazulite.  
A string of pearls of matchless hue  
Which gleams like tender moonlight threw  
Adorned with gems of brightest sheen,  
He gave to grace his darling queen.  
The offering from his hand received  
A moment on her bosom heaved;  
Then from her neck the chain she drew,  
A glance on all the Vánars threw,  
And wistful eyes on Ráma bent  
As still she held the ornament.  
Her wish he knew, and made reply  
To that mute question of her eye:  
'Yea. love; the chain on him bestow  
Whose wisdom truth and might we know,  
The firm ally, the faithful friend  
Through toil and peril to the end,  
   Then on Hanúmán's bosom hung  
The chain which Sitá's hand had flung:  
So may a cloud, when winds are still  
With moon-lit silver gird a hill.  
   To every Vánar Ráma gave  
Rich treasures from the mine and wave.  
And with their honours well content  
Homeward their steps the chieftains bent.  
Ten thousand years Ayodhyá, blest  
With Ráma's rule, had peace and rest.  
No widow mourned her murdered mate,  
No house was ever desolate.  
The happy land no murrain knew,  
The flocks and herds increased and grew.  

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>  

The earth her kindly fruits supplied,  
No harvest failed, no children died.  
Unknown were want, disease, and crime:  
So calm, so happy was the time.  <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1](#fn_1052)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[508:1](ry501.htm#fr_1052) Here follows in the
original an enumeration of the chief blessings which will attend the man
or woman who reads or hears read this tale of Ráma. These blessings are
briefly mentioned at the end of the first Canto of the first book, and
it appears unnecessary to repeat them here in their amplified form. The
Bengal recension (Gorresio's edition) gives them more concisely as
follows: 'This is the great first poem blessed and glorious, which gives
long life to men and victory to kings, the poem which Válmíki made. He
who listens to this wondrous tale of Ráma unwearied in action shall be
absolved from all his sins. By listening to the deeds of Ráma he who
wishes for sons shall obtain, his heart's desire, and to him who longs
for riches shall riches be given. The virgin who asks for a husband
shall obtain a husband suited to her mind, and shall meet again her dear
kinsfolk who are far away. They who hear this poem which Válmíki made
shall obtain all their desires and all their prayers shall be
fulfilled.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendices](ry502)
