[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ry501)  [Next](ry503.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

RAVAN DOOMED.

SECTION XIII.

Afterwards Rishya-shringa said again to the King "I will perform another
sacrificial act to secure thee a son." Then the son of Vibhanduka, of
subdued passions, seeking the happiness of the king, proceeded to
perform the sacrifice for the accomplishment of his wishes. Hither were
previously collected the gods, with the Gandharvas, the Siddhas and the
sages, for the sake of receiving their respective shares, Brahma too,
the sovereign of the gods, with Sthanoo, and Narayana, chief of beings
and the four supporters of the universe, and the divine,mothers of all
the celestials, met together there. To the Ushwa-medha, the great
sacrifice of the magnanimous monarch, came also Indra the glorious one,
surrounded by the Muroots. Rishya-shringi then supplicated the gods
assembled for their share of the sacrifice (saying), "This devout king
Dusha-rutha, who, through the desire of offspring, confiding in you, has
performed sacred austerities, and who has offered to you the sacrifice
called Ushwa-medha, is about to perform, another sacrifice for the sake
of obtaining sons. To him thus desirous of offspring be pleased to grant
the blessing: I supplicate you all with joined hands. May he have four
sons, renowned through the universe." The gods replied to the sage's son
supplicating with joined hands, "Be it so: thou, O brahman, art ever to
be regarded by us, as the king is in a peculiar manner. The lord of men
by this sacrifice shall obtain the great object of his desires. Having
thus said, the gods preceded by Indra, disappeared.

They all then having seen that (sacrifice) performed by the great sage
according to the ordinance went to Prajapati the lord of mankind, and
with joined hands addressed Bráhma the giver of blessings, "O Brháma,
the Rakshas Ravana by name, to whom a blessing was awarded by thee,
through pride troubleth all of us the gods, and even the great sages,
who perpetually practise sacred austerities. We, O glorious one,
regarding the promise formerly granted by thy kindness that he should be
invulnerable to the gods, the Danuvas and the Yukshas have born (sic)
all, (his oppression); this lord of Rakshases therefore distresses the
universe; and, inflated by this promise unjustly vexes the divine sages,
the Yukshas, and Gandhavras, the Usooras, and men: where Ravana remains
there the sun loses his force, the winds through fear of him do not
blow, the fire ceases to burn; the rolling ocean, seeing him, ceases to
move its waves. Vishruvna, distressed by his power, has abandoned Lanka
and fled. O divine one save us from Ravana, who fills the world with
noise and tumult. O giver of desired things, be pleased to contrive a
way for his destruction."

Bruhma thus informed by the devas, reflecting, replied, Oh! I have
devised the method for slaying this outrageous tyrant. Upon his
requesting, "May I be invulnerable to the divine sages, the Gandharvas,
the Yakshas, the Rakshasas

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

and the serpents," I replied "Be it so."This Raksh*u*s, through
contempt, said nothing respecting man; therefore this wicked one shall
be destroyed by man. The gods, preceded by Sh*u*kr*a*, hearing these
words spoken by Br*u*hm*á*, were filled with joy.

At this time V*i*shn*oo* the glorious, the lord of the world, arrayed in
yellow, with hand ornaments of glowing gold, riding on Vin*u*tey*a*, as
the sun on a cloud, arrived with his conch, his discus, and his club in
his hand. Being adored by the excellent celestials, and welcomed by
Br*u*hm*a*, he drew near and stood before him. All the gods then
addressed V*i*shn*oo*, "O M*u*dh*oo*-s*oo*d*u*na, thou art able to
abolish the distress of the distressed. We intreat thee, be our
sanctuary, 0 *U*chy*oo*ta." Vishn*oo* replied, "Say, what shall I do?"
The celestials hearing these his words added further. "The virtuous, the
encourager of excellence, eminent for truth, the firm observer of his
vows, being childless, is performing an *U*shwamedh*a* for the purpose
of obtaining offspring. For the sake of the good of the universe, we
intreat thee, O V*i*shn*oo*, to become his son. Dividing thyself into
four parts, in the wombs of his three consorts equal to H*u*r*i*, Shree,
and Keertee, assume the sonship of king D*u*sha-r*u*th*a*, the lord of
*U*yodhya, eminent in the knowledge of duty, generous and illustrious,
as the great sages. Thus becoming man, O Vishn*oo*, conquer in battle
Rav*u*n*a*, the terror of the universe, who is invulnerable to the gods.
This ignorant Raksh*u*s Rav*u*n*a*, by the exertion of his power,
afflicts the gods, the G*u*ndhurv*a*s, the S*i*ddh*a*s, and the most
excellent sages; these sages, the G*u*ndh*u*rv*a*s, and the
*U*ps*a*r*a*s, sporting in the forest N*u*nd*u*n*a* have been destroyed
by that furious one. We, with the sages, are come to thee seeking his
destruction. The S*i*ddh*a*s, the G*u*ndh*u*rv*a*s, and the Y*a*ksh*a*s
betake themselves to thee, thou art our only refuge; O Dev*a*, afflicter
of enemies, regard the world of men, and destroy the enemy of the gods."

Vishn*oo*, the sovereign of the gods, the chief of the celestials,
adored by all beings, being thus supplicated, replied to all the
assembled gods (standing) before Br*u*hm*a*, "Abandon fear; peace be
with you; for your benefit having killed Rav*u*n*a* the cruel,
destructively active, the cause of fear to the divine sages, together
with all his posterity, his courtiers and counsellors, and his
relations, and friends, protecting the earth, I will remain incarnate
among men for the space of eleven thousand years."

Having given this promise to the gods, the divine Vishn*oo*, ardent in
the work, sought a birth-place among men. Dividing himself into four
parts, he whose eyes resemble the lotos and the p*u*las*a*, the lotos
petal-eyed, chose for his father D*u*sha-r*a*th*a* the sovereign of men.
The divine sages then with the G*u*ndh*u*rv*a*s, the R*oo*dr*a*s, and
the (different sorts of) *U*psar*a*s, in the most excellent strains,
praised the destroyer of M*u*dh*oo*, (saying) "Root up Rav*u*n*a*, of
fervid energy, the devastator, the enemy of *I*ndra swollen with pride.
Destroy him, who causes universal lamentation, the annoyer of the holy
ascetics, terrible, the terror of the devout T*u*p*u*swees. Having
destroyed Rav*u*n*a*, tremendously powerful, who causes universal
weeping, together with his army and friends, dismissing all sorrow,
return to heaven, the place free from stain and sin, and protected by
the sovereign of the celestial powers."

Thus far the Section, containing the plan for the death of Rav*u*n*a*.

                                            CAREY AND MARSHMAN.

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

CAPUT XIV.

RATIO NECANDI RAVANAE EXCOGITATA.

Prudens ille, voluminum sacrorum gnarus, responsum quod dederat
aliquamdiu meditatus, mente ad se revocata regem deuno est effatus:
Parabo tibi aliud sacrum, genitale, prolis masculae adipiscendae gratia,
cum carminibus in ATHARVANIS exordio expressis rite peragendum. Tum
coepit modestus Vibhândaci filius, regis commodis intentus, parare
sacrum, quo eius desiderium expleret. Lam'antea\* eo convenerant, ut
suam quisque portionem acciperent, Di cum fidicinum coelestium choris,
Beatique cum Sapientibus; Brachman Superûm regnator, Sthânus nee non
augustus Nârâyanus, Indrasque alraus, coram visendus Ventorum cohorte
circumdatus, in magno isto sacrificio equino regis magnanimi. Ibidem
vates ille deos, qui portiones suas accipiendi gratia advenerant,
apprecatus, En!\* inquit, hicce--ex Dasarathus filiorum desiderio
castimoniis adstrictus, fidei plenus, vestrum numen adoravit sacrificio
equino. Nunc iterum accingit se ad aliud sacrum peragendum: quamobrem
aequum est, ut filios cupienti vos faveatis. Ille ego, qui manus
supplices tendo, vos universos pro eo apprecor: nascantur ei filii
quatuor, faina per triplicem mundum clari. Divi supplicem vatis filium
invicem affari: Fiat quod petis! Tu nobis, virsancte, imprimis es
venerandus, nec minus rex ille; compos fiet voti sui egregii hominum
princeps. Ita locuti Dî Indra duce, ex oculis evanuerunt.

Superi vero, legitime in concilio congregati. BRACHMANEM mundi creatorem
his verbis compellarunt: Tuo munere auctus, O Brachman! gigas nomine
Râvanas, prae superbia nos omnes vexat, pariterque Sapientes castimoniis
gaudentes. A te propitio olim ex voto ei hoc munus concessum fuit, ut ne
a diis, Danuidis, Geniisve necari posset. Nos, oraculum tuum reveriti,
facinora eius qualiacunque toleramus. At ille gigantum tyrannus ternos
mundos gravibus iniuriis vexat Deos, Sapientes, Genios, Fidicines
coelestes, Titanes, mortales denique, exsuperat ille aegre cohibendus,
tuoque munere demens. Non ibi calet sol, neque Ventus prae timore
spirat, nec flagrat ignis, ubi Râvanas versatur. Ipse oceanus, vagis
fluctibus redimitus, isto viso stat immotus; eiectus fuit e sede sua
Cuvêrus, huius robore vexatus. Ergo ingens nobis periculum imminet ab
hoc gigante visu horribili; tuum est, alme Parens! auxilium parare, quo
hic deleatur. Ita admonitus ille a diis universis, paulisper meditatus,
Ehem!\* inquit, hancce inveni rationem nefarium istum necandi. Petierat
is a me, ut a Gandharvis, a Geniis, a Divis, Danuibus Gigantibusque
necari non posset et me annuente voto suo potitus est. Prae contemptu
vero monstrum illud homines non commemoravit: ideo ab homine est
necandus: nullum aliud exstat leti genus, quod ei sit £atale. Postquam
audiverant gratum hunc sermonem BRACHMANIS ore prolatum, Di cum duce suo
Indra summopere gaudio erecti sunt. Eodem temporis momento Vishnus,
istuc accessit, splendore insignis, concham, discum et clavum manibus
gestans, croceo vestitu, mundi dominus, vulturis Vinateii dorso, sicuti
sol nimbo, vectus, armillas ex auro candente gerens, salutatus a Superûm
primoribus. Quem laudibus celebratum reverenter Dî universi
compellarunt. Tu animantium afflictorum es vindex, Madhûs interfector!
quamobrem nos afflicti te apprecamur. Sis praesidio nobis numine tuo
inconcusso. Dicite, inquit Vishnus, quid pro vobis facere

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

me oporteat. Audito eius sermone, Di hunc in modum respondent: Rex
quidam, nomine Dasarathus, austeris castimoniis sese castigavit, litavit
sacrificio equino, prolis cupidus et prole carens. Nostro hortatu tu,
Vishnus, conditionem natorum eius subeas: ex tribus eius uxoribus,
Pudicitiae, Venustatis et Famae similibus, nasci velis, temetipsum
quadrifariam dividens. Ibi tu in humanam naturam conversus Râvanam,
gravissimam mundi pestem, diis insuperabilem, O Vishnus! proelio caede.
Gigas ille vecors Râvanas Deos cum Fidicinum choris, Beatos et Sapientes
praestantisslmos vexat, audacia superbiens. Etenim ab hoc furioso
Sapientes Fidicines et nymphae, ludentes in Nandano viridario, sunt
proculcati. Tu es nostrum omnium summa salus, divine bellator! Ut deorum
hostes extinguas, ad sortem humanam animum converte. Augustus ille
Nârâyanus, diis hunc in modum coram hortantibus, eosdem apto hoc sermone
compellavit: Quare, quaeso, hac in renegotium vestrum a me potissimum,
corporea specie palam facto, est peragendum \*? \*aut unde tantus vobis
terror fuit iniectus? His verbis a Vishnû interrogati Dî talia proferre:
Terror nobis instat, O Vishnus! a Râvana mundi direptore; a quo nos
vindicare, corpore humano assumpto, tuum est. Nemo alius coelicoiarum
praeter te hunc scelestum enecare potis est. Nimirum ille, O hostium
domitor! per diuturnum tempus sese excruciaverat severissima
abstinentia, qua magnus hicce rerum Parens propitius ipsi redditus est,
Itaque almus votorum sponsor olim ei concessit securitatem ab ommibus
animantibus. hominibus tamen exceptis. Hinc ilium, voti compotem, non
aliunde quam ab homine necis perículum urget: tu ergo, humanitate
assumpta eum intertice. Sic monitus Vishnus, Superûm princeps, quem
mundus univerans adorat, magnum Parentem oeterosque deos, in concilio
congregatos, recti auctores, affatur: Mittite timorem; bene bobís
eveniat! Vestrae salutis gratia, postquam praelio necavero Râvanam cum
filiis nepotibusque, cum amicis, ministris, cognatis socusque, crudelem
istum aegre cohibendum, qui divinis Sapientibus terrorem \*incutit, per
decem millia annorum decies centenis additis, commorabor in mortalium
sedibus, orbem terrarum imperio regens. Tum divini sapientes et
Fidicines conjuncti cum Rudris nympha, rumque choris celebravere Madhûs
interfectorem hymnis, quales sedem aetheriam decent.

"Râvanam ilium insolentem, acri impetu actum, superbia elatum, Superûm
hostem, tumultus cientem, bonorum piorumque pestem, humanitate assumpta
pessumdare tuum est."

SCHLEGEL.

CAPITOLO XIV.

IL MEZZO STABILITO PER UCCIDERE RÁVANO.

Ma Riscyasringo soggiunse poscia al re: T'appresterò io un altro rito
santissimo, genitale, onde tu conseguisca la prole che tu bramí. E in
quel punto stesso il saggio figliulo di Vibhândaco, iutento alia
prosperità del re, pose mano al sacro rito per condurre ad effetto il
suo desiderio. Già erano prima, per ricevere ciascuno la sua parte, quí
convenuti al gran sacrifizio del re magnanimo l'Asvamedha, í Devi coi
Gandharvi, i Siddhi e i Muni, Brahma Signor dei Sari, Sthânu e l'
Augusto Nârâyana, i quattio custudi dell' universo e le Madri degli
Iddn, i Yacsi insieme cogli Dei, e il sovrano, venerando Indra,
visibile, circondato

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

dalla schiera dei Maruti. Quivi così parlò Riscyasr'ingo agli Dei venuti
a partecipare del sacrifizio: Questo è il re Dasaratha, che per
desiderio di progenie già s' astrinse ad osservanze austeré, e testè
pieno di fede ha a voi, O eccelsi, sacrificato con un Asvamedha. Ora
egli, sollecito d' aver figli, si dispone ad adempiere un nuovo rito;
vogliate essere favorevole a lui che sospira progenie. lo alzo a voi
supplici le mani, e voi tutti per lui implor'o: nascano a lui quattro
figli degni d'essere celebrati per tre mondi. Risposero gli Dei al
supplichevole tigliuolo del Risci: Sia fatto ciò che chiedi; a te ed al
re parimente si debbe da noi, O Brahmano, sommo pregio; canseguirà il re
per questo sacro rito il suo suppremo desiderio. Ciò detto disparvero i
Numi preceduti da Indra.

Poichè videro gli Dei compiersi debitamente dal gran Risci l'oblazione,
venuti al cospetto di Brahma facitor del mondo, signor delle creature,
così parlarono reverenti a lui dator di grazie: O Brahma, un Racsáso per
nome Râvano, cui tu fosti largo del tuo favore, è per superbia infesto a
noi tutti e ai grandi Saggi penitenti. Un di, O Nume, augusto, tu
propizio a lui gli accordasti il favore, ch' egli bramava, di non poter
essere ucciso dagli Dei, dai Dânavi nè dai Yacsi: noi venerando i tuoi
oracoli, ogni cosa sopportiamo da costui. Quindi il signor dei Racsasi
infesta con perpetue offese i tre mondi, i Devi, i Risci, i Yacsi ed i
Gandharvi, gli Asuri e gli uomini: tutti egli opprime indegnamente
inorgoglito pel tuo dono. Colà dove si trova Râvano, più non isfavilla
per timore il sole, più non spira il vento, più non fiammeggia il fuoco:
l' oceano stesso cui fan corona i vasti flutti, veggendo costui, tutto
si turba e si commuove. Stretto dalla forza di costui e ridotto allo
stremo dovette Vaisravano abbandonare Lancâ. Da questo Râvano, terror
del mondo, tu ne proteggi, O almo Nume: degna, O dator d'ogni bene,
trovar modo ad estirpar costui. Fatto di queste cose conscio dai Devi,
stette alquanto meditando, poi rispose Brahma: Orsù! è stabilito il modo
onde distruggere questo iniquo. Egli a me chiese, ed io glieì concessi,
di non poter essere ucciso dai Devi, dai Risci, dai Gandharvi, dai
Yacsi, dai Racsasi nè dai Serpenti; ma per disprezzo non fece menzione
degli uomini quel Racso: or bene, sarà quell' empio ucciso da un uomo.
Udite le fauste parole profferte da Brahma, furono per ogni parte liete
gli Iddii col loro duce Indra. In questo mezzo qui sopravvenne raggiante
d'immensa luce il venerando Visnu, pensato da Brahma nell' immortal sua
mente, siccome atto ad estirpar colui; Allora Brahma colla schiera de'
Celesti così parlò a Visnu: Tu sei il conforto delle gente oppresse, O
distruttor di Madhu: noi quindi a te supplichiamo afflitti: sia tu
nostro sostegno, O Aciuto. Dite, loro rispose Visnu, quale cosa io debba
far per voi; e gli Dei, udite queste parole, cosi soggiunsero: Un re per
nome Dasaratha, giusto, virtuoso, veridico e pio, non ha progenie e la
desidera: ei già s' impose durissime penitenze, ed ora ha sacrificato
con un Asvamedha: tu, per nostro consiglio, O Visnu, consenti a divenir
suo figlio: fatte di te quattro parti, ti manifesta, O invocato dalle
genti, nel seno delle quattro sue consorti, simili alla venusta Dea.
Così esortato dagli Dei quivi presenti, l'augusto Nârâyana loro rispose
queste opportune parole: Quale opra s'ha da me, fatto visible nel mondo,
a compiere per voi, O Devi? e d'onde in voi cotal terrore? Intese le
parole di Visnu, così risposero gli Dei: ll nostro terrore, O Visnu,
nasce da un Racsaso per nome Râvano, spavento dell' universo. Vestendo
umano corpo, tu debhi esterminar costui. Nessuno fra i Celesti, fuorchè
tu solo, è valevole ad uccidere quell' iniquo. Egli, O domator de' tuoi
nemici, sostenne per lungo tempo acerbissime

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

macerazioni: per esse fu di lui contento l'augusto sommo Genitore: a un
di gli accordò propizio la sicurezza da tutti gli esseri, eccettutine
gli nomini. Per questo favore a lui concesso non ha egli a temere offesa
da alcuna parte, fuorchè dall' uomo, perciò, assumendo la natura umana,
costui tu uccidi. Egli, il peggior di tutti i Racsasi, insano per la
forza che gli infonde il dono avuto, da travaglio ai Devi ed ai
Gaudharvi, ai Risci, ai Muni ed ai mortali. Egli, sicuro da morte pel
favore ottenuto, è turbatore dei sacrifizj, nemico ed uccisor dei
Brahmi, divoratore degli uomini, peste del mondo. Da lui furono assaliti
re coi loro carri ed elefanti; altri percossi e fugati si dispersero per
ogni dove. Da lui furono divorati Risci ed Apsarase: egli insomma
oltracotato continuamente e quasi per ischerzo tutti travaglia i sette
mondi. Perciò, O terribile ai nemici è stabilita la morte di costui per
opra d'un uomo; poich' un di per superbia del dono tutti sprezzò gli
uomini. Tu, O supremo fra i Numi, dei, umanandoti, estirpare questo
tremendo, superbo Ravano, oltracotato, a noi nemico, terrore e flagello
dei penitenti.

GORRESIO.

XIV\.

De nouveau Rishyaçringa tint ce langage au Monarque: "Je vais célébrer
un autre sacrifice, afin que le ciel accorde à tes voeux les enfants que
tu souhaites." Cela dit, cherchant le bonheur du roi et pour
l'accomplissement de son désir, le fils puissant de Vibhándaka se mit à
célébrer ce nouveau sacrifice.

Là auparavant, étaient venus déjà recevoir une part de l'offrande les
Dieux, accompagnés des Gaudharvas, et les Siddhas avec les Mounis
divins, Brahma, le monarque des Souras, l'immuable S'iva, et l'auguste
Náráyana, et les quatre gardiens vigilants du monde, et les mères des
Immortels, et tous les Dieux, escortés des Yakshas, et le maître éminent
du ciel, Indra, qui se manifestait aux yeux, environné par l'essaim des
Maroutes. Alors ce jeune anachorète avait supplié tous les Dieux, que le
desir d'une part dans l'offrande avait conduits à l' açwamédha, cette
grande cérémonie de ce roi magnanime; *et, dans ce moment, l' époux de
S'ántá les conjurait ainsi pour la seconde fois*: "Cet homme *en
prières*, c'est le roi Daçaratha, qui est privé de fils. Il est rempli
d' une foi vive; il s'est infligé de pénibles austérités; il vous a déjà
servi, divinités augustes, le sacrifice d'un açwa-médha, et maintenant
il s'étudie encore à vous plaire avec ce nouveau sacrifice dans
l'espérance que vous lui donnerez les fils, où tendent ses désirs.
Versez donc sur lui votre bienveillance et daignez sourire à son voeu
pour des fils. C'est pour lui que moi ici, les mains jointes, je vous
adresse à tous mes supplications: envoyez-lui quatre fils, qui soient
vantés dans les trois mondes!"

"Oui! répondirent les Dieux au fils suppliant du rishi; tu mérites que
nous t'écoutions avec faveur, toi, brahme saint, et même, en premier
lieu, ce roi. Comme récompense de ces différents sacrifices, le monarque
obtendra cet objet le plus cher de ses désirs."

Ayant aussi parlé et vu que le grand saint avait mis fin suivant les
rites à son *pieux* sacrifice, les Dieux, Indra à leur tête,
s'évanouissent dans le vide des airs et se rendent vers l'architecte des
mondes, le souverain des créatures, le donateur des biens, vers Brahma
enfin, auquel tous, les mains jointes, ils adressent les paroles
suivantes: "O Brahma, un rakshasa, nommé Råvana, tourne au

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

mal les grâces, qu'il a reçues de toi. Dans son orgueil, il nous opprime
tous; il opprime avec nous les grands anchorètes, qui se font un bonheur
des macérations: car jadis, ayant su te plaire, O Bhagavat, il a reçu de
toi ce don incomparable. "Oui, as-tu dit, exauçant le voeu du mauvais
Génie; Dieu. Yaksha ou Démon ne pourra jamais causer ta mort!" Et nous,
par qui ta parole est respectée, nous avons tout supporté de ce roi des
rakshasas, qui écrase de sa tyrannie les trois mondes, ou il promène
l'injure impunément. Enorgueilli de ce don victorieux, il opprime
indignement les Dieux, les rishis, les Yakshas, les Gandharvas, les
Asouras et les enfants de Manon. Là ou se tient Râvana, la peur empéche
le soleil d'échauffer, le vent craint de souffler, et le feu n'ose
flamboyer. A son aspect, la guirlande même des grands flots tremble au
sein de la mer. Aceablé par sa vigueur indomptable, Kouvéra défait lui a
cédé Lanká. Suave-nous donc, ô toi, qui reposes dans le bonheur absolu;
sauve-nous de Râvana, le fléau des mondes. Daigne, ô toi, qui souris aux
voeux du suppliant, daigne imaginer un expedient pour ôter la vie à ce
cruel Démon." Les Dieux ayant ainsi dénoncé leurs maux à Brahma, il
réfléchit un instant et leur tint ce langage: "Bien, voici que j'ai
découvert un moyen pour tuer ce Génie scélérat. Que ni les Dieux, a-t-il
dit, ni les rishis, ni les Gandharvas ni les Yakshas, ni les rakshasas,
ni les Nágas même ne puissent me donner la mort! Soit lui ai-je répondu.
Mais, par dédain pour la force humaine, les hommes n'ont pas été compris
dans sa demande. C'est donc par la main d' un homme, qu'il faut immoler
ce méchant." Ainsi tombée de la bouche du créateur, cette parole
salutaire satisfit pleinement le roi des habitants du ciel et tous les
Dieux avec lui. Lá, dans ce même instant, survint le fortuné Visnou,
revêtu d' une splendeur infinie; car c'était a lui, que Brahma avait
pensé dans son âme pour la mort du tyran. Celui-ci donc avec l'essaim
des Immortels adresse à Vishnou ces paroles: "Meurtrier de Madhou,
comrae tu aimes á tirer de l' affliction les êtres malheureux, nous te
supplions, nous qui sommes plongés dans la tristesse, Divinité auguste,
sois notre asyle!" "Dites! reprit Vishnou; que dois-je faire? "Ayant oui
les paroles de l' ineffable, tous les Dieux repondirent: "Il est un roi
nommé Daçaratha; il a embrassé une très-duré pénitence; il a célébré
même le sacrifice d'un açwa-medha, parce qu'il n'a point de fils et
qu'il veut en obtenir du ciel. Il est inébranlable dans sa piéte, il est
vanté pour ses vertus; la justice est son caractère, la verite est sa
parole. Acquiesce donc à notre demande, ô toi, Vishnou, et consens à
naître comme son fils. Divisé en quatre portions de toi-même, daigne, ô
toi qui foules aux pieds tes ennemis, daigne t' incarner dans le sein de
ses trois épouses, belles comme la déesse de la beauté." Náráyana, le
maître, *non, perceptible aux sens, mais qui alors s' était rendu*
visible, Náráyana répondit cette parole salutaire aux Dieux, qui i
invitaient à cet *heroique avátara*. Quelle chose, une fois revêtu de
cette incarnation, faudra-t-il encore que je fasse pour vous, et de
quelle part vient la terreur, qui vous trouble ainsi?' A ces mots du
grand Vishnou: "C'est le démon Rávana, reprirent les Dieux; c'est lui,
Vishnou, cette désolation des mondes, qui nous inspire un tel effroi.
Enveloppe-toi d' un corps, humain, et qu'il te plaise arrâcher du monde
cette blessante epine; car nul autre que toi parmi les habitants du ciel
n'est capable d'immoler ce pécheur. *Sache que* longtemps il s'est
imposé la plus austére pénitence, et *que* par elle il s'est rendu
agreable au suprême ayeul de toutes les créatures. Aussi le distributeur
ineffable des gràces lui a-t-il accordé ce don insigne d'être
invulnérable à tous les êtres, l'

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

homme seul excepté. Puisque, doué ainsi de cette faveur, la mort
terrible et s\*ûre ne peut venir à lui de nulle autre part que de
l'homme, va, dompteur *puissant* de tes ennemis, va dans la condition
humaine, et tue-le. Car ce don, auquel on ne peut résister, élevant au
plus haut point l'ivresse de sa force, le vil rakshasa, tourmente les
Dieux, les rishis, les Gandharvas, les hommes sanctifiés par la
pénitence; et, quoique, destructeur des sacrifices, lacérateur des
Saintes E\*critures, ennemi des brahmes, dévorateur des hommes, cette
faveur incomparable sauve de la mort Rávana le triste fléau des mondes.
Il ose attaquer les rois, que défendant les chars de guerre, que
remparent les élephants: d'autres blessés et mis en fuite, sont dissipés
ça et là devant lui. Il a dévoré des saints, il a dévoré même une foule
d'apsaras. Sans cesse, dans son délire, il s'amuse à tourmenter les sept
mondes. Comme *on vient de nous apprendre qu'* il n' a point daigné
parler d'eux ce jour, que lui fut donnée cette faveur, *dont il abuse*,
entre dans un corps humain, ô toi, qui peux briser tes ennemis, et jette
sans vie à tes pieds, roi puissant des treize Dieux, ce Rávana superbe,
d'une force épouvantable, d'un orgueil immense, l'ennemi de tous les
ascètes, ce ver, *qui les ronge*, cette cause de leurs gémissements."

*Ici, dans le premier tome du saint Râmâyana*, Finit le quatorzième
chapitre, nommé: UN EXPÉDIENT POUR TUER RÁVANA.

HIPPOLYTE FAUCHE.

UTTARAKÁNDA.

The Rámáyan ends, epically complete, with the triumphant return of Ráma
and his rescued queen to Ayodhyá and his consecration and coronation in
the capital of his forefathers. Even if the story were not complete, the
conclusion of the last Canto of the sixth Book, evidently the work of a
later hand than Válmíki's, which speaks of Ráma's glorious and happy
reign and promises blessings to those who read and hear the Rámáyan,
would be sufficient to show that, when these verses were added, the poem
was considered to be finished. The Uttarakánda or Last Book is merely an
appendix or a supplement and relates only events antecedent and
subsequent to those described in the original poem. Indian scholars
however, led by reverential love of tradition, unanimously ascribe this
Last Book to Válmíki, and regard it as part of the Ráamáyan.

Signor Gorresio has published an excellent translation of the
Uttarakánda, in Italian prose, from the recension current in
Bengal; <span id="fr_1053"></span>[1](#fn_1053.md) and Mr. Muir has
epitomized a portion of the book in the Appendix to the Fourth Part of
his Sanskrit Texts (1862). From these scholars I borrow freely in the
following pages, and give them my hearty thanks for saving me much
wearisome labour.

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

"After Ráma had returned to Ayodhyá and taken possession of the throne,
the rishis \[saints} assembled to greet him, and Ágastya, in answer to
his questions recounted many particulars regarding his old enemies. In
the Krita Yuga (or Golden Age) the austere and pious Brahman rishi
Pulastya, a son of Brahmá, being teased with the visits of different
damsels, proclaimed that any one of them whom he again saw near his
hermitage should become pregnant. This had not been heard by the
daughter of the royal rishi Trinavindu, who one day came into Pulastya's
neighbourhood, and her pregnancy was the result (Sect. 2, vv. 14 ff.).
After her return home, her father, seeing her condition, took her to
Pulastya, who accepted her as his wife, and she bore a son who received
the name of Vis'ravas. This son was, like his father, an austere and
religious sage. He married the daughter of the muni Bharadvája, who bore
him a son to whom Brahmá gave the name of Vais'ravan--Kuvera (Sect. 3,
vv. I ff). He performed austerities for thousands of years, when he
obtained from Brahmá as a boon that he should be one of the guardians of
the world (along with Indra, Varuna, and Yáma) and the god of riches. He
afterwards consulted his father Vis'ravas about an abode, and at his
suggestion took possession of the city of Lanká, which had formerly been
built by Vis'vakarman for the Ráxasas, but had been abandoned by them
through fear of Vishnu, and was at that time unoccupied. Ráma then
(Sect. 4) says he is surprised to hear that Lanká had formerly belonged
to the Ráxasas, as he had always understood that they were the
descendants of Pulastya, and now he learns that they had also another
origin. He therefore asks who was their ancestor, and what fault they
had committed that they were chased away by Vishnu. Àgastya replies that
when Brahmá created the waters, he formed certain beings,--some of whom
received the name of Ráxasas,--to guard them. The first Ráxasa kings
were Heti and Praheti. Heti married a sister of Kála (Time). She bore
him a son Vidyutkes'a, who in his turn took for his wife Lankatankatá,
the daughter of Sandhyá (V. 21). She bore him a son Sukes'a, whom she
abandoned, but he was seen by S'iva as he was passing by with his wife
Párvatí, who made the child as old as his mother, and immortal, and gave
him a celestial city. Sukes'a married a Gandharví called Devavatí who
bore three sons, Mályavat, Sumáli and Máli. These sons practised intense
austerities, when Brahmá appeared and conferred on them invincibility
and long life. They then harassed the gods. Vis'vakarman gave them a
city, Lanká, on the mountain Trikúta, on the shore of

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

the southern ocean, which he had built at the command of Indra....The
three Ráxasas, Mályavat and his two brothers, then began to oppress the
gods, rishis, etc.; who (Sect. 6, v.1 ff.) in consequence resort for aid
to Mahádeva, who having regard to his protégé Sukes'a the father of
Mályavat, says that he cannot kill the Ráxasas. but advises the
suppliants \[\*supplicants?\*} to go to Vishnu, which they do, and
receive from him a promise that he will destroy their enemies. The three
Ráxasa kings, hearing of this, consult together, and proceed to heaven
to attack the gods. Vishnu prepares to meet them. The battle is
described in the seventh section. The Ráxasas are defeated by Vishnu
with great slaughter, and driven back to Lanká, one of their leaders,
Máli, being slain. Mályavat remonstrates with. Vishnu, who was
assaulting the rear of the fugitives, for his unwarrior-like conduct,
and wishes to renew the combat (Sect. 8, v. 3 ff.). Vishnu replies that
he must fulfil his promise to the gods by slaying the Ráxasas, and that
he would destroy them even if they fled to Pátála. These Ráxasas,
Agastya says, were more powerful than Rávana, and, could only be
destroyed by Náráyana, *i.e.* by Ráma himself, the eternal,
indestructible god. Sumáli with his family lived for along time in
Pátála, while Kuvera dwelt in Lanká. In section 9 it is related that
Sumáli once happened to visit the earth, when he observed Kuvera going
in his chariot to see his father Vis'ravas. This leads him to consider
how he might restore his own fortunes. He consequently desires his
daughter Kaikasí to go and woo Vis'ravas, who receives her graciously.
She becomes the mother of the dreadful Rávana, of the huge Kumbhakarna,
of Súrpanakhá, and of the righteous Vibhíshana, who was the last son.
These children grow up in the forest. Kumbhakarna goes about eating
rishis. Kuvera comes to visit his father, when Kaikasí takes occasion to
urge her son Rávana to strive to become like his brother (Kuvera) in
splendour. This Rávana promises to do. He then goes to the hermitage of
Gokarna with his brothers to perform austerity. In section 10 their
austere observances are described: after a thousand years' penance
Rávana throws his head into the fire. He repeats this oblation nine
times after equal intervals, and is about to do it the tenth time, when
Brahmá appears, and offers a boon. Rávana asks immortality, but is
refused. He then asks that he may be indestructible by all creatures
more powerful than men; which boon is accorded by Brahmá together with
the recovery of all the heads he had sacrificed and the power of
assuming any shape he pleased. Vibhíshana asks as his boon that "even
amid the greatest calamities he may think only of righteousness, and
that the weapon of Brahmá may appear to him unlearnt, etc. The god
grants his request, and adds the gift of immortality. When Brahmá is
about to offer a boon to Kumbhakarna, the gods interpose, as, they say,
he had eaten seven Apsarases and ten followers of Indra, besides rishis
and men; and beg that under the guise of a boon stupefaction may be
inflicted on him. Brahmá thinks on Sarasvatí, who arrives and, by
Brahmá's command, enters into Kumbhakarna's mouth that she may speak for
him. Under this influence he asks that he may receive the boon of
sleeping for many years, which is granted. When however Sarasvatí has
left him, and he recovers his own consciousness, he perceives that he
has been deluded. Kuvera by his father's advice, gives up the city of
Lanká to Rávana." <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1](#fn_1054.md) Rávana marries
(Sect. 12,) Mandodarí the beautiful daughter of the Asur Maya whose

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

name has several times occurred in the Rámáyan as that of an artist of
wonderful skill. She bears a son Meghanáda or the Roaring Cloud who was
afterwards named Indrajit from his victory over the sovereign of the
skies. The conquest of Kuvera, and the acquisition of the magic
self-moving chariot which has done much service in the Rámáyan, form the
subject of sections XIII., XIV. and XV. "The rather pretty story of
Vedavatí is related in the seventeenth section, as follows: Rávana in
the course of his progress through the world, comes to the forest on the
Himálaya, where he sees a damsel of brilliant beauty, but in ascetic
garb, of whom he straightway becomes enamoured. He tells her that such
an austere life is unsuited to her youth and attractions, and asks who
she is and why she is leading an ascetic existence. She answers that she
is called Vedavatí, and is the vocal daughter of Vrihaspati's son, the
rishi Kus'adhvája, sprung from him during his constant study of the
Veda. The gods, gandharvas, etc., she says, wished that she should
choose a husband, but her father would give her to no one else than to
Vishnu, the lord of the world, whom he desired for his son-in-law.
Vedavati then proceeds: "In order that I may fulfil this desire of my
father in respect of Náráyana, I wed him with my heart. Having entered
into this engagement I practise great austerity. Náráyana and no other
than he, Purushottama, is my husband. From the desire of obtaining him,
I resort to this severe observance. Rávana's passion is not in the least
diminished by this explanation and he urges that it is the old alone who
should seek to become distinguished by accumulating merit through
austerity, prays that she who is so young and beautiful shall become his
bride; and boasts that he is superior to Vishnu. She rejoins that no one
but be would thus contemn that deity. On receiving this reply he touches
the hair of her head with the tip of his finger. She is greatly
incensed, and forthwith cuts off her hair and tells him that as he has
so insulted her, she cannot continue to live, but will enter into the
fire before his eyes. She goes on "Since I have been insulted in the
forest by thee who art wicked-hearted, I shall be born again for thy
destruction. For a man of evil desire cannot be slain by a woman; and
the merit of my austerity would be lost if I were to launch a curse
against thee. But if I have performed or bestowed or sacrificed aught
may I be born the virtuous daughter, not produced from the womb, of a
righteous man." Having thus spoken she entered, the blazing fire. Then a
shower of celestial flowers fell (from every part of the sky). It is
she, lord, who, having been Vedavatí in the Krita age, has been born (in
the Treta age) as the daughter of the king of the Janakas, and (has
become) thy \[Ráma's\] bride; for thou art the eternal Vishnu. The
mountain-like enemy who was \[virtually\] destroyed before by her wrath,
has now been slain by her having recourse to thy superhuman energy." On
this the commentator remarks: "By this it is signified that Sítá was the
principal cause of Rávana's death; but the function of destroying him is
ascribed to Ráma." On the words,"thou art Vishnu," in the preceding
verse the same commentator remarks: "By this it is clearly affirmed that
Sítá was Laxmí. This is what Parás'ara says: "In the god's life as Ráma,
she became Sítá, and in his birth as Krishna \[she became\]
Rukminí." <span id="fr_1055"></span>[1](#fn_1055.md)

In the following section (XVIII.) "Rávana is described as violently
interrupting a sacrifice which is being performed by king Marutta, and
the assembled

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

gods in terror assume different shapes to escape; Indra becomes a
peacock, Yama a crow, Kuvera a lizard, and Varuna a swan; and each deity
bestows a boon on the animal he had chosen. The peacock's tail recalls
Indra's thousand eyes; the swan's colour becomes white, like the foam of
the ocean (Varuna being its lord); the lizard obtains a golden colour;
and the crow is never to die except when killed by a violent death, and
the dead are to enjoy the funeral oblations when they have been devoured
by the crows."  <span id="fr_1056"></span>[1](#fn_1056.md)

Rávan then attacks Arjuna or Kárttavírya the mighty king of Máhishmati
on the banks of the Narmadá, and is defeated, captured and imprisoned by
Arjuna. At the intercession of Pulastya (Sect. XXII.) he is released
from his bonds. He then visits Kishkindhá where he enters into alliance
with Báli the King of the Vánars: "We will have all things in common,"
says Rávan, "dames, sons, cities and kingdoms, food, vesture, and all
delights." His next exploit is the invasion of the kingdom of departed
spirits and his terrific battle with the sovereign Yama. The poet in his
description of these regions with the detested river with waves of
blood, the dire lamentations, the cries for a drop of water, the
devouring worm, all the tortures of the guilty and the somewhat insipid
pleasures of the just, reminds one of the scenes in the under world so
vividly described by Homer, Virgil, and Dante. Yama is defeated (Sect.
XXVI.) by the giant, not so much by his superior power as because at the
request of Brahmá Yama refrains from smiting with his deadly weapon the
Rákshas enemy to whom that God had once given the promise that preserved
him. In the twenty-seventh section Rávan goes "under the earth into
Pátála the treasure-house of the waters inhabited by swarms of serpents
and Daityas, and well defended by Varun." He subdues Bhogavati the city
ruled by Vásuki and reduces the Nágas or serpents to subjection. He
penetrates even to the imperial seat of Varun. The God himself is
absent, but his sons come forth and do battle with the invader. The
giant is victorious and departs triumphant. The twenty-eighth section
gives the details of a terrific battle between Rávan and Mándhátá King
of Ayodhya, a distinguished ancestor of Ráma. Supernatural weapons are
employed on both sides and the issue of the conflict is long doubtful.
But at last Mándhátá prepares to use the mighty weapon "acquired by
severe austerities through the grace and favour of Rudra." The giant
would inevitably have been slain. But two pre-eminent Munis Pulastya and
Gálava beheld the fight through the power given by contemplation, and
with words of exhortation they parted King Mándhátá and the sovereign of
the Rákshases. Rávan at last (Sect. XXXII.) returns homeward carrying
with him in his car Pushpak the virgin daughters of kings, of Rishis, of
Daityas, and Gandharvas whom he has seized upon his way. The
thirty-sixth section describes a battle with Indra. in which the
victorious Meghanáda son of the giant, makes the King of the Gods his
prisoner, binds him with his magic art, and carries him away (Sect.
XXVII.) in triumph to Lanká. Brahmá intercedes (Sect. XXXVIII.) and
Indrajit releases his prisoner \*\*\* obtaining in return the boon that
sacrifice to the Lord of Fire shall always make him invincible in the
coming battle. In sections XXXIX, XL, "we have a legend related to Ráma
by the sage Agastya to account for the stupendous strength of the monkey
Hanumat, as it had been described in the *Rámáyana*. Rama naturally
wonders (as

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

perhaps many readers of the *Rámáyana* have done since) why a monkey of
such marvellous power and prowess had not easily overcome Báli and
secured the throne for his friend Sugríva. Agastya replies that Hanumat
was at that time under a curse from a Rishi, and consequently was not
conscious of his own might."  <span id="fr_1057"></span>[1](#fn_1057.md)
The whole story of the marvellous Vánar is here given at length, but
nothing else of importance is added to the tale already given in the
Rámáyana. The Rishis or saints then (Sect. XL.) return to their
celestial seats, and the Vánars, Rákshases and bears also (Sect. XLIII.)
take their departure. The chariot Pushpak is restored to its original
owner Kuvera, as has already been related in the Rámáyan.

The story of Ráma and Sitá is then continued, and we meet with matter of
more human interest. The winter is past and the pleasant spring-time is
come, and Ráma and Sitá sit together in the shade of the As'oka trees
happy as Indra and S'achí when they drink in Paradise the nectar of the
Gods. "Tell me, my beloved," says Ráma, "for thou wilt soon be a mother,
hast thou a wish in thy heart for me to gratify?" And Sitá smiles and
answers: "I long, O son of Raghu, to visit the pure and holy hermitages
on the banks of the Ganges and to venerate the feet of the saints who
there perform their rigid austerities and live on roots and berries.
This is my chief desire, to stand within the hermits' grove were it but
for a single day," And Ráma said: "Let not the thought trouble thee:
thou shalt go to the grove of the ascetics," But slanderous tongues have
been busy in Ayodhyá, and Sitá has not been spared. Ráma hears that the
people are lamenting his blind folly in taking back to his bosom the
wife who was so long a captive in the palace of Rávan. Ráma well knows
her spotless purity in thought, word, and deed, and her perfect love of
him; but he cannot endure the mockery and the shame and resolves to
abandon his unsuspecting wife. He orders the sad but still obedient
Lakshman to convey her to the hermitage which she wishes to visit and to
leave her there, for he will see her face again no more. They arrive at
the hermitage, and Lakshman tells her all. She falls fainting on the
ground, and when she recovers her consciousness sheds some natural tears
and bewails her cruel and undeserved lot. But she resolves to live for
the sake of Ráma and her unborn son, and she sends by Lakshman a
dignified message to the husband who has forsaken her: "I grieve not for
myself," she says " because I have been abandoned on account of what the
people say, and not for any evil that I have done, The husband is the
God of the wife, the husband is her lord and guide; and what seems good
unto him she should do even at the cost of her life."

Sitá is honourably received by the saint Válmiki himself, and the holy
women of the hermitage are charged to entertain and serve her. In this
calm retreat she gives birth to two boys who receive the names of Kus'a
and Lava. They are carefully brought up and are taught by Válmiki
himself to recite the Rámáyan. The years pass by: and Ráma at length
determines to celebrate the As'vamedha or Sacrifice of the Steed.
Válmiki, with his two young pupils, attends the ceremony, and the
unknown princes recite before the delighted father the poem which
recounts his deeds. Ráma inquires into their history and recognizes them
as his sons. Sitá is invited to return and solemnly affirm her innocence
before the great assembly.

"But Sitá's heart was too full; this second ordeal was beyond even her.
power to submit to, and the poet rose above the ordinary Hindu level of
women

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

when be ventured to paint her conscious purity as rebelling: "Beholding
all the spectators, and clothed in red garments, Sítá clasping her hands
and bending low her face, spoke thus in a voice choked with tears: 'as
I, even in mind, have never thought of any other than Ráma, so may
Mádhaví the goddess of Earth, grant me a hiding-place.' As Sítá made
this oath, lo! a marvel appeared. Suddenly cleaving the earth, a divine
throne of marvellous beauty rose up, borne by resplendent dragons on
their heads: and seated on it, the goddess of Earth, raising Sítá with
her arm, said to her, 'Welcome to thee!' and placed her by her side. And
as the queen, seated on the throne, slowly descended to Hades, a
continuous shower of flowers fell down from heaven on her head."  <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[1](#fn_1058.md)

"Both the great Hindu epics thus end in disappointment and sorrow. In
the *Mahábhárata* the five victorious brothers abandon the hardly won
throne to die one by one in a forlorn pilgrimage to the Himálaya; and in
the same way Ráma only regains his wife, after all his toils, to lose
her. It is the same in the later Homeric cycle-the heroes of the *Iliad*
perish by ill-fated deaths. And even Ulysses, after his return to
Ithaca, sets sail again to Thesprotia, and finally falls by the hand of
his own son. But in India and Greece alike this is an afterthought of a
self-conscious time, which has been subsequently added to cast a gloom
on the strong cheerfulness of the heroic age."  <span
id="fr_1059"></span>[2](#fn_1059.md)

"The termination of Ráma's terrestrial career is thus told in Sections
116 ff. of the Uttarakánda. Time, in the form of an ascetic, comes to
his palace gate, and asks, as the messenger of the great rishi (Brahmá)
to see Ráma. He is admitted and received with honour, but says, when he
is asked what he has to communicate, that his message must be delivered
in private, and that any one who witnesses the interview is to lose his
life. Ráma informs Laxmana of all this, and desires him to stand
outside. Time then tells Ráma that he has been sent by Brahmá, to say
that when he (Ráma, i.e. Vishnu) after destroying the worlds was
sleeping on the ocean, he had formed him (Brahmá) from the lotus
springing from his navel, and committed to him the work of creation;
that he (Brahmá) had then entreated Ráma to assume the function of
Preserver, and that the latter had in consequence become Vishnu, being
born as the son of Aditi, and had determined to deliver mankind by
destroying Rávana, and to live on earth ten thousand and ten hundred
years; that period, adds Time, was now on the eve of expiration, and
Ráma could either at his pleasure prolong his stay on earth, or ascend
to heaven and rule over the gods, Ráma replies, that he had been born
for the good of the three worlds, and would now return to the place
whence he had come, as it was his function to fulfil the purposes of the
gods. While they are speaking the irritable rishi Durvásas comes, and
insists on seeing Ráma immediately, under a threat, if refused, of
cursing Ráma and all his family.

Laxmana, preferring to save his kinsman, though knowing that his own
death must he the consequence of interrupting the interview of Ráma with
Time, enters the palace and reports the rishi's message to Ráma. Ráma
comes out, and

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

when Durvásas has got the food he wished, and departed, Ráma reflects
with great distress on the words of Time, which require that Laxmana
should die. Laxmana however exhorts Ráma not to grieve, but to abandon
him and not break his own promise. The counsellors concurring in this
advice, Ráma abandons Laxmana, who goes to the river Sarayú, suppresses
all his senses, and is conveyed bodily by Indra to heaven. The gods are
delighted by the arrival of the fourth part of Vishnu. Ráma then
resolves to install Bharata as his successor and retire to the forest
and follow Laxmana. Bharata however refuses the succession, and
determines to accompany his brother. Ráma's subjects are filled with
grief, and say they also will follow him wherever he goes. Messengers
are sent to S'atrughna, the other brother, and he also resolves to
accompany Ráma; who at length sets out in procession from his capital
with all the ceremonial appropriate to the "great departure," silent,
indifferent to external objects, joyless, with S'rí on his right, the
goddess Earth on his left, Energy in front, attended by all his weapons
in human shapes, by the Vedas in the forms of Brahmans, by the Gáyatri,
the Omkára, the Vashatkára, by rishis, by his women, female slaves,
eunuchs, and servants. Bharata with his family, and S'atrughna, follow
together with Brahmans bearing the sacred fire, and the whole of the
people of the country, and even with animals, etc., etc. Ráma, with all
these attendants, comes to the banks of the Sarayú. Brahmá, with all the
gods and innumerable celestial cars, now appears, and all the sky is
refulgent with the divine splendour, Pure and fragrant breezes blow, a
shower of flowers falls. Ráma enters the waters of the Sarayú; and
Brahmá utters a voice from the sky, saying: "Approach, Vishnu; Rághava,
thou hast happily arrived, with thy godlike brothers. Enter thine own
body as Vishnu or the eternal ether. For thou art the abode of the
worlds: no one comprehends thee, the inconceivable and imperishable,
except the large-eyed Máyá thy primeval spouse." Hearing these words,
Ráma enters the glory of Vishnu with his body and his followers. He then
asks Brahmá to find an abode for the people who had accompanied him from
devotion to his person, and Brahmá appoints them a celestial residence
accordingly."  <span id="fr_1060"></span>[1](#fn_1060.md)

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

ADDITIONAL NOTES

QUEEN FORTUNE.

'A curious festival is celebrated in honour of this divinity (Lakshmí)
on the fifth lunar day of the light half of the month Mâgha (February),
when she is identified with Saraswatí the consort of Brahmá, and the
goddess of learning. In his treatise on festivals, a great modern
authority, Raghunandana, mentions, on the faith of a work called
*Samvatsara-sandipa*, that Lakshmí is to be worshipped in the forenoon
of that day with flowers, perfumes, rice, and water; that due honour is
to be paid to inkstand and writing-reed, and no writing to be done.
Wilson, in his essay on the *Religious Festivals of the Hindus* (works,
vol. ii, p. 188. ff.). adds that on the morning of the 2nd February, the
whole of the pens and inkstands, and the books, if not too numerous and
bulky, are collected, the pens or reeds cleaned, the inkstands scoured,
and the books wrapped up in new cloth, are arranged upon a platform, or
a sheet, and strewn over with flowers and blades of young barley, and
that no flowers except white are to be offered. After performing the
necessary rites,.........all the members of the family assemble and make
their prostrations; the books, the pens, and ink having an entire
holiday; and should any emergency require a written communication on the
day dedicated to the divinity of scholarship, it is done with chalk or
charcoal upon a black or white board.'

Chambers's Encyclopaedia. *Lakshmí*.

INDRA.

'The Hindu Jove or Jupiter Tonans, chief of the secondary deities. He
presides over swarga or paradise, and is more particularly the god of
the atmosphere and winds. He is also regent of the east quarter of the
sky. As chief of the deities he is called Devapati, Devadeva, Surapati,
etc; as lord of the atmosphere Divaspati: as lord of the eight Vasus or
demigods, Fire, etc., Vásava: as breaking cities into fragments,
Purandara, Puranda: as lord of a hundred sacrifices (the performance of
a hundred As'vamedhas elevating the sacrficer to the rank of Indra)
S'atakratu, S'atamakha; as having a thousand eyes, Sahasráksha; as
husband of S'achí, S'achípati. His wife is called S'achí, Indrání,
Sakrání, Maghoni, Indras'akti, Pulomajá. and Paulomi. His son is
Jayanta. His pleasure garden or elysium is Nandana; his city, Amarávati;
his palace, Vaijayanta; his horse, Uchchaihs'ravas, his elephant,
Airávata; his charioteer, Mátali.'

Professor M. William's English-Sanskrit Dictionary. *Indra*.

VISHNU.

'The second person of the Hindu triad, and the most celebrated and
popular of all the Indian deities. He is the personification of the
preserving power, and became incarnate in nine different forms, for the
preservation of mankind in various emergencies. Before the creation of
the universe, and after its temporary annihilation, he is supposed to
sleep on the waters, floating on the serpent Sesha, and is then
identified with Náráyana. Brahmá, the creator, is fabled to spring at
that time from a lotus which grows from his navel, whilst thus asleep
..... ......His ten avatárs or incarnations are:

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

I. The Matsya, or fish. In this avatár Vishnu descended in the form of a
fish to save the pious king Satyavrata, who with the seven Rishis and
their wives had taken refuge in the ark to escape the deluge which then
destroyed the earth. 2, The Kúrma, or Tortoise. In this he descended in
the form of a tortoise, for the purpose of restoring to man some of the
comforts lost during the flood. To this end he stationed himself at the
bottom of the ocean, and allowed the point of the great mountain Mandara
to be placed upon his back, which served as a hard axis, whereon the
gods and demons, with the serpent Vásuki twisted round the mountain for
a rope, churned the waters for the recovery of the amrita or nectar, and
fourteen other sacred things. 3. The Varáha, or Boar. In this he
descended in the form of a boar to rescue the earth from the power of a
demon called 'golden-eyed,' Hiranyáksha. This demon had seized on the
earth and carried it with him into the depths of the ocean. Vishnu dived
into the abyss, and after a contest of a thousand years slew the
monster. 4 The Narasinha, or Man-lion. In this monstrous shape of a
creature half-man, half-lion, Vishnu delivered the earth from the
tyranny of an insolent demon called Hiranyakas'ipu. 5. Vámana, or Dwarf.
This avatár happened in the second age of the Hindús or Tretáyug, the
four preceding are said to have occurred in the first or Satyayug; the
object of this avatár was to trick Balí out of the dominion of the three
worlds. Assuming the form of a wretched dwarf he appeared before the
king and asked, as a boon, as much land as he could pace in three steps.
This was granted; and Vishnu immediately expanding himself till he
filled the world, deprived Balí at two steps of heaven and earth, but in
consideration of some merit, left Pátála still in his dominion. 6.
Parasuráma. 7. Rámchandra, 8. Krishna, or according to some Balaráma. 9.
Buddha. In this avatár Vishnu descended in the form of a sage for the
purpose of making some reform in the religion of the Brahmins, and
especially to reclaim them from their proneness to animal sacrifice.
Many of the Hindús will not allow this to have been an incarnation of
their favourite god. 10. Kalki, or White Horse. This is yet to come.
Vishnu mounted on a white horse, with a drawn scimitar, blazing like a
comet, will, according to prophecy, end this present age, viz. the
fourth or Kaliyug, by destroying the world, and then renovating creation
by an age of purity.'

WILLIAMS'S DICTIONARY. *Vishnu*.

S'IVA.

A celebrated Hindú God, the Destroyer of creation, and therefore the
most formidable of the Hindú Triad. He also personifies reproduction,
since the Hindú philosophy excludes the idea of total annihilation
without subsequent regeneration. Hence he is sometimes confounded with
Brahmá, the creator or first person of the Triad. He is the particular
God of the Tántrikas, or followers of the books called Tantras. His
worshippers are termed S'aivas, and although not so numerous as the
Vaishnavas, exalt their god to the highest place in the heavens, and
combine in him many of the attributes which properly belong to the other
deities. According to them S'iva is Time, Justice, Fire, Water, the Sun,
the Destroyer and Creator. As presiding over generation, his type is the
Linga, or Phallus, the origin probably of the Phallic emblem of Egypt
and Greece. As the God of generation and justice, which latter character
he shares with the god Yama, he is represented riding a white bull. His
own colour, as well as that of the bull, is generally white, referring
probably to the unsullied purity of Justice,

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

His throat is dark-blue; his hair of alight reddish colour, and thickly
matted together, and gathered above his head like the hair of an
ascetic. He is sometimes seen with two hands, sometimes with four,
eight, or ten, and with five faces. He has three eyes, one being in the
centre of his forehead, pointing up and down. These are said to denote
his view of the three divisions of time, past, present, and future. He
holds a trident in his hand to denote, as some say, his relationship to
water, or according to others, to show that the three great attributes
of Creator, Destroyer, and Regenerator are combined in him. His loins
are enveloped in a tiger's skin. In his character of Time, he not only
presides over its extinction, but also its astronomical regulation. A
crescent or half-moon on his forehead indicates the measure of time by
the phases of the moon; a serpent forms one of his necklaces to denote
the measure of time by years, and a second necklace of human skulls
marks the lapse and revolution of ages, and the extinction and
succession of the generations of mankind. He is often represented as
entirely covered with serpents, which are the emblems of immortality.
They are bound in his hair, round his neck, wrists, waist, arms and
legs; they serve as rings for his fingers, and earrings for his ears,
and are his constant companions, S'iva has more than a thousand names
which are detailed at length in the sixty-ninth chapter of the S'iva
Purán'a.--WILLIAMS'S DICTIONARY, S'iva.

APSARASES.

   'Originally these deities seem to have been personifications of the
vapours which are attracted by the sun, and form into mist or clouds:
their character may be thus interpreted in the few hymns of the Rigveda
where mention is made of them. At a subsequent period when the Gandharva
of the Rigveda who personifies there especially the Fire of the Sun,
expanded into the Fire of Lightning, the rays of the moon and other
attributes of the elementary life of heaven as well as into pious acts
referring to it, the Apsarasas become divinities which represent
phenomena or objects both of a physical and ethical kind closely
associated with that life; thus in the *Yajurveda* Sunbeams are called
the Apsarasas associated with the Gandharva who is the Sun; Plants are
termed the Apsarasas connected with the Gandharva Fire: Constellations
are the Apsarasas of the Gandharva Moon: Waters the Apsarasas of the
Gandharva Wind, etc. etc.................... In the last Mythological
epoch when the Gandharvas have saved from their elementary nature merely
so much as to be musicians in the paradise of Indra, the Apsarasas
appear among other subordinate deities which share in the merry life of
Indra's heaven, as the wives of the Gandharvas, but more especially as
wives of a licentious sort, and they are promised therefore, too, as a
reward to heroes fallen in battle when they are received in the paradise
of Indra; and while, in the Rigveda, they assist Soma to pour down his
floods, they descend in the epic literature on earth merely to shake the
virtue of penitent Sages and to deprive them of the power they would
otherwise have acquired through unbroken austerities.'--GOLDSTÜCKER'S
Sanskrit Dictionary.

VISHN'U'S INCARNATION AS RÁMA.

'Here is described one of the *avatárs*, descents or manifestations of
Vishn'u in a visible form. The word *avatár* signifies literally
*descent*. The *avatár* which is here spoken of, that in which,
according to Indian traditions, Vishn'u descended

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

and appeared upon earth in the corporeal form of Ráma, the hero of the
Rámáyana, is the seventh in the series of Indian avatars. Much has been
said before now of these avatars, and through deficient knowledge of the
ideas and doctrines of India, they have been compared to the sublime
dogma of the Christian Incarnation. This is one of the grossest errors
that ignorance of the ideas and beliefs of a people has produced.
Between the avatars of India and the Christian Incarnation there is such
an immensity of difference that it is impossible to find any reasonable
analogy that can approximate them. The idea of the avatars is intimately
united with that of the Trimúrti; the bond of connection between these
two ideas is an essential notion common to both, the notion of Vishnu.
What is the Trimurti? I have already said that it is composed of three
Gods, Brahma (masculine), Vishnu the God of *avatárs*, and S'iva. These
three Gods, who when reduced to their primitive and most simple
expression are but three cosmogonical personifications, three powers or
forces of nature, these Gods, I say, are here found, according to Indian
doctrines, entirely external to the true God of India, or Brahma in the
neuter gender. Brahma is alone, unchangeable in the midst of creation:
all emanates from him, he comprehends all, but he remains extraneous to
all: he is Being and the negation of beings. Brahma is never worshipped;
the indeterminate Being is never invoked; he is inaccessible to the
prayers as the actions of man; humanity, as well as nature, is
extraneous to him. External to Brahma rises the Trimurti, that is to
say, Brahmá (masculine) the power which creates, Vishnu the power which
preserves, and S'iva the power which destroys: theogony here commences
at the same time with cosmogony. The three divinities of the Trimurti
govern the phenomena of the universe and influence all nature. The real
God of India is by himself without power; real efficacious power is
attributed only to three divinities who exist externally to him. Brahmá,
Vishnu, and S'iva, possessed of qualities in part contradictory and
attributes that are mutually exclusive, have no other accord or harmony
than that which results from the power of things itself, and which is
found external to their own thoughts. Such is the Indian Trimurti. What
an immense difference between this Triad and the wonderful Trinity of
Christianity! Here there is only one God, who created all, provides for
all, governs all. He exists in three Persons equal to one another, and
intimately united in one only infinite and eternal substance. The Father
represents the eternal thought and the power which created, the Son
infinite love, the Holy Spirit universal sanctification. This one and
triune God completes by omnipotent power the great work of creation
which, when it has come forth from His hands, proceeds in obedience to
the laws which He has given it, governed with certain order by His
infinite providence.

The immense difference between the Trimurti of India and the Christian
Trinity is found again between the avatars of Vishnu and the Incarnation
of Christ. The avatar was effected altogether externally to the Being
who is in India regarded as the true God, The manifestation of one
essentially cosmogonical divinity wrought for the most part only
material and cosmogonical prodigies. At one time it takes the form of
the gigantic tortoise which sustains Mount Mandar from sinking in the
ocean; at another of the fish which raises the lost Veda from the bottom
of the sea, and saves mankind from the waters. When these avatars are
not cosmogonical they consist in some protection accorded to

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

men or Gods, a protection which is neither universal nor permanent. The
very manner in which the *avatár* is effected corresponds to its
material nature, for instance the mysterious vase and the magic liquor
by means of which the *avatár* here spoken of takes place. What are the
forms which Vishn'u takes in his descents? They are the simple forms of
life; he becomes a tortoise, a boar, a fish, but he is not obliged to
take the form of intelligence and liberty, that is to say, the form of
man, In the avatár of Vishn'u is discovered the inpress of pantheistic
ideas which have always more or less prevailed in India. Does the avatár
produce a permanent and definitive result in the world? By no means. It
is renewed at every catastrophe either of nature or man, and its effects
are only transitory........... To sum up then, the Indian *avatár* is
effected externally to the true God of India, to Brahma; it has only a
cosmogonical or historical mission which is neither lasting nor
decisive; it is accomplished by means of strange prodigies and magic
transformations; it may assume promiscuously all the forms of life; it
may be repeated indefinitely. Now let the whole of this Indian idea
taken from primitive tradition be compared with the Incarnation of
Christ and it will be seen that there is between the two an
irreconcilable difference. According to the doctrines of Christianity
the Everlasting Word, Infinite Love, the Son of God, and equal to Him,
assumed a human body, and being born as a man accomplished by his divine
act the great miracle of the spiritual redemption of man. His coming had
for its sole object to bring erring and lost humanity back to Him; this
work being accomplished, and the divine union of men with God being
re-established, redemption is complete and remains eternal.

   The superficial study of India produced in the last century many
erroneous ideas, many imaginary and false parallels between Christianity
and the Brahmanical religion. A profounder knowledge of Indian
civilization and religion, and philological studies enlarged and guided
by more certain principles have dissipated one by one all those errors.
The attributes of the Christian God, which by one of those intellectual
errors, which Vico attributes to the vanity of the learned, had been
transferred to Vishnu, have by a better inspired philosophy been
reclaimed for Christianity, and the result of the two religions, one
immovable and powerless, the other diffusing itself with all its
inherent force and energy, has shown further that there is a difference,
a real opposition, between the two principles.'--GORRESIO.

KUS'A AND LAVA, Page 10.

   As the story of the banishment of Sítá and the subsequent birth in
Válmíki's hermitage of Kus'a and Lava the rhapsodists of the Rámáyan, is
intimately connected with the account in the introductory cantos of
Válmíki's composition of the poem, I shall, I trust, be pardoned for
extracting it from my rough translation of Kálidása's Raghuvan's'a,
parts only of which have been offered to the public.

'Then, day by day, the husband's hope grew high,  
Gazing with love on Sítá's melting eye:  
With anxious care he saw her pallid cheek,  
And fondly bade her all her wishes speak.  
'Once more I fain would see,' the lady cried,  
'The sacred groves that rise on Gangá's side,  

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>  

Where holy grass is ever fresh and green,  
And cattle feeding on the rice are seen:  
There would I rest awhile, where once I strayed  
Linked in sweet friendship to each hermit maid.'  
And Ráma smiled upon his wife, and sware,  
With many a tender oath, to grant her prayer.  
It chanced, one evening, from a lofty seat  
He viewed Ayodhyá stretched before his feet:  
He looked with pride upon the royal road  
Lined with gay shops their glittering stores that showed,  
He looked on Sarjú's silver waves, that bore  
The light barks flying with the sail and oar;  
He saw the gardens near the town that lay,  
Filled with glad citizens and boys at play.  
Then swelled the monarch \*bosom with delight,  
And his heart triumphed at the happy sight.  
He turned to Bhadra, standing by his side,--  
Upon whose secret news the king relied.--  
And bade him say what people said and thought  
Of all the exploits that his arm had wrought.  
The spy was silent, but, when questioned still.  
Thus spake, obedient to his master's will:  
'For all thy deeds in peace and battle done  
The people praise thee. King, except for one:  
This only act of all thy life they blame,--  
Thy welcome home of her, thy ravished dame.'  
Like iron yielding to the iron's blow.  
Sank Ráma, smitten by those words of woe.  
His breast, where love and fear for empire vied,  
Swayed, like a rapid swing, from side to side.  
Shall he this rumour scorn, which blots his life,  
Or banish her, his dear and spotless wife?  
But rigid Duty left no choice between  
His perilled honour and his darling queen.  
Called to his side, his brothers wept to trace  
The marks of anguish in his altered face.  
No longer bright and glorious as of old.  
He thus addressed them when the tale was told:  
'Alas! my brothers, that my life should blot  
The fame of those the Sun himself begot:  
As from the labouring cloud the driven rain  
Leaves on the mirror's polished face a stain.  
E'en as an elephant who loathes the stake  
And the strong chain he has no power to break,  
I cannot brook this cry on every side,  
That spreads like oil upon the moving tide.  
I leave the daughter of Videha's King,  
And the fair blossom soon from her to spring,  

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>  

As erst, obedient to my sire's command,  
I left the empire of the sea-girt land.  
Good is my queen, and spotless; but the blame  
Is hard to bear, the mockery and the shame.  
Men blame the pure Moon for the darkened ray.  
When the black shadow takes the light away  
And, O my brothers, if ye wish to see  
Ráma live long from this reproach set free,  
Let not your pity labour to control  
The firm sad purpose of his changeless soul.'  

Thus Ráma spake. The sorrowing brothers beard  
His stern resolve, without an answering word;  
For none among them dared his voice to raise,  
That will to question:--and they could not praise.  
'Beloved brother,' thus the monarch cried  
To his dear Lakshman, whom he called aside.--  
Lakshman, who knew no will save his alone  
Whose hero deeds through all the world were known:--  
'My queen has told me that s\*he longs to rove  
Beneath the shade of Saint Válmíki's grove:  
Now mount thy car, away my lady bear;  
Tell all, and leave her in the forest there.'  

The car was brought, the gentle lady smiled,  
As the glad news her trusting heart beguiled.  
She mounted up: Sumantra held the reins;  
And forth the coursers bounded o'er the plains.  
She saw green fields in all their beauty dressed,  
And thanked her husband in her loving breast.  
Alas! deluded queen! she little knew  
How changed was he whom she believed so true;  
How one she worshipped like the Heavenly Tree  
Could, in a moment's time, so deadly be.  
Her right eye throbbed,--ill-omened sign, to tell  
The endless loss of him she loved so well,  
And to the lady's saddening heart revealed  
The woe that Lakshman, in his love, concealed.  
Pale grew the bloom of her sweet face,--as fade  
The lotus blossoms,--by that sign dismayed.  
'Oh. may this omen,'--was her silent prayer,--  
'No grief to Ráma or his brothers bear I'  

When Lakshman, faithful to his brother, stood  
Prepared to leave her in the distant wood,  
The holy Gangá, flowing by the way,  
Raised all her hands of waves to bid him stay.  
At length with sobs and burning tears that rolled  
Down his sad face, the king's command he told;  
As when a monstrous cloud, in evil hour,  

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>  

Rains from its labouring womb a stony shower.  
She heard, she swooned, she fell upon the earth,  
Fell on that bosom whence she sprang to birth.  
As, when the tempest in its fury flies,  
Low in the dust the prostrate creeper lies,  
So, struck with terror sank she on the ground,  
And all her gems, like flowers, lay scattered round.  
But Earth, her mother, closed her stony breast.  
And, filled with doubt, denied her daughter rest.  
She would not think the Chief of Raghu's race  
Would thus his own dear guiltless wife disgrace.  
Stunned and unconscious, long the lady lay,  
And felt no grief, her senses all astray.  
But gentle Lakshman, with a brother's care,  
Brought back her sense, and with her sense, despair.  
But not her wrongs, her shame, her grief, could wring  
One angry word against her lord the King:  
Upon herself alone the blame she laid.  
For tears and sighs that would not yet be stayed.  
To soothe her anguish Lakshman gently strove;  
He showed the path to Saint Válmíki's grove;  
And craved her pardon for the share of ill  
He wrought, obedient to his brother's will.  
'O, long and happy, dearest brother, live!  
I have to praise', she cried,' and not forgive:  
To do his will should be thy noblest praise;  
As Vishn'u ever Indra's will obeys.  
Return, dear brother: on each royal dame  
Bestow a blessing in poor Sítá's name,  
And bid them, in their love, kind pity take  
Upon her offspring, for the father's sake.  
And speak my message in the monarch's ear,  
The last last words of mine that he shall hear:  
'Say, was it worthy of thy noble race  
Thy guiltless queen thus lightly to disgrace?  
For idle tales to spurn thy faithful bride,  
Whose constant truth the searching fire had tried?  
Or may I hope thy soul refused consent,  
And but thy voice decreed my banishment?  
Hope that no care could turn, no love could stay  
The lightning stroke that falls on me to-day?  
That sins committed in the life that's fled  
Have brought this evil on my guilty head?  
Think not I value now my widowed life,  
Worthless to her who once was Ráma's wife.  
I only live because I hope to see  
The dear dear babe that will resemble thee.  
And then my task of penance shall be done,  

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>  

With eyes uplifted to the scorching sun;  
So shall the life that is to come restore  
Mine own dear husband, to be lost no more.'  
And Lakshman swore her every word to tell,  
Then turned to go, and bade the queen farewell.  
Alone with all her woes, her piteous cries  
Rose like a butchered lamb's that struggling dies.  
The reverend sage who from his dwelling came  
For sacred grass and wood to feed the flame,  
Heard her loud shrieks that rent the echoing wood,  
And, quickly following, by the mourner stood.  
Before the sage the lady bent her low,  
Dried her poor eyes, and strove to calm her woe.  
With blessings on her hopes the blameless man  
In silver tones his soothing speech began:  
'First of all faithful wives, O Queen, art thou;  
And can I fail to mourn thy sorrows now?  
Rest in this holy grove, nor harbour fear  
Where dwell in safety e'en the timid deer.  
Here shall thine offspring safely see the light,  
And be partaker of each holy rite.  
Here, near the hermits' dwellings, shall thou lave  
Thy limbs in \*Tonse's\* sin-destroying wave,  
And on her isles, by prayer and worship, gain  
Sweet peace of mind, and rest from care and pain.  
Each hermit maiden with her sweet soft voice,  
Shall soothe thy woe, and bid thy heart rejoice:  
With fruit and early flowers thy lap shall fill,  
And offer grain that springs for us at will.  
And here, with labour light, thy task shall be  
To water carefully each tender tree,  
And learn how sweet a nursing mother's joy  
Ere on thy bosom rest thy darling boy.'  

That very night the banished Sítá bare  
Two royal children, most divinely fair.  

The saint Válmíki, with a friend's delight,  
Graced Sítá's offspring with each holy rite.  
Kus'a and Lava--such the names they bore--  
Learnt, e'en in childhood, all the Vedas' lore;  
And then the bard, their minstrel souls to train,  
Taught them to sing his own immortal strain.  
And Ráma's deeds her boys so sweetly sang,  
That Sítá's breast forgot her bitterest pang.  

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>  

   Then Sítá's children, by the saint's command,  
   Sang the Rámáyan, wandering through the land.  
   How could the glorious poem fail to gain  
   Each heart, each ear that listened to the strain!  
   So sweet each minstrel's voice who sang the praise  
   Of Ráma deathless in Válmíki's lays.  
   Ráma himself amid the wondering throng  
   Marked their fair forms, and loved the noble song,  
   While, still and weeping, round the nobles stood,  
   As, on a windless morn, a dewy wood.  
   On the two minstrels all the people gazed,  
   Praised their fair looks and marvelled as they praised;  
   For every eye amid the throng could trace  
   Ráma's own image in each youthful face.  
   Then spoke the king himself and bade them say  
   Who was their teacher, whose the wondrous lay.  
   Soon as Válmíki, mighty saint, he saw,  
   He bowed his head in reverential awe.  
   'These are thy children' cried the saint,'recall  
   Thine own dear Sítá, pure and true through all.  
   'O holy father,' thus the king replied,  
   'The faithful lady by the fire was tried;  
   But the foul demon's too successful arts  
   Raised light suspicions in my people's hearts.  
   Grant that their breasts may doubt her faith no more,  
   And thus my Sítá and her sons restore.'  

             *Raghuvans'a Cantos XIV, XV.*  

PARAS'URÁMA, PAGE 87.

'He cleared the earth thrice seven times of the Kshatriya caste, and
filled with their blood the five large lakes of Samanta, from which he
offered libations to the race of Bhrigu. Offering a solemn sacrifice to
the King of the Gods Paras'uráma presented the earth to the ministering
priests. Having given the earth to Kas'vapa, the hero of immeasurable
prowess retired to the Mahendra mountain, where he still resides; and in
this manner was there enmity between him and the race of the Kshatriyas,
and thus was the whole earth conquered by Paras'uráma.' The destruction
of the Kshatriyas by Paras'uráma had been provoked by the cruelty of the
Kshatriyas. *Chips from a German Workshop*, Vol. II. p.334.

The scene in which he appears is probably interpolated for the sake of
making him declare Ráma to be Vishnu. 'Herr von Schlegel has often
remarked to me,' says Lassen,'that without injuring the connexion of the
story all the chapters \[of the Rámáyan} might be omitted in which Ráma
is regarded as an incarnation of Vishn'u. In fact, where the incarnation
of Vishn'u as the four sons of Das'aratha is described, the great
sacrifice is already ended, and all the priests remunerated at the
termination, when the new sacrifice begins at which the Gods appear,
then withdraw, and then first propose the incarnation to Vishnu,

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

If it had been an original circumstance of the story, the Gods would
certainly have deliberated on the matter earlier, and the celebration of
the sacrifice would have continued without interruption.' LASSEN,
*Indische Alterthumskunde, Vol. I.* p.489.

YAMA, PAGE 68.

Son of Vivasvat=Jima son of Vivanghvat, the Jamahid of the later
Persians.

FATE PAGE 68.

'The idea of fate was different in India from that which prevailed in
Greece. In Greece fate was a mysterious, inexorable power which governed
men and human events, and from which it was impossible to escape. In
India Fate was rather an inevitable consequence of actions done in
births antecedent to one's present state of existence, and was therefore
connected with the doctrine of metempsychosis. A misfortune was for the
most part a punishment, an expiation of ancient faults not yet entirely
cancelled.' GORRESIO.

VIS'VÁMITRA. PAGE 76.

'Though of royal extraction, Vis'vámitra conquered for himself and his
family the privileges of a Brahman. He became a Brahman, and thus broke
through all the rules of caste. The Brahmans cannot deny the fact,
because it forms one of the principal subjects of their legendary poems.
But they have spared no pains to represent the exertions of Vis'vámitra,
in his struggle for Brahmanhood, as so superhuman that no one would
easily be tempted to follow his example. No mention is made of these
monstrous penances in the Veda, where the struggle between Vis'vámitra,
the leader of the Kus'ikas or Bharatas, and the Brahman Vas'ishtha, the
leader of the white-robed Tritsus, is represented as the struggle of two
rivals for the place of Purohita or chief priest and minister at the
court of King Sudás, the son of Pijavana.' *Chips from a German
Workshop, Vol. II.* p.336.

HOUSEHOLD GODS, PAGE 102.

'No house is supposed to be without its tutelary divinity, but the
notion attached to this character is now very far from precise. The
deity who is the object of hereditary and family worship, the
*Kuladeváta*, is always one of the leading personages of the Hindu
mythology, as S'iva, Vishnu or Durgá, but the *Grihadevatá* rarely bears
any distinct appellation. In Bengal, the domestic god is sometimes the
*Sábagrám* stone, sometimes the *tulasi* plant, sometimes a basket with
a little rice in it, and sometimes a water-jar--to either of which a
brief adoration is daily addressed, most usually by the females of the
family. Occasionally small images of Lakshmi or Chandi fulfil the
office, or should a snake appear, he is venerated as the guardian of the
dwelling. In general, however, in former times, the household deities
were regarded as the unseen spirits of ill, the ghosts and goblins who
hovered about every spot, and claimed some particular sites as their
own. Offerings were made to them in the open air, by scattering a little
rice with a short formula at the close of all ceremonies to keep them in
good humour.

The household gods correspond better with the genii locorum than with
the lares or penates of autiquity.' H. H. WILSON

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

PAGE 107.

  
*S'aivya, a king whom earth obeyed,  
Once to a hawk a promise made.*  

The following is a free version of this very ancient story which occurs
more than once in the *Mahábhárat*:

THE SUPPLIANT DOVE.  

Chased by a hawk there came a dove  
   With worn and weary wing,  
And took her stand upon the hand  
   Of Kás'í's mighty king.  
The monarch smoothed her ruffled plumes  
   And laid her on his breast,  
And cried, 'No fear shall vex thee here,  
   Rest, pretty egg-born, rest!  
Fair Kás'i's realm is rich and wide,  
   With golden harvests gay,  
But all that's mine will I resign  
   Ere I my guest betray.'  
But panting for his half won spoil  
   The hawk was close behind.  
And with wild cry and eager eye  
   Came swooping down the wind:  
'This bird', he cried, 'my destined prize,  
   'Tis not for thee to shield:  
'Tis mine by right and toilsome flight  
   O'er hill and dale and field.  
Hunger and thirst oppress me sore,  
   And I am faint with toil:  
Thou shouldst not stay a bird of prey  
   Who claims his rightful spoil.  
They say thou art a glorious king,  
   And justice is thy care:  
Then justly reign in thy domain,  
   Nor rob the birds of air.'  
Then cried the king: 'A cow or deer  
   For thee shall straightway bleed,  
Or let a ram or tender lamb  
   Be slain, for thee to feed.  
Mine oath forbids me to betray  
   My little twice-born guest:  
See how she clings with trembling wings  
   To her protector's breast.'  
'No flesh of lambs,' the hawk replied,  
   'No blood of deer for me;  
The falcon loves to feed on doves  
   And such is Heaven's decree.  
But if affection for the dove  

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>  

     Thy pitying heart has stirred,  
   Let thine own flesh my maw refresh,  
     Weighed down against the bird.'  
   He carved the flesh from off his side,  
     And threw it in the scale,  
   While women's cries smote on the skies  
     With loud lament and wail.  
   He hacked the flesh from side and arm,  
     From chest and back and thigh,  
   But still above the little dove  
     The monarch's scale stood high.  
   He heaped the scale with piles of flesh,  
     With sinews, blood and skin,  
   And when alone was left him bone  
     He threw himself therein.  
   Then thundered voices through the air;  
     The sky grew black as night;  
   And fever took the earth that shook  
     To see that wondrous sight.  
   The blessed Gods, from every sphere,  
     By Indra led, came nigh:  
   While drum and flute and shell and lute  
     Made music in the sky.  
   They rained immortal chaplets down,  
     Which hands celestial twine,  
   And softly shed upon his head  
     Pure Amrit, drink divine.  
   Then God and Seraph, Bard and Nymph  
     Their heavenly voices raised,  
   And a glad throng with dance and song  
     The glorious monarch praised.  
   They set him on a golden car  
     That blazed with many a gem;  
   Then swiftly through the air they flew,  
     And bore him home with them.  
   Thus Kás'í's lord, by noble deed,  
     Won heaven and deathless fame:  
   And when the weak protection seek  
     From thee, do thou the same.  

*Scenes from the Ramayan, &c.*  

PAGE 108.

The ceremonies that attended the consecration of a king (*Abhisheka lit.
Sprinkling over*) are fully described in Goldstücker's Dictionary, from
which the following extract is made: 'The type of the inauguration
ceremony as practised at the Epic period may probably be recognized in
the history of the inauguration of *Ráma*, as told in the *Rámáyana*,
and in that of the inauguration of *Yudhishtira*, as told in the
*Mahábháratha*. Neither ceremony is described in these poems

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

with the full detail which is given of the vaidik rite in the
*Aitareya-Bráhmanam*; but the allusion that Ráma was inaugurated by
*Vasishtha* and the other Bráhmanas in the same manner as Indra by the
Vasus...and the observation which is made in some passages that a
certain rite of the inauguration was performed 'according to the sacred
rule'...admit of the conclusion that the ceremony was supposed to have
taken place in conformity with the vaidik injunction.... As the
inauguration of *Ráma* was intended and the necessary preparations for
it were made when his father Das'aratha was still alive, but as the
ceremony itself, through the intrigues of his step-mother *Kaikeyí*, did
not take place then, but fourteen years later, after the death of
*Das'aratha*, an account of the preparatory ceremonies is given in the
*Ayodhyákánda* (Book II) as well as in the *Yuddha-Kánda* (Book VI.) of
the Rámáyana, but an account of the complete ceremony in the latter book
alone. According to the *Ayodhyákánda*, on the day preceding the
intended inauguration *Ráma* and his wife *Sítá* held a fast, and in the
night they performed this preliminary rite: *Ráma* having made his
ablutions, approached the idol of *Náráyana*, took a cup of clarified
butter, as the religious law prescribes, made a libation of it into the
kindled fire, and drank the remainder while wishing what was agreeable
to his heart. Then, with his mind fixed on the divinity he lay, silent
and composed, together with *Sítá*, on a bed of Kus'a-grass, which was
spread before the altar of Vishnu, until the last watch of the night,
when he awoke and ordered the palace to be prepared for the solemnity.
At day-break reminded of the time by the voices of the bards, he
performed the usual morning devotion and praised the divinity. In the
meantime the town Ayodhyá had assumed a festive appearance and the
inauguration implements had been arranged...golden water-jars, an
ornamented throne-seat, a chariot covered with a splendid tiger-skin,
water taken from the confluence of the Ganges and Jumna, as well as from
other sacred rivers, tanks, wells, lakes, and from all oceans, honey,
curd, clarified butter, fried grain, Kus'a-grass, flowers, milk;
besides, eight beautiful damsels, and a splendid furious elephant,
golden and silver jars, filled with water, covered with *Udumbara*
branches and various lotus flowers, besides a white jewelled *chourie*,
a white splendid parasol, a white bull, a white horse, all manner of
musical instruments and bards....In the preceding chapter...there are
mentioned *two* white *chouries* instead of one, and all kinds of seeds,
perfumes and jewels, a scimitar, a bow, a litter, a golden vase, and a
blazing fire, and amongst the living implements of the pageant, instead
of the bards, gaudy courtesans, and besides the eight damsels,
professors of divinity, Bráhmanas, cows and pure kinds of wild beasts
and birds, the chiefs of town and country-people and the citizens with
their train.'

PAGE 109.

  
   *Then with the royal chaplains they  
   Took each his place \*in\* long array.  
   The twice born chiefs, with zealous heed,  
   Made ready what the rite would need.*  

'Now about the office of a Purohita (house priest). The gods do not eat
the food offered by a king, who has a house-priest (Purohita). Thence
the king even when (not) intending to bring a sacrifice, would appoint a
Bráhman to the office of house-priest.' HA\*UG'S *A\*dureya Bráhmanam.
Vol. II. p.* 523. 35

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

PAGE 110.

  
*There by the gate the Sáras screamed.*  

The Sáras or Indian Crane is a magnificent bird easily domesticated and
speedily constituting himself the watchman of his master's house and
garden. Unfortunately he soon becomes a troublesome and even dangerous
dependent, attacking strangers with his long bill and powerful wings,
and warring especially upon 'small infantry' with unrelenting ferocity.

PAGE 120.

  
*My mothers or my sire the king.*  

All the wives of the king his father are regarded and spoken of by Ráma
as his mothers.

PAGE 125.

  
*Such blessings as the Gods o'erjoyed  
      Poured forth when Vritra was destroyed.*  

Mythology regards Vritra as a demon or Asur, the implacable enemy of
Indra, but this is not the primitive idea contained in the name of
Vritra. In the hymns of the Veda Vritra appears to be the thick dark
cloud which Indra the God of the firmament attacks and disperses with
his thunderbolt.' GORRESIO.

'In that class of Rig-veda hymns which there is reason to look upon as
the oldest portion of Vedic poetry, the character of Indra is that of a
mighty ruler of the firmament, and his principal feat is that of
conquering the demon *Vritra*, a symbolical personification of the cloud
which obstructs the clearness of the sky, and withholds the fructifying
rain from the earth. In his battles with Vritra he is therefore
described as 'opening the receptacles of the waters,' as 'cleaving the
cloud' with his 'far-whirling thunderbolt,' as 'casting the waters down
to earth.' and 'restoring the sun to the sky.' He is in consequence 'the
upholder of heaven, earth, and firmament,' and the god 'who has
engendered the sun and the dawn.' CHAMBERS'S CYCLOPÆDIA, *lndra*.

'Throughout these hymns two images stand out before us with overpowering
distinctness. On one side is the bright god of the heaven, as beneficent
as he is irresistible: on the other the demon of night and of darkness,
as false and treachorous as he is malignant... The latter (as his name
Vritra, from var, to veil, indicates) is pre-eminently the thief who
hides away the rain-clouds... But the myth is yet in too early a state
to allow of the definite designations which are brought before us in the
conflicts of Zeus with Typhôn and his monstrous progeny, of Apollôn with
the Pythôn, of Bellerophôn with Chimaira of Oidipous with the Sphinx, of
Hercules with Cacus, of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir; and thus not only
is Vritra known by many names, but he is opposed sometimes by Indra,
sometimes by Agni the fire-god, sometimes by Trita, Brihaspati, or other
deities; or rather these are all names of one and the same god:

  
πολλών ὀνομάτων μορφὴ μία.  

Cox's *Mythology of the Aryan Nations. Vol. II. p. 326.*  

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

PAGE 125.

  
   *And that prized herb whose sovereign power  
   Preserves from dark misfortune's hour.*  
   'And yet more medicinal is it than that Moly,  
   That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;  
   He called it Haemony, and gave it me,  
   And bade me keep it as of sovereign use  
   'Gainst all enchantment, mildew, blast, or damp,  
   Or ghastly furies' apparition.' *Comus.*  

The *Moly* of Homer, which Dierbach considers to have been the
*Mandrake*, is probably a corruption of the Sanskrit *Múla* a root.

PAGE 136.

  
   *True is the ancient saw: the Neem  
   Can ne'er distil a honeyed stream.*  

The Neem tree, especially in the Rains, emits a strong unpleasant smell
like that of onions. Its leaves however make an excellent cooling
poultice, and the Extract of Neem is an admirable remedy for cutaneous
disorders.

PAGE 152.

  
   *Who of Nisháda lineage came.*  

The following account of the origin of the Nishádas is taken from
Wilson's *Vishnu Purána*, Book I. Chap. 15. 'Afterwards the Munis beheld
a great dust arise, and they said to the people who were nigh: "What is
this?" And the people answered and said: "Now that the kingdom is
without a king, the dishonest men have begun to seize the property of
their neighbours. The great dust that you behold, excellent Munis, is
raised by troops of clustering robbers, hastening to fall upon their
prey." The sages, hearing this, consulted, and together rubbed the thigh
of the king (Vena), who had left no offspring, to produce a son. From
the thigh, thus rubbed, came forth a being of the complexion of a
charred stake, with flattened features like a negro, and of dwarfish
stature. "What am I to do," cried he eagerly to the Munis. "Sit down
(nishída)," said they. And thence his name was Nisháda. His descendants,
the inhabitants of the Vindhyá mountain, great Muni, are still called
Nishádas and are characterized by the exterior tokens of depravity.'
Professor Wilson adds, in his note on the passage: 'The Matsya says that
there were born outcast or barbarous races, Mlechchhas, as black as
collyrium. The Bhágavata describes an individual of dwarfish stature,
with short arms and legs, of a complexion as black as a crow, with
projecting chin, broad flat nose, red eyes, and tawny hair, whose
descendants were mountaineers and foresters. The Padma (Bhúmi Khanda)
has a similar deccription; adding to the dwarfish stature and black
complexion, a wide mouth, large ears, and a protuberant belly. It also
particularizes his posterity as Nishádas, Kirátas, Bhillas, and other
barbarians and Mlechchhas, living in woods and on mountains. These
passages intend, and do not much exaggerate, the uncouth appearance of
the Gonds, Koles, Bhils, and other uncivilized tribes, scattered along
the forests and mountains of Central India from Behar to Khandesh, and
who are, not improbably, the predecessors of the present occupants of
the cultivated portions of the country. They are always very black,
ill-shapen, and dwarfish, and have countenances of a very African
character.'

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

Manu gives a different origin of the Nishádas as the offspring of a
Bráhman father and a Súdra mother. See Muir's *Sanskrit Texts*, Vol. I.
p. 481.

PAGE 157.

  
   *Beneath a fig-tree's mighty shade,  
   With countless pendent shoots displayed.*  
   'So counselled he, and both together went  
   Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose  
   The fig-tree: not that kind for fruit renowned,  
   But such as at this day, to Indians known,  
   In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms  
   Branching so broad and long, that in the ground  
   The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow  
   About the mother tree, a pillared shade  
   High overarched, and echoing walks between.'  

*Paradise Lost*, Book IX,

PAGE 161.

  
   *Now, Lakshman, as our cot is made,  
   Must sacrifice be duly paid*.  

The rites performed in India on the completion of a house are
represented in modern Europe by the familiar 'house-warming.'

PAGE 169.

  
   *I longed with all my lawless will  
   Some elephant by night to kill*.  

One of the regal or military caste was forbidden to kill an elephant
except in battle.

  
   *Thy hand has made no Bráhman bleed*.  

'The punishment which the Code of Manu awards to the slayer of a Brahman
was to be branded in the forehead with the mark of a headless corpse,
and entirely banished from society; this being apparently commutable for
a fine. The poem is therefore in accordance with the Code regarding the
peculiar guilt of killing Brahmans; but in allowing a hermit who was not
a *Divija* (twice-born) to go to heaven, the poem is far in advance of
the Code. The youth in the poem is allowed to read the Veda, and to
accumulate merit by his own as well as his fathers pious acts; whereas
the exclusive Code reserves all such privileges to *Divijas*, invested
with the sacred cord.' Mrs. SPEIR'S *Life in Ancient India,* p. 107.

PAGE 174.

THE PRAISE OF KINGS.

'Compare this magnificent eulogium of kings and kingly government with
what Samuel says of the king and his authority: And Samuel told all the
words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king.

And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over
you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for his
chariots, and to be his horsemen: and some shall run before his
chariots.

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

     And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over
fifties, and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest,
and to make his instrument of war, and instruments of his chariots.

     And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
cooks, and to be bakers.

     And he will take your fields, and your vineyards and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.

     And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and
give to his officers, and to his servants.

     And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work.     
He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.     
And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall
have chosen you. I. *Samuel*, VIII.

     In India kingly government was ancient and consecrated by
tradition: whence to change it seemed disorderly and revolutionary: in
Judea theocracy was ancient and consecrated by tradition, and therefore
the innovation which would substitute a king was represented as full of
dangers.' GORRESIO.

                         S'ÁLMALÍ PAGE 1:6.

      According to the Bengal recension S'álmalí appears to have been
another name of the Vipás'á. S'álmalí may be an epithet signifying rich
in Bombax heptaphyllon. The commentator makes another river out of the
word.

                   BHARATH'S RETURN, PAGE 178.

'Two routes from Ayodhyá to Rájagriha or Girivraja are described. That
taken by the envoys appears to have been the shorter one, and we are not
told why Bharath returned by a different road. The capital of the
Kekeyas lay to the west of the Vipás'á. Between it and the S'atadru
stretched the country of the Bahikas. Upon the remaining portion of the
road the two recensions differ. According to that of Bengal there follow
towards the east the river Indamatí, then the town Ajakála belonging to
the Bodhi, then Bhulingá, then the river S'aradandá. According to the
other instead of the first river comes the Ikshumatí...instead of the
first town Abhikála, instead of the second Kulingá, then the second
river. According to the direction of the route both the above-mentioned
rivers must be tributaries of the S'atadrú...The road then crossed the
Yamnuná (Jumna), led beyond that river through the country of the
Panchálas, and reached the Ganges at Hástinapura, where the ferry was.
Thence it led over the Rámagangá and its eastern tributaries, then over
the Gomati, and then in a southern direction along the Málini, beyond
which it reached Ayodhyá\*. In Bharath's journey the following rivers
are passed from west to east: *Kutikeshtiká*, *Uttániká*, *Kutiká*,
*Kapívatí*, *Gomatí* according to Schlegel, and *Hiranyairatí*,
*Uttáriká*, *Kvtilá*, *Kapivati*, *Gomatí* according to Gorresio. As
these rivers are to be looked for on the east of the Ganges, the first
must be the modern *K\*oh*, a small affluent of the Rámagangá, over
which the highway cannot have gone as it bends too far to the north. The
Uttániká or Uttáriká must be the Rámagangá,the Kutiká or Kutilá its
eastern tributary Kos'ilá, the Kapívatí the next tributary which on the
maps has different names, *Gurra* or above Kailas,

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

lower down *Bhaigu*. The Gomatí (Goomtee) retains its old name. The
Máliní, mentioned only in the envoys' journey, must have been the
western tributary of the Sarayú now called Chuká.' LASSEN'S *Indische
Alterthumskunde*, Vol. II. P. 524,

PAGE 183.

  
   *What worlds await thee, Queen, for this?*  

'Indian belief divided the universe into several worlds (lokáh). The
three principal worlds were heaven, earth, and hell. But according to
another division there were seven: Bhúrloka or the earth, Bhuvarloka or
the space between the earth and the sun, the seat of the Munis, Siddhas,
&c., Svarloka or the heaven of Indra between the sun and the polar star,
and the seventh Brahmaloka or the world of Brahma. Spirits which reached
the last were exempt from being born again.' GORRESIO.

PAGE 203.

  
   *When from a million herbs a blaze  
   Of their own luminous glory plays.*  

This mention of lambent flames emitted by herbs at night may be compared
with Lucan's description of a similar phenomenon in the Druidical forest
near Marseilles, (*Pharsalia*, III. 420.).

  
     *Non ardentis* fulgere incendia silvae.  

Seneca, speaking of Argolis, (Thyestes, Act IV), says:--

  
     Tota solet  
   Micare flamma silva, et excelsae trabes  
   *Ardent sine igni*.  

Thus also the bush at Horeb (Exod. II.) flamed, but was not consumed.
The Indian explanation of the phenomenon is, that the sun before he sets
deposits his rays for the night with the deciduous plants. See *Journal
of R. As. S. Bengal*, Vol. II. p. 339.

PAGE 219.

  
   *We rank the Buddhist with the thief.*  

Schlegel says in his Preface: 'Lubrico vestigio insistit V. Cl.
*\*Heerenius\*, prof. Gottingensis*, in libro suo de commerciis veterum
populorum (OPP. Vol. HIST. XII, pag. 129,) dum putat, ex mentione
sectatorum Buddhae secundo libro Rameidos iniecta de tempore, quo totum
carmen sit conditum, quicquam legitime concludi posse.... Sunt versus
spurii, reiecti a Bengalis in sola commentatorum recensione leguntur.
Buddhas quidem mille fere annis ante Christum natun visit: sed post
multa demumsecula, odiointernecivo inter Brachmanos et Buddhae
sectatores orto, his denique ex India pulsis, fingi potuit iniquissima
criminatio, eos animi immortalitatem poenasque et praemia in vita futura
negare. Praeterea metrum, quo concinnati sunt hi versus, de quo metro
mox disseram, recentiorem aetatem arguit....Poenitet me nunc mei
consilii, quod non statim ab initio,...eiecerim cuncta disticha diversis
a sloco vulgari metris composita. Metra sunt duo: pariter ambo constant
quatuor hemistichiis inter se aequalibus, alterum undenarum syllabarum,
alterum duodenarum, hunc in modum:

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

  
V -- v -- \| -- v v -- \| v -- V  
v -- v -- \| -- v v -- \| v -- v V  

Cuius generis versus in primo et secundo Rameidos libro nusquam nisi ad
finem capitum apposita inveniuntur, et huic loco unice sunt acommodata,
quasi peroratio, lyricis numeris assurgens, quo magis canorae cadant
clausulae: sicut musici in concentibus extremis omnium vocum
instrumentorumque ictu fortiore aures percellere amant. Igitur disticha
illa non ante divisionem per capita illatam addi potuerunt: hanc autem
grammaticis deberi argumento est ipse recensionum dissensus, manifesto
inde ortus, quod singuli editores in ea constituenda suo quisque iudicio
usi sunt; praeterquam quod non credibile est, poetam artis suae peritum
narrationem continuam in membra tam minuta dissecuisse. Porro discolor
est dictio: magniloquentia affectatur, sed nimis turgida illa atque
effusa, nec sententiarum pondere satis suffulta. Denique nihil fere novi
affertur: ampli ficantur prius dicta, rarius aliquid ex capite sequente
anticipatur. Si quis appendices hosce legendo trasiliat, sentiet slocum
ultimum cum primo capitis proximi apte coagmentatum, nec sine vi quadam
inde avulsum. Eiusmodi versus exhibet utraque recensio, sed modo haec
modo illa plures paucioresve numero, et lectio interdum magnopere
variat.'

"The narrative of Ráma's exile in the jungle is one of the most obscure
portions of the Rámáyana, inasmuch as it is difficult to discover any
trace of the original tradition, or any illustration of actual life and
manners, beyond the artificial life of self-mortification and selfdenial
said to have been led by the Brahman sages of olden time. At the same
time, however, the story throws some light upon the significance of the
poem, and upon the character in which the Brahmanical author desired to
represent Ráma; and consequently it deserves more serious consideration
than the nature of the subject-matter would otherwise seem to imply.

According to the Rámáyana, the hero Ráma spent more than thirteen years
of his exile in wandering amongst the different Brahmanical settlements,
which appear to have been scattered over the country between the Ganges
and the Godáveri; his wanderings extending from the hill of Chitra-kúta
in Bundelkund, to the modern town of Nasik on the western side of India,
near the source of the Godáveri river, and about seventy-five miles to
the north-west of Bombay. The appearance of these Brahmanical hermitages
in the country far away to the south of the Raj of Kasala, seems to call
for critical inquiry. Each hermitage is said to have belonged to some
particular sage, who is famous in Brahmanical tradition. But whether the
sages named were really contemporaries of Ráma, or whether they could
possibly have flourished at one and the same period, is open to serious
question. It is of course impossible to fix with any degree of certainty
the relative chronology of the several sages, who are said to have been
visited by Ráma; but still it seems tolerably clear that some belonged
to an age far anterior to that in which the Rámáyana was composed, and
probably to an age anterior to that in which Ráma existed as a real and
living personage; whilst, at least, one sage is to be found who could
only have existed in the age during which the Rámáyana was produced in
its present form. The main proofs of these inferences are as follows. An
interval of many centuries seems to have elapsed between the composition
of the Rig-Veda and that of the Rámáyana: a conclusion

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

which has long been proved by the evidence of language, and is generally
accepted by Sanskrit scholars. But three of the sages, said to have been
contemporary with Ráma, namely, Vis'vámitra, Atri and Agastya, are
frequently mentioned in the hymns of the Rig-Veda; whilst Válmíki, the
sage dwelling at Chitra-kúta, is said to have been himself the composer
of the Rámáyana. Again, the sage Atri, whom Ráma visited immediately
after his departure from Chitra-kúta, appears in the genealogical list
preserved in the Mahá Bhárata, as the progenitor of the Moon, and
consequently as the first ancestor of the Lunar race: whilst his
grandson Buddha \[Budha} is said to have married Ilá, the daughter of
Ikhs'váku who was himself the remote ancestor of the Solar race of
Ayodhyá, from whom Ráma was removed by many generations. These
conclusions are not perhaps based upon absolute proof, because they are
drawn from untrustworthy authorities; but still the chronological
difficulties have been fully apprehended by the Pundits, and an attempt
has been made to reconcile all contradictions by representing the sages
to have lived thousands of years, and to have often re-appeared upon
earth in different ages widely removed from each other. Modern science
refuses to accept such explanations; and consequently it is impossible
to escape the conclusion that if Válmíki composed the Rámáyana in the
form of Sanskrit in which it has been preserved, he could not have
flourished in the same age as the sages who are named in the Rig-Veda."
WHEELER'S *History of India, Vol.* II, 229.

PAGE 249.

  
   *And King Himálaya's Child*.  

Umá or Párvatí, was the daughter of Himálaya and Mená. She is the
heroine of Kálidása's *Kumára-Sambhava*, or *Birth of the War-God*.

PAGE 250.

  
   *Strong Kumbhakarna slumbering deep  
   In chains of never-ending sleep*.  

"Kumbhakarna, the gigantic brother of the titanic Rávan,--named from the
size of his ears which could contain a *Kumbha* or large water-jar--had
such an appetite that he used to consume six months' provisions in a
single day. Brahmá, to relieve the alarm of the world, which had begun
to entertain serious apprehensions of being eaten up, decreed that the
giant should sleep six months at a time and wake for only one day during
which he might consume his six months' allowance without trespassing
unduly on the reproductive capabilities of the earth." *Scenes front the
Rámáyan*, p. 153, 2nd Edit.

PAGE 257.

  
   *Like S'iva when his angry might  
   Stayed Daksha's sacrificial rite*.  

The following spirited version of this old story is from the pen of Mr.
W. Waterfield:

"\[This is a favorite subject of Hindú sculpture, especially on the
temples of Shiva, such as the caves of Elephanta and Ellora. It, no
doubt, is an allegory of the contest between the followers of Shiva and
the worshippers of the Elements, who observed the old ritual of the
Vedas; in which the name of Shiva is never mentioned.}

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

Daksha for devotion  
   Made a mighty feast:  
Milk and curds and butter,  
   Flesh of bird and beast,  

Rice and spice and honey,  
   Sweetmeats ghí and gur, <span id="fr_1061"></span>[1](#fn_1061.md)  
Gifts for all the Bráhmans,  
   Food for all the poor.  

At the gates of Gangá <span id="fr_1062"></span>[2](#fn_1062.md)  
   Daksha held his feast;  
Called the gods unto it,  
   Greatest as the least.  

All the gods were gathered  
   Round with one accord;  
All the gods but Umá,  
   All but Umá's lord.  

Umá sat with Shiva  
   On Kailása hill:  
Round them stood the Rudras  
   Watching for their will.  

Who is this that cometh  
   Lilting to his lute?  
All the birds of heaven  
   Heard his music, mute.  

Round his head a garland  
   Rich of hue was wreathed:  
Every sweetest odour  
   From its blossoms breathed.  

'Tis the Muni Nárad;  
   'Mong the gods he fares,  
Ever making mischief  
   By the tales he bears.  

"Hail to lovely Umá!  
   Hail to Umá's lord!  
Wherefore are they absent  
   For her father's board?  

"Multiplied his merits  
   Would be truly thrice,  
Could he gain your favour  
   For his sacrifice."  

Worth of heart was Umá;  
   To her lord she spake:--  
"Why dost thou, the mighty,  
   Of no rite partake?  

"Straight I speed to Daksha  
   Such a sight to see:  
If he be my father,  
   He must welcome thee."  

Wondrous was in glory  
   Daksha's holy rite;  
Never had creation  
   Viewed so brave a sight.  

Gods, and nymphs, find fathers,  
   Sages, Bráhmans, sprites,--  
Every diverge creature  
   Wrought that rite of rites.  

Quickly then a quaking  
   Fell on all from far;  
Umá stood among them  
   On her lion car.  

"Greeting, gods and sages,  
   Greeting, father mine!  
Work hath wondrous virtue,  
   Where such aids combine.  

"Guest-hall never gathered  
   Goodlier company:  
Seemeth all are welcome.  
   All the gods but me."  

Spake the Muni Daksha,  
   Stern and cold his tone:--  
"Welcome thou, too, daughter,  
   Since thou com'st alone.  

"But thy frenzied husband  
   Suits another shrine;  
He is no partaker  
   Of this feast of mine.  

"He who walks in darkness  
   Loves no deeds of light:  
He who herds with demons  
   Shuns each kindly sprite.  

"Let him wander naked.--  
   Wizard weapons wield,--  
Dance his frantic measure  
   Round the funeral field.  

"Art thou yet delighted  
   With the reeking hide,  
Body smeared with ashes.  
   Skulls in necklace tied?  

"Thou to love this monster!  
   Thou to plead his part!  
Know the moon and Gangá  
   Share that faithless heart  

"Vainly art thou vying  
   With thy rivals' charms.  
Are not coils of serpents  
   Softer than thine arms?"  

Words like these from Daksha  
   Daksha's daughter heard:  
Then a sudden passion  
   All her bosom stirred.  

Eyes with fury flashing.  
   Speechless in her ire,  
Headlong did she hurl her  
   'Mid the holy fire.  

Then a trembling terror  
   Overcame each one,  
And their minds were troubled  
   Like a darkened sun;  

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>  

And a cruel Vision,  
   Face of lurid flame,  
Umá's Wrath incarnate,  
   From the altar came.  

Fiendlike forms by thousands  
   Started from his side,  
'Gainst the sacrificers  
   All their might they plied:  

Till the saints availed not  
   Strength like theirs to stay,  
And the gods distracted  
   Turned and fled away.  

Hushed were hymns and chanting,  
   Priests were mocked and spurned;  
Food defiled and scattered;  
   Altars overturned.--  

Then, to save the object  
   Sought at such a price,  
Like a deer in semblance  
   Sped the sacrifice.  

Soaring toward the heavens,  
   Through the sky it fled?  
But the Rudras chasing  
   Smote away its head.  

Prostrate on the pavement  
   Daksha fell dismayed:--  
"Mightiest, thou hast conquered  
   Thee we ask for aid.  

"Let not our oblations  
   All be rendered vain;  
Let our toilsome labour  
   Full fruition gain."  

Bright the broken altars  
   Shone with Shiva's form;  
"Be it so!" His blessing  
   Soothed that frantic storm.  

Soon his anger ceases,  
   Though it soon arise;--  
But the Deer's Head ever  
   Blazes in the skies."  

*Indian Ballads and other Poems*.  

URVASÎ, PAGE 286.

"The personification of Urvasî herself is as thin as that of Eôs or
Selênê. Her name is often found in the Veda as a mere name for the
morning, and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns which
passing over men bring them to old age and death. Urvasî is the bright
flush of light overspreading the heaven before the sun rises, and is but
another form of the many mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names
take us back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the Vedic
hymns is called Urûkî, the far-going (Têlephassa, Têlephos), so is she
also Uruasî, the wide-existing or wide-spreading; as are Eurôpê,
Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and many more of the sisters of Athênê and
Aphroditê. As such she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as
Oidipous is the son of Iokastê; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous,
has become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of Mitra and
Varuna, of night and day. Her lover Purûravas is the counterpart of the
Hellenic Polydeukês; but the continuance of her union with him depends
on the condition that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas,
impatient of her long sojourn among mortal men resolved to bring her
back to their bright home; and Purûravas is thus led unwitingly to
disregard her warning. A ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch, and
the Gandharvas stole one of them; Urvasî said, "They take away my
darling, as if I lived in a land where there is no hero and no man."
They stole the second, and she upbraided her husband again. Then
Purûravas looked and said, "How can that be a land without heroes or men
where I am?" And naked he sprang up; he thought it was too long to put
on his dress. Then the Gandharvas sent a flash of lighting, and Urvasî
saw her husband naked as by daylight. Then she vanished. "I come back,"
she said, and went. 'Then he bewailed his vanished love in bitter
grief.' Her promise to return was fulfilled, but for a moment only, at
the Lotos-lake, and Purûravas in vain beseeches her to tarry longer.
'What shall I do with thy

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

speech?' is the answer of Urvasî. 'I am gone like the first of the
dawns. Purûravas, go home again. I am hard to be caught like the winds.'
Her lover is in utter despair; but when he lies down to die, the heart
of Urvasî was melted, and she bids him come to her on the last night of
the year. On that night only he might be with her; but a son should be
born to him. On that day he went up to the golden seats, and there
Urvasî told him that the Gandharvas would grant him one wish, and that
he must make his choice. 'Choose thou for me,' he said: and she
answered, 'Say to them, Let me be one of you.'

Cox's *Mythology of the Aryan Nations*. Vol. I. p. 397

PAGE 324.

  
   *The sovereign of the Vánar race.*  

"Vánar is one of the most frequently occurring names by which the poem
calls the monkeys of Ráma's army. Among the two or three derivations of
which the word Vánar is susceptible, one is that which deduces it from
\[Sanskrit: \*\*} which signifies a wood, and thus Vánar would mean a
forester, an inhabitant of the wood. I have said elsewhere that the
monkeys, the Vánars, whom Ráma led to the conquest of Ceylon were fierce
woodland tribes who occupied the mountainous regions of the south of
India, where their descendants may still be seen. I shall hence forth
promiscuously employ the word *Vánar* to denote those monkeys, those
fierce combatants of Ráma's army." GORRESIO.

PAGE 326.

  
   *No change of hue, no pose of limb  
   Gave sign that aught was false in him.  
   Concise, unfaltering, sweet and clear,  
   Without a word to pain the ear,  
   From chest to throat, nor high nor low,  
   His accents came in measured flow.*  

Somewhat similarly in *The Squire's Tale*:

   'He with a manly voice said his message,    After the form used in
his language,    Withouten vice of syllable or of letter.    And for his
talë shouldë seem the better    Accordant to his wordës was his chere,
   As teacheth art of speech them that it lere.

PAGE 329.

RÁMA'S ALLIANCE WITH SUGRÍVA.

"The literal interpretation of this portion of the Rámáyana is indeed
deeply rooted in the mind of the Hindu. He implicitly believes that Ráma
is Vishnu, who became incarnate for the purpose of destroying the demon
Rávana: that he permitted his wife to be captured by Rávana for the sake
of delivering the gods and Bráhmans from the oppressions of the
Rákshasa; and that he ultimately assembled an army of monkeys, who were
the progeny of the gods, and led them against the strong-hold of Rávana
at Lanká, and delivered the world from the tyrant Rákshasa, whilst
obtaining ample revenge for his own personal wrongs.

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

One other point seems to demand consideration, namely, the possibility
of such an alliance as that which Ráma is said to have concluded with
the monkeys. This possibility will of course be denied by modern
critics, but still it is interesting to trace out the circumstances
which seem to have led to the acceptance, of such a wild belief by the
dreamy and marvel loving Hindi. The south of India swarms with monkeys
of curious intelligence and rare physical powers. Their wonderful
instinct for organization, their attachment to particular localities,
their occasional journeys in large numbers over mountains and across
rivers, their obstinate assertion of supposed rights, and the ridiculous
caricature which they exhibit of all that is animal and emotional in
man, would naturally create a deep impression.... Indeed the habits of
monkeys well deserve to be patiently studied; not as they appear in
confinement, when much that is revolting in their nature is developed,
but as they appear living in freedom amongst the trees of the forest, or
in the streets of crowded cities, or precincts of temples. Such a study
would not fail to awaken strange ideas; and although the European would
not be prepared to regard monkeys as sacred animals he might be led to
speculate as to their origin by the light of data, which are at present
unknown to the naturalist whose observations have been derived from the
menagerie alone.

Whatever, however, may have been the train of ideas which led the Hindú
to regard the monkey as a being half human and half divine, there can be
little doubt that in the Rámáyana the monkeys of southern India have
been confounded with what may be called the aboriginal people of the
country. The origin of this confusion may be easily conjectured.
Perchance the aborigines of the country may have been regarded as a
superior kind of monkeys; and to this day the features of the Marawars,
who are supposed to be the aborigines of the southern part of the
Carnatic, are not only different from those of their neighbours, but are
of a character calculated to confirm the conjecture. Again, it is
probable that the army of aborigines may have been accompanied by
outlying bands of monkeys impelled by that magpie-like curiosity and
love of plunder which are the peculiar characteristics of the monkey
race; and this incident may have given rise to the story that the army
was composed of Monkeys." WHEELER'S *History of India. Vol. II. pp.* 316
*ff.*

THE FALL OF BÁLI, PAGE 342.

"As regards the narrative, it certainly seems to refer to some real
event amongst the aboriginal tribes: namely, the quarrel between an
elder and younger brother for the possession of a Ráj; and the
subsequent alliance of Ráma with the younger brother. It is somewhat
remarkable that Ráma appears to have formed an alliance with the wrong
party, for the right of Báli was evidently superior to that of Sugríva;
and it is especially worthy of note that Ráma compassed the death of
Báli by an act contrary to all the laws of fair fighting. Again, Ráma
seems to have tacitly sanctioned the transfer of Tárá from Báli to
Sugríva, which was directly opposed to modern rule, although in
conformity with the rude customs of a barbarous age; and it is
remarkable that to this day the marriage of both widows and divorced
women is practised by the Marawars, or aborigines of the southern
Carnatic, contrary to the deeply-rooted prejudice which exists against
such unions amongst the Hindús at large." WHEELER'S *History of India,
Vol. II.* 324.

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

THE VÁNAR HOST, PAGE 370.

"The splendid Marutas form the army of Indras, the red-haired monkeys
and bears that of Râmas; and the mythical and solar nature of the
monkeys and bears of the Râmâyanam manifests itself several times. The
king of the monkeys is a sun-god. Thc ancient king was named Bâlin, and
was the son of Indras. His younger brother Sugrívas, he who changes his
shape at pleasure (Kâmarúpas), who, helped by Râmas, usurped his throne,
is said to be own child of the sun. Here it is evident that the Vedic
antagonism between Indras and Vishnus is reproduced in a zoological and
entirely apish form. The old Zeus must give way to the new, the moon to
the sun, the evening to the morning sun, the sun of winter to that of
spring; the young son betrays and overthrows the old one.... Râmas, who
treacherously kills the old king of the monkeys, Bâlin, is the
equivalent of Vishnus, who hurls his predecessor Indras from his throne;
and Sugrívas, the new king of the monkeys resembles Indras when he
promises to find the ravished Sítá, in the same way as Vishnus in one of
his incarnations finds again the lost vedás. And there are other
indications in the Râmâyanam of opposition between Indras and the
monkeys who assist Râmas. The great monkey Hanumant, of the reddish
colour of gold, has his jaw broken, Indras having struck him with his
thunderbolt and caused him to fall upon a mountain, because, while yet a
child, he threw himself off a mountain into the air in order to arrest
the course of the sun, whose rays had no effect upon him. (The cloud
rises from the mountain and hides the sun, which is unable of itself to
disperse it; the tempest comes, and brings flashes of lightning and
thunder-bolts, which tear the cloud in pieces.)

The whole legend of the monkey Hanumant represents the sun entering into
the cloud or darkness, and coming out of it. His father is said to be
now the wind, now the elephant of the monkeys (Kapikunjaras), now
Kes'arin, the long-haired sun, the sun with a mane, the lion sun (whence
his name of *Kes'arinak putrah*). From this point of view, Hanumant
would seem to be the brother of Sugrívas, who is also the offspring of
the sun....

All the epic monkeys of the *Râmâyanam* are described in the twentieth
canto of the first book by expressions which very closely resemble those
applied in the Vedic hymns to the Marutas, as swift as the tempestuous
wind, changing their shape at pleasure, making a noise like clouds,
sounding like thunder, battling, hurling mountain-peaks, shaking great
uprooted trees, stirring up the deep waters, crushing the earth with
their arms, making the clouds fall. Thus Bâlin comes out of the cavern
as the sun out of the cloud....

But the legend of the monkey Hanumant presents another curious
resemblance to that of Samson. Hanumant is bound with cords by Indrajit,
son of Rávanas; he could easily free himself, but does not wish to do
so. Rávanas to put him to shame, orders his tail to be burned, because
the tail is the part most prized by monkeys....

The tail of Hanumant, which sets fire to the city of the monsters, is
probably a personification of the rays of the morning or spring sun,
which sets fire to the eastern heavens, and destroys the abode of tne
nocturnal or winter monsters." DE GUBERNATIS, *Zoological Mythology*,
Vol. II. pp. 100 ff.

<span id="page_550">p. 550</span>

"The Jaitwas of Rajputana, a tribe politically reckoned as Rajputs,
nevertheless trace their descent from the monkey-god Hanuman, and
confirm it by alleging that their princes still bear its evidence in a
tail-like prolongation of the spine; a tradition which has probably a
real ethnological meaning, pointing out the Jaitwas as of non-Aryan
race."  <span id="fr_1063"></span>[\*](#fn_1063.md) TYLOR'S *Primitive
Culture*, Vol. I. p. 341.

PAGE 372.

The names of peoples occurring in the following *s'lokas* are omitted in
the metrical translation:

'Go to the Brahmamálas, <span id="fr_1064"></span>[1](#fn_1064.md) the
Videhas, <span id="fr_1065"></span>[2](#fn_1065.md) the Málavas, <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[3](#fn_1066.md) the Kás'ikos'alas, <span
id="fr_1067"></span>[4](#fn_1067.md) the Mágadnas, <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[5](#fn_1068.md) the Pundras, <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[6](#fn_1069.md) and the Angas, <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[7](#fn_1070.md) and the land of the weavers of silk,
and the land of the mines of silver, and the hills that stretch into the
sea, and the towns and the hamlets that are about the top of Mandar, and
the Karnaprávaranas, <span id="fr_1071"></span>[8](#fn_1071.md) and the
Oshthakarnakas, <span id="fr_1072"></span>[9](#fn_1072.md) and the
Ghoralobamukhas, <span id="fr_1073"></span>[10](#fn_1073.md) and the

<span id="page_551">p. 551</span>

swift Ekapádakas <span id="fr_1074"></span>[1](#fn_1074.md) and the strong
imperishable Eaters of Men, and the Kirátas <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[2](#fn_1075.md) with stiff hair-tufts, men like gold
and fair to look upon: And the Eaters of Raw Fish, and the Kirátas who
dwell in islands, and the fierce Tiger-men <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[3](#fn_1076.md) who live amid the waters.'

PAGE 374.

'Go to the Vidarbhas <span id="fr_1077"></span>[4](#fn_1077.md) and the
Rishtikas <span id="fr_1078"></span>[5](#fn_1078.md) and the Mahishikas,
 <span id="fr_1079"></span>[6](#fn_1079.md) and the Matsyas <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[7](#fn_1080.md) and Kalingas <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[8](#fn_1081.md) and the Kausikas <span
id="fr_1082"></span>[9](#fn_1082.md)...and the Andhras <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[10](#fn_1083.md) and the Pundras <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[11](#fn_1084.md) and the Cholas <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[12](#fn_1085.md) and the Pandyas <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[13](#fn_1086.md) and the Keralas. <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[14](#fn_1087.md) 'Go to the

<span id="page_552">p. 552</span>

Mlechchhas <span id="fr_1088"></span>[1](#fn_1088.md) and the
Pulindas <span id="fr_1089"></span>[2](#fn_1089.md) and the
S'úrasenas, <span id="fr_1090"></span>[3](#fn_1090.md) and the Prasthalas
and the Bharatas and Madrakas <span id="fr_1091"></span>[4](#fn_1091.md)
and the Kámbojas <span id="fr_1092"></span>[5](#fn_1092.md) and the
Yavanas <span id="fr_1093"></span>[6](#fn_1093.md) and the towns of the
S'akas <span id="fr_1094"></span>[7](#fn_1094.md) and the Varadas. <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[8](#fn_1095.md)

NORTHERN KURUS, PAGE 378.

Professor Lassen remarks in the Zeitschrift für die Kunde des
Morgenlandes, ii. 62: "At the furthest accessible extremity of the earth
appears Harivarsha with the northern Kurus. The region of Hari or Vishnu
belongs to the system of mythical geography; but the case is different
with the Uttara Kurus. Here there is a real basis of geographical fact;
of which fable has only taken advantage, without creating it. The Uttara
Kurus were formerly quite independent of the mythical system of
*dvípas*, though they were included in it at an early date." Again the
same writer says at p. 65: "That the conception of the Uttara Kurus is
based upon an actual country and not on mere invention, is proved (1) by
the way in which they are mentioned in the Vedas; (2) by the

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

existence of Uttara Kuru in historical times as a real country; and (3)
by the way in which the legend makes mention of that region as the home
of primitive customs. To begin with the last point the Mahabharata
speaks as follows of the freer mode of life which women led in the early
world, Book I. verses 4719-22: 'Women were formerly unconfined and roved
about at their pleasure, independent. Though in their youthful innocence
they abandoned their husbands, they were guilty of no offence; for such
was the rule in early times. This ancient custom is even now the law for
creatures born as brutes, which are free from lust and anger. This
custom is supported by authority and is observed by great rishia, and it
is *still practiced among the northern Kurus*.'

"The idea which is here conveyed is that of the continuance in one part
of the world of that original blessedness which prevailed in the golden
age. To afford a conception of the happy condition of the southern Kurus
it is said in another place M.-Bh, i. 4346. "The southern Kurus vied in
happiness with the northern Kurus and with the divine rishis and bards."

Professor Lassen goes on to say: "Ptolemy (vi. 16.) is also acquainted
with *Uttara Kuru*. He speaks of a mountain, a people, and a city called
*Ottorakorra*. Most of the other ancient authors who elsewhere mention
this name, have it from him. It is a part of the country which he calls
Serica; according to him the city lies twelve degrees west from the
metropolis of Sera, and the mountain extends from thence far to the
eastward. As Ptolemy has misplaeed the whole of eastern Asia beyond the
Ganges, the relative position which he assigns will guide us better that
the absolute one, which removes Oitorakorra so far to the east that a
correction is inevitable. According to my opinion the Ottorakorra of
Ptolemy must be sought for to the east of Kashgar." Lassen also thinks
that Magasthenes had the Uttara Kurus in view when he referred to the
Hyperboreans who were fabled by Indian writers to live a thousand years.
In his Indian antiquities, (Ind. Alterthumskunde, i. 511, 512. and
note,) the same writer concludes that though the passages above cited
relative to the Uttara Kurus indicate a belief in the existence of a
really existing country of that name in the far north, yet that the
descriptions there given are to be taken as pictures of an ideal
paradise, and not as founded on any recollections of the northern origin
of the Kurus. It is probable, he thinks, that some such reminiscences
originally existed, and still survived in the Vedic era, though there is
no trace of their existence in latter times." Muia's *Santkrit Texts*,
Vol. II. pp. 336, 337.

PAGE 428.

*Trust to these mighty Vanars.*

The corresponding passage in the Bengal recension has "these silvans in
the forms of monkeys, vanaran kapirupinah." "Here it manifestly
appears," says Gorresio, "that these hosts of combatants whom Rama led
to the coitqnest of Lanka (Ceylon) the kingdom and seat of the Hamitic
race, and whom the poem calls monkeys, were in fact as I have elsewhere
observed, inhabitants of the mountainous and southen regions of India,
who were wild-looking and not altogether unlike monkeys. They were
perhaps the remote ancestors of the Malay races."

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

PAGE 481.

  
   *"Art thou not he who slew of old  
   The Serpent-Gods, and stormed their hold."*  

All these exploits of Rávan are detailed in the *Uttarakánda*, and
epitomized in the Appendix.

PAGE 434.

  
   *Within the consecrated hall*.  

The Bráhman householder ought to maintain three sacred fires, the
*Gárhapatya*, the *Akavaniya* and the *Dakshina*. These three fires were
made use of in many Brahmanical solemnities, for example in funeral
rites when the three fires were arranged in prescribed order.

PAGE 436.

  
   *Fair Punjikasthalá I met.*  

"I have not noticed in the Uttara Kánda any story about the daughter of
Varuna, but the commentator on the text (VI 60, 11) explains the
allusion to her thus:

"The daughter of Varuna was Punjikasthalí. On her account, a curse of
Brahmá, involving the penalty of death, \[was pronounced} on the rape of
women." MUIR, *Sanskrit Texts*, Part IV. Appendix.

PAGE 452.

  
   *"Shall no funereal honours grace  
   The parted lord of Raghu's race?"*  

"Here are indicated those admirable rites and those funeral prayers
which Professor Müller has described in his excellent work, *Die
Todtenbestattung bei den Brahmanen*, Sítá laments that the body of Ráma
will not be honoured with those rites and prayers, nor will the Bráhman
priest while laying the ashes from the pile in the bosom of the earth,
pronounce over them those solemn and magnificent words: 'Go unto the
earth, thy mother, the ample, wide, and blessed earth.... And do thou, O
Earth, open and receive him as a friend with sweet greeting: enfold him
in thy bosom as a mother wraps her child in her robes." GORRESIO.

PAGE 462.

  
     *Each glorious sign  
   That stamps the future queen is mine*.  

We read in Josephus that Caesar was so well versed in chiromancy that
when one day a *soi-disant* son of Herod had audience of him, he at once
detected the impostor because his hand was destitute of all marks of
royalty.

PAGE 466.

  
  *In battle's wild Gandharva dance*.  

"Here the commentator explains: 'the battle resembled the dance of the
Gandharvas,' in accordance with the notion of the Gandharvas entertained
in his day. They were regarded as celestial musicians enlivening with
their melodies

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

Indra's heaven and the banquets of the Gods. But the Gandharvas before
becoming celestial musicians in popular tradition, were in the primitive
and true signification of the name heroes, spirited and ardent warriors,
followers of Indra, and combined the heroical character with their
atmospherical deity. Under this aspect the dance of the Gandharvas may
be a very different thing from what the commentator means, and may
signify the horrid dance of war." GORRESIO.

The Homeric expression is similar, "to dance a war-dance before Ares."

PAGE 470.

  
   *By Anaranya'a lips of old.*  

"The story of Anaranya is told in the Uttara Kanda of the Rámáyana....'
Anaranya a descendant of Ixváku and King of Ayodhyá, when called upon to
fight with Rávana or acknowledge himself conquered, prefers the former
alternative; but his army is overcome, and he himself is thrown from his
chariot.

When Rávana triumphs over his prostrate foe, the latter says that he has
been vanquished not by him but by fate, and that Rávana is only the
instrument of his overthrow; and he predicts that Rávana shall one day
be slain by his descendant Ráma." *Sanskrit Texts*, IV., Appendix.

PAGE 497.

"With regard to the magic image of Sítá made by Indrajit, we may observe
that this thoroughly oriental idea is also found in Greece in Homer's
Iliad, where Apollo forms an image of Aeneas to save that hero beloved
by the Gods: it occurs too in the Aeneid of Virgil where Juno forms a
fictitious Aeneas to save Turnus:

  
   Tum dea nube cava tenuem sine viribus umbram  
   In faciem Aeneae (visu mirabile monstrum)  
   Dardaniis ornat telis; clipeumque jubasque  
   Divini assimulat capitis; dat inania verba;  
   Dat sine mente sonum, gressusque effingit euntis.  

(*Aeneidos*, lib X.)" GORRESIO.

PAGE 489.

  
   *"To Raghu's son my chariot lend."*  

"Analogous to this passage of the Rámáyana, where Indra sends to Ráma
his own chariot, his own charioteer, and his own arms, is the passage in
the Aeneid where Venus descending from heaven brings celestial arms to
her son Aeneas when he is about to enter the battle:

  
   At Venus aethereos inter dea candida nimbos  
   Dona fereus aderat;...  
   ...  
   Arma sub adversa posuit radiantia quercu.  
   Ille, deae donis et tanto laetus honore,  
   Expleri nequit, atque oculos per singula volvit,  
   Miraturque, interque manus et brachia versat  
   Terribilem cristis galeam flammasque vomentem,  
   Fatiferumque ensem, loriam ex aere rigentcm.  

(*Aeneidos*, lib. VIII)" GORRESIO.

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

PAGE 489.

  
   *Agastya came and gently spake.*  

"The Muni or saint Agastya, author of several Vedic hymns, was
celebrated in Indo-Sanskrit tradition for having directed the first
brahmanical settlements in the southern regions of India; and the
Mahábhárata gives him the credit of having subjected those countries,
expelled the Rákshases. and given security to the solitary ascetics, who
were settled there. Hence Agastya was regarded in ancient legend as the
conqueror and ruler of the southern country. This tradition refers to
the earliest migrations made by the Sanskrit Indians towards the south
of India. To Agastya are attributed many marvellous mvthic deeds which
adumbrate and veil ancient events; some of which are alluded to here and
there in the Rámáyana." GORRESIO.

The following is the literal translation of the Canto, text and
commentary, from the Calcutta edition:

Having found Ráma weary with fighting and buried in deep thought, and
Rávan standing before him ready to engage in battle, the holy Agastya,
who had come to see the battle, approached Ráma and spoke to him thus:
"O mighty Ráma, listen to the old mystery by which thou wilt conquer all
thy foes in the battle. Having daily repeated the Ádityahridaya (the
delighter of the mind of the Sun) the holy prayer which destroys all
enemies (of him who repeats it) gives victory, removes all sins, sorrows
and distress, increases life, and which is the blessing of all
blessings, worship the rising and splendid sun who is respected by both
the Gods and demons, who gives light to all bodies and who is the rich
lord of all the worlds, (To the question why this prayer claims so great
reverence; the sage answers) Since yonder <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[\*](#fn_1096.md) sun is full of glory and all gods
reside in him (he being their material cause) and bestows being and the
active principle on all creatures by his rays; and since he protects all
deities, demons and men with his rays.

He is Brahmá, <span id="fr_1097"></span>[1](#fn_1097.md) Vishnu, <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[2](#fn_1098.md) Siva, <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[3](#fn_1099.md) Skanda, <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[4](#fn_1100.md) Prajápati, <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[5](#fn_1101.md) Mahendra, <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[6](#fn_1102.md) Dhanada, <span
id="fr_1103"></span>[7](#fn_1103.md) Kála, <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[8](#fn_1104.md) Yama, <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[9](#fn_1105.md) Soma, <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[10](#fn_1106.md) Apàm Pati *i.e.* The lord of waters,
Pitris, <span id="fr_1107"></span>[11](#fn_1107.md) Vasus, <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[12](#fn_1108.md)

<span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

Sádhyas, <span id="fr_1109"></span>[1](#fn_1109.md) Asvins, <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[2](#fn_1110.md) Maruts, <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[3](#fn_1111.md) Manu, <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[4](#fn_1112.md) Váyu, <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[5](#fn_1113.md) Vahni, <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[6](#fn_1114.md) Prajá, <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[7](#fn_1115.md) Prána, <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[8](#fn_1116.md) Ritukartá, <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[9](#fn_1117.md) Prabhákara, <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[10](#fn_1118.md) (Thou, <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[11](#fn_1119) art.md) Aditya, <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[12](#fn_1120.md) Savitá, <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[13](#fn_1121.md) Súrya, <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[14](#fn_1122.md) Khaga, <span
id="fr_1123"></span>[15](#fn_1123.md) Púshan, <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[16](#fn_1124.md) Gabhastimán, <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[17](#fn_1125.md) Suvarnasadris'a, <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[18](#fn_1126.md) Bhánu, <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[19](#fn_1127.md) Hiranyaretas, <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[20](#fn_1128.md) Divákara, <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[21](#fn_1129.md) Haridas'va, <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[22](#fn_1130.md) Sahasrárchish, <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[23](#fn_1131.md) Saptasapti, <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[24](#fn_1132.md) Marichimán, <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[25](#fn_1133.md) Timironmathana, <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[26](#fn_1134.md) Sambhu, <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[27](#fn_1135.md) Twashtá, <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[28](#fn_1136.md) Mártanda, <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[29](#fn_1137.md) Ans'umán, <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[30](#fn_1138.md) Hiranyagarbha, <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[31](#fn_1139.md) Sis'ira, <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[32](#fn_1140.md) Tapana, <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[33](#fn_1141.md) Ahaskara, <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[34](#fn_1142.md) Ravi, <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[35](#fn_1143.md) Agnigarbha, <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[36](#fn_1144.md) Aditiputra, <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[37](#fn_1145.md) Sankha, <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[38](#fn_1146.md) Sis'iranás'ana, <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[39](#fn_1147.md) Vyomanátha, <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[40](#fn_1148.md) Tamobhedí, <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[41](#fn_1149.md) Rigyajussámapáraga, <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[42](#fn_1150.md) Ghana-\*

<span id="page_558">p. 558</span>

vríshti. <span id="fr_1151"></span>[1](#fn_1151.md) Apám-Mitra, <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[2](#fn_1152.md) Vindhyavíthíplavangama, <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[3](#fn_1153.md) A'tapí, <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[4](#fn_1154.md) Mandalí, <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[5](#fn_1155) Mrityu (death.md), Pingala, <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[6](#fn_1156.md) Sarvatápana, <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[7](#fn_1157.md) Kavi, <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[8](#fn_1158.md) Vis'va, <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[9](#fn_1159.md) Mahátejas, <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[10](#fn_1160.md) Rakta, <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[11](#fn_1161.md) Sarvabhavodbhava. <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[12](#fn_1162.md) The Lord of stars, planets, and other
luminous bodies, Vis'vabhávana, <span id="fr_1163"></span>[13](#fn_1163.md)
Tejasvinám-Tejasvi, <span id="fr_1164"></span>[14](#fn_1164.md)
Dwádas'átman: <span id="fr_1165"></span>[15](#fn_1165.md) I salute thee, I
salute thee who art the eastern mountain. I salute thee who art the
western mountain. I salute thee who art the Lord of all the luminous
bodies. I salute thee who art the Lord of days.

I respectfully salute thee who art Jaya, <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[16](#fn_1166.md) Jayabhadra, <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[17](#fn_1167.md) Haryas'va, <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[18](#fn_1168.md) O Thou who hast a thousand rays, I
repeatedly salute thee. I repeatedly and respectfully salute thee who
art A'ditya, I repeatedly salute thee who art Ugra, <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[19](#fn_1169.md) Víra, <span
id="fr_1170"></span>[20](#fn_1170.md) and Sáranga. <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[21](#fn_1171.md) I salute thee who openest the lotuses
(or the lotus of the heart). I salute thee who art furious. I salute
thee who art the Lord of Brahmá, S'iva and Vishnu. I salute thee who art
the sun, A'dityavarchas, <span id="fr_1172"></span>[22](#fn_1172.md)
splendid, Sarvabhaksha, <span id="fr_1173"></span>[23](#fn_1173.md) and
Raudravapush. <span id="fr_1174"></span>[24](#fn_1174.md)

I salute thee who destroyest darkness, cold and enemies: whose form is
boundless, who art the destroyer of the ungrateful; who art Deva; <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[25](#fn_1175.md) who art the Lord of the luminous
bodies, and who appearest like the heated gold. I salute thee who art
Hari, <span id="fr_1176"></span>[26](#fn_1176.md) Vis'vakarman, <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[27](#fn_1177.md) the destroyer of darkness, and who
art splendid and Lokasákshin. <span id="fr_1178"></span>[28](#fn_1178.md)
Yonder sun destroys the whole of the material world and also creates it.
Yonder sun dries (all earthly things), destroys them and causes rain
with his rays. He wakes when our senses are asleep; and resides within
all beings. Youder sun is Agnihotra <span
id="fr_1179"></span>[29](#fn_1179.md) and also the fruit obtained by the

<span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

performer of Agnihotra. He is identified with the gods, sacrifices, and
the fruit of the sacrifices. He is the Lord of all the duties known to
the world, if any man, O Rághava, in calamities, miseries, forests and
dangers, prays to yonder sun, he is never overwhelmed by distress.

Worship, with close attention Him the God of gods and the Lord of the
world; and recite these verses thrice, whereby thou wilt be victorious
in the battle. O brave one, thou wilt kill Rávana this very instant."

Thereupon Agastya having said this went away as he came. The glorious
Ráma having heard this became free from sorrow. Rághava whose senses
were under control, being pleased, committed the hymn to memory, recited
it facing the sun, and obtained great delight. The brave Ráma having
sipped water thrice and become pure took his bow, and seeing Rávana, was
delighted, and meditated on the sun.

PAGE 490.

  
   *His horses poured their burning tears.*  

I have omitted the Canto from which this line is taken because it
describes signs and portents similar to those which have occurred in
preceding books. But the weeping of the horses is new and is too Homeric
to be passed by unnoticed. I borrow the following extract from De
Quincey: "The old Homeric superstition which connects horses by the
closest sympathy, and even by prescience, with their masters--that
superstition which Virgil has borrowed from Homer in his beautiful
episode of Mezentins (*Rhaebe diu*, res si qua diu mortalibus ulla est,
Viximus)-- still lingers unbroken in Crete. Horses foresee the fates of
riders who are doomed, and express their prescience by weeping in a
human fashion. The horses of Achilles weep in "Iliad" xvii, on seeing
Automedon their beloved driver prostrate on the ground. With this view
of the horse's capacity, it is singular, that in Crete this animal by
preference should be called το αλογου, the brute, or irrational
creature. But the word ἱππος has, by some accident, been lost in the
modern Greek. As an instance both of the disparaging name, and of the
ennobling superstition, take the following stanza from a Cretan ballad
of 1825, written in the modern Greek:--

  
   "Ωντεν εκαβαλλικευε,  
     Εκλαιε τ᾽ αλογο του.  
   Και τοτεσα το εγνωρισε  
     Πωσ ειναι ὁ θανατος του"  

"Upon which he mounted, and his horse wept; and then he saw clearly how
this should bode his death."

Under the same old Cretan faith, Homer in "Iliad" xvii. 437, says:--

  
                                 "Δάκρυα δέ σφι  
   Θερμὰ κατὰ βλεφάρων χαμάδις ῥέε μυρομένοιῖν  
   Ἡνιόχοιο ποθῃ".  

"Tears, scalding tears, trickled to the ground from the eyelids of them
(the horses), fretting through grief for the loss of their charioteer."

DE QUINCEY. *Homer and the Homeridae*.

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

PAGE 492.

RÁVAN'S FUNERAL.

"In the funeral ceremonies of India the fire was placed on three sides
of the pyre; the *Dakshina* on the south, the *Gárhapatya* on the west,
and the *Áhavaníya* on the east. The funeral rites are not described in
detail here, and it is therefore difficult to elucidate and explain
them. The poem assigns the funeral ceremonies of Aryan Brahmans to the
Rákshases, a race different from them in origin and religion, in the
same way as Homer sometimes introduces into Troy the rites of the
Grecian cult." GORRESIO.

Mr. Muir translates the description of the funeral from the Calcutta
edition, as follows: "They formed, with Vedic rites, a funeral pile of
faggots of sandal wood, with *padmaka* wood, *us'ira* grass, and sandal,
and covered with a quilt of deer's hair. They then performed an
unrivalled obsequial ceremony for the Ráxasa prince, placing the
sacrificial ground to the S.E. and the fire in the proper situation.
They cast the ladle filled with curds and ghee on the shoulder <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1](#fn_1180) of the deceased; he (?.md) placed the car
on the feet, and the mortar between the thighs. Having deposited all the
wooden vessels, the \[upper\] and lower fire-wood, and the other pestle,
in their proper places, they departed. The Ráxasas having then slain a
victim to their prince in the manner prescribed in the S'ástras, and
enjoined by great rishis, cast \[into the fire\] the coverlet of the
king saturated with ghee. They then, Vibhíshana included, with afflicted
hearts, adorned Rávana with perfumes and garlands, and with various
vestments, and besprinkled him with fried grain. Vibhíshana having
bathed, and having, with his clothes wet, scattered in proper form
*tila* seeds mixed with *darbha* grass, and moistened with water,
applied the fire \[to the pile\]."

PAGE 496.

The following is a literal translation of Brahmá's address to Ráma
according to the Calcutta edition, text and commentary:

"O Ráma, how dost thou, being the creator of all the world, best of all
those who have profound knowledge of the Upanishads and all-powerful as
thou art, suffer Sitá to fall in the fire? How dost thou not know
thyself as the best of the gods? Thou art one of the primeval
Vasus, <span id="fr_1181"></span>[2](#fn_1181.md) and also their lord and
creator. Thou art thyself the lord and first creator of the three
worlds. Thou art the eighth (that is Mahádeva) of the Rudras, <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[3](#fn_1182.md) and also the fifth <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[4](#fn_1183.md) of the Sádhyas. <span
id="fr_1184"></span>[5](#fn_1184.md) (The poet describes Ráma as made of
the following gods) The As'vinikumáras (the twin divine physicians of
the gods) are thy ears; the sun and the moon are thy eyes; and thou hast
been seen in the beginning and at the end of creation. How dost thou
neglect the daughter of Videha (Janaka like a man whose actions are
directed by the dictates of nature?" Thus addressed by Indra, Brahmá and

<span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

the other gods, Ráma the descendant of Raghu, lord of the world and the
best of the virtuous, spoke to the chief of the gods. "As I take myself
to be a man of the name of Ráma and son of Das'aratha, therefore, sir,
please tell me who I am and whence have I come." "O thou whose might is
never failing," said Brahmá to Kákutstha the foremost of those who
thoroughly know Brahmá, "Thou art Náráyana,  <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1](#fn_1185.md) almighty, possessed of fortune, and
armed with the discus. Thou art the boar  <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[2](#fn_1186.md) with one tusk; the conqueror of thy
past and future foes. Thou art Brahmá true and eternal or undecaying.
Thou art Vis'vaksena,  <span id="fr_1187"></span>[3](#fn_1187.md) having
four arms; Thou art Hrishíkes'a,  <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[4](#fn_1188.md) whose bow is made of horn; Thou art
Purusha,  <span id="fr_1189"></span>[5](#fn_1189.md) the best of all
beings; Thou art one who is never defeated by any body; Thou art the
holder of the sword (named Nandaka). Thou art Vishnu (the pervader of
all); blue in colour: of great might; the commander of armies; and lord
of villages. Thou art truth. Thou art embodied intelligence,
forgiveness, control over the senses, creation, and destruction. Thou
art Upendra  <span id="fr_1190"></span>[6](#fn_1190.md) and
Madhusúdana. <span id="fr_1191"></span>[7](#fn_1191.md) Thou art the
creator of Indra, the ruler over all the world, Padmanábha.  <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[8](#fn_1192.md) and destroyer of enemies in the
battle. The divine Rishis call thee shelter of refugees, as well as the
giver of shelter. Thou hast a thousand horns,  <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[9](#fn_1193.md) a hundred heads.  <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[10](#fn_1194.md) Thou art respected of the respected;
and the lord and first creator of the three worlds. Thou art the
forefather and shelter of Siddhas,  <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[11](#fn_1195.md) and Sádhyas.  <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[12](#fn_1196.md) Thou all sacrifices; Vashfatkára,
 <span id="fr_1197"></span>[13](#fn_1197.md) Omkára.  <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[14](#fn_1198.md) Thou art beyond those who are beyond
our senses. There is none who knows who thou art and who knows thy
beginning and end. Thou art seen in all material objects, in Bráhmans,
in cows, and also in all the quarters, sky and streams. Thou hast a
thousand feet, a hundred heads, and a thousand eyes. Thou hast borne the
material objects and the earth with the mountains; and at the bottom of
the ocean thou art seen the great serpent. O Ráma, Thou hast borne the
three worlds, gods, Gandharvas, <span id="fr_1199"></span>[15](#fn_1199.md)
and demons. I am, O Ráma, thy heart; the goddess of learning is thy
tongue; the gods are the hairs of thy body; the closing of thy eyelids
is called the night: and their opening is called the day. The Vedas are
thy Sanskáras. <span id="fr_1200"></span>[16](#fn_1200.md) Nothing can
exist without thee. The whole world is thy body; the surface of the
earth is thy stability.

<span id="page_562">p. 562</span>

O S'rívatsalakshana, fire is thy anger, and the moon is thy favour. In
the time of thy incarnation named Vámana, thou didst pervade the three
worlds with thy three steps; and Mahendra was made the king of paradise
by thee having confined the fearful Bali. <span
id="fr_1201"></span>[1](#fn_1201) Sitá (thy wife.md) is Lakshmí; and thou
art the God Vishnu, <span id="fr_1202"></span>[2](#fn_1202.md)
Krishna, <span id="fr_1203"></span>[3](#fn_1203.md) and Prajápati. To kill
Rávan thou hast assumed the form of a man; therefore, O best of the
virtuous, thou hast completed this task imposed by us (gods). O Ráma,
Rávana has been killed by thee: now being joyful (e. i. having for some
time reigned in the kingdom of Ayodhyá,) go to paradise. O glorious
Ráma, thy power and thy valour are never failing. The visit to thee and
the prayers made to thee are never fruitless. Thy devotees will never be
unsuccessful. Thy devotees who obtain thee (thy favour) who art first
and best of mankind, shall obtain their desires in this world as well as
in the next. They who recite this prayer, founded on the Vedas (or first
uttered by the sages), and the old and divine account of (Ráma) shall
never suffer defeat."

THE MEETING, PAGE 503.

The *Bharat-Miláp* or meeting with Bharat, is the closing scene of the
dramatic representation of Ráma's great victory and triumphant return
which takes place annually in October in many of the cities of Northern
India. The Rám-Lalá or Play of Ráma, as the great drama is called, is
performed in the open air and lasts with one day's break through fifteen
successive days. At Benares there are three nearly simultaneous
performances, one provided by H. H. the Maharajah of Benares near his
palace at Ramnaggur, one by H. H. the Maharajah of Vizianagram near the
Missionary settlement at Sigra and at other places in the city, and one
by the leading gentry of the city at Chowká Ghát near the College. The
scene especially on the great day when the brothers meet is most
interesting: the procession of elephants with their gorgeous howdahs of
silver and gold and their magnificently dressed riders with priceless
jewels sparkling in their turbans, the enthusiasm of the thousands of
spectators who fill the streets and squares, the balconies and the
housetops, the flowers that are rained down upon the advancing car, the
wild music, the shouting and the joy, make an impression that is not
easily forgotten.

  
   *Still on his head, well trained in lore  
   Of duty, Ráma's shoes he bore.*  

Ráma's shoes are here regarded as the emblems of royalty or possession.
We may compare the Hebrew "Over Edom will I cast forth my shoe." A
curiously similar passage occurs in LYSCHANDER'S *Chronicon Greenlandiæ
Rhythmicon*:

  
   "Han sendte til Irland sin skiden skoe,  
   Og böd den Konge. Som der monne boe,  
   Han skulde dem hæderlig bære  
   Pan Juuledag i sin kongelig Pragt,  
   Og kjende han havde sit Rige og Magt  
   Af Norges og Quernes Herre."  

<span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

  
   He sent to Ireland his dirty shoes,  
   And commanded the king who lived there  
   To wear them with honour  
   On Christmas Day in his royal state,  
   And to own that he had his kingdom and power  
   From the Lord of Norway and the Isles.  
   *Notes & Queries, March* 30, 1872.  

I end these notes with an extract which I translate from Signor
Gorreslo's Preface to the tenth volume of his Rámáyan, and I take this
opportunity of again thankfully acknowledging my great obligations to
this eminent S'anskritist from whom I have so frequently borrowed. As
Mr. Muir has observed, the Bengal recension which Signor Gorresio has
most ably edited is throughout an admirable commentary on the genuine
Rámáyan of northern India, and I have made constant reference to the
faithful and elegant translation which accompanies the text for
assistance and confirmation in difficulties:

"Towards the southern extremity and in the island of Lanká (Ceylon)
there existed undoubtedly a black and ferocious race, averse to the
Aryans and hostile to their mode of worship: their ramifications
extended through the islands of the Archipelago, and some traces of them
remain in Java to this day.

The Sanskrit-Indians, applying to this race a name expressive of hatred
which occurs in the Vedas as the name of hostile, savage and detested
beings, called it the Rákshas race: it is against these Rákshases that
the expedition of Ráma which the Rámáyan celebrates is directed. The
Sanskrit-Indians certainly altered in their traditions the real
character of this race: they attributed to it physical and moral
qualities not found in human nature; they transformed it into a race of
giants; they represented it as monstrous, hideous, truculent, changing
forms at will, blood-thirsty and ravenous, just as the Semites
represented the races that opposed them as impious, horrible and of
monstrous size. But notwithstanding these mythical exaggerations, which
are partly due to the genius of the Aryans so prone to magnify
everything without measure, the Rámáyan in the course of its epic
narration has still preserved and noted here and there some traits and
peculiarities of the race which reveal its true character. It represents
the Rákshases as black of hue, and compares them with black clouds and
masses of black collyrium; it attributes to them curly woolly hair and
thick lips, it depicts them as loaded with chains, collars and girdles
of gold, and the other bright ornaments which their race has always
loved, and in which the kindred races of the Soudan still delight. It
describes them as worshippers of matter and force. They are hostile to
the religion of the Aryans whose rites and sacrifices they disturb and
ruin...Such is the Rákshas race as represented in the Rámáyan; and the
war of the Aryan Ráma forms the subject of the epic, a subject certainly
real and historical as far as regards its substance, but greatly
exaggerated by the ancient myth. In Sanskrit-Indian tradition are found
traces of another struggle of the Aryans with the Rákshas races, which
preceded the war of Ráma. According to some pauranic legends,
Kárttavírya a descendant of the royal tribe of tha Yádavas, contemporary
with Parasurama and a little anterior to Ráma, attacked Lanká and took
Rávan prisoner. This well shows how ancient and how deeply rooted in the
Aryan race is the thought of this war which the Rámáyan celebrates.

<span id="page_564">p. 564</span>

"But," says an eminent Indianist  <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[1](#fn_1204.md) whose learning I highly appreciate,
"the Rámáyan if an allegorical epic, and no precise and historical value
can be assigned to it. Sítá signifies the furrow made by the plough, and
under this symbolical aspect has already appeared honoured with worship
in the hymns of the Rig-veda; Ráma is the bearer of the plough (this
assertion is entirely gratuitous; these two allegorical personages
represented agriculture introduced to the southern regions of India by
the race of the Kosalas from whom Ráma was descended; the Rákshases on
whom he makes war are races of demons and giants who have little or
nothing human about them; allegory therefore predominates in the poem,
and the exact reality of an historical event must not be looked for in
it." Such is Professor Weber's opinion. If he means to say that mythical
fictions are mingled with real events,

Forsan in alcun vero suo arco percuote,

as Dante says, and I fully concede the point. The interweaving of the
myth with the historical truth belongs to the essence, so to speak, of
the primitive epopeia. If Sítá is born, as the Rámáyan feigns, from the
furrow which King Janak opened when he ploughed the earth, not a whit
more real is the origin of Helen and Aeneas as related in Homer and
Virgil, and if the characters in the Rámáyan exceed human nature, and in
a greater degree perhaps than is the case in analogous epics, this
springs in part from the nature of the subject and still more from the
symbol-loving genius of the orient. Still the characters of the Rámáyan,
although they exceed more or less the limits of human nature, act
notwithstanding in the course of the poem, speak, feel, rejoice and
grieve according to the natural impulse of human passions. But if by
saying that the Rámáyan is an allegorical epic, it is meant that its
fundamental subject is nothing but allegory, that the war of the Aryan
Ráma against the Rákshas race is an allegory, that the conquest of the
southern region and of the island of Lanká is an allegory, I do not
hesitate to answer that such a presumption cannot be admitted and that
the thing is in my opinion impossible. Father Paolíno da S.
Bartolommeo, <span id="fr_1205"></span>[2](#fn_1205.md) had already,
together with other strange opinions of his own on Indian matters,
brought forward a similar idea, that is to say that the exploit of Ráma
which is the subject of the Rámáyan was a symbol and represented the
course of the sun: thus he imagined that Brahmá was the earth, Vishnu
the water, and that his avatárs were the blessings brought by the
fertilizing waters, etc. But such ideas, born at a time when
Indo-sanskrit antiquities were enveloped in darkness, have been
dissipated by the light of new studies. How could an epic so dear in
India to the memory of the people, so deeply rooted for many centuries
in the minds of all, so propagated and diffused through all the dialects
and languages of those region, which had become the source of many
dramas which are still represented in India, which is itself represented
every year with such magnificence and to such crowds of people in the
neighbourhood of Ayodhyá, a poem welcomed at its very birth with such
favour, as the legend relates, that the recitation of it by the first
wandering Rhapsodists has consecrated and made famous all the places
celebrated

<span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

by them, and where Ráma made a shorter or longer stay, how, I ask, could
such an epic have been purely allegorical? How, upon a pure invention,
upon a simple allegory, could a poem have been composed of about fifty
thousand verses, relating with such force and power the events, and
giving details with such exactness? On a theme purely allegorical there
may easily be composed a short mythical poem, as for example a poem on
Proserpine or Psyche: but never an epic so full of traditions and
historical memories, so intimately connected with the life of the
people, as the Rámáyan. <span id="fr_1206"></span>[1](#fn_1206.md)
Excessive readiness to find allegory whenever some traces of symbolism
occur, where the myth partly veils the historical reality, may lead and
often has led to error. What poetical work of mythical times could stand
this mode of trial? could there not be made, or rather has there not
been made a work altogether allegorical, out of the Homeric poems? We
have all heard of the ingenious idea of the anonymous writer, who in
order to prove how easily we may pass beyond the truth in our wish to
seek and find allegory everywhere, undertook with keen subtlety to prove
that the great personality of Napoleon I. was altogether allegorical and
represented the sun. Napoleon was born in an island, his course was from
west to east, his twelve marshals were the twelve signs of the zodiac,
etc.

I conclude then, that the fundamental theme of the Rámáyan, that is to
say the war of the Aryan Ráma against the Rákshases, an Hamitic race
settled in the south, ought to be regarded as real and historical as far
as regards its substance, although the mythic element intermingled with
the true sometimes alters its natural and genuine aspect.

How then did the Indo-Sanskrit epopeia form and complete itself? What
elements did it interweave in its progress? How did it embody, how did
it clothe the naked and simple primitive datum? We must first of all
remember that the Indo-European races possessed the epic genius in the
highest degree, and that they alone in the different regions they
occupied produced epic poetry...But other causes and particular
influences combined to nourish and develop the epic germ of the
Sanskrit-Indians. Already in the Rig-veda are found hymns in which the
Aryan genius preluded, so to speak, to the future epopeia, in songs that
celebrated the heroic deeds of Indra, the combats and the victories of
the tutelary Gods of the Aryan races over enemies secret or open, human
or superhuman, the exploits and the memories of ancient heroes. More
recently, at certain solemn occasions, as the very learned A. Weber
remarks, at the solemnity, for example of the As'vamedha of sacrifice of
the horse, the praises of the king who ordained the great rite were sung
by bards and ministrels in songs composed for the purpose, the memories
of past times were recalled and honourable mention was made of the just
and pious kings of old. In the *Bráhmanas*, a sort of prose commentaries
annexed to the Vedas, are found recorded stories and legends which
allude to historical events of the past ages, to ancient memories, and
to mythical events. Such popular legends which the *Bráhmanas*
undoubtedly gathered from tradition admirably suited the epic tissue
with which they were interwoven by successive hands......Many and
various mythico-historical traditions suitable for epic development,
were diffused among the Aryan races, those for example which are related

<span id="page_566">p. 566</span>

in the four chapters containing the description of the earth, the
Descent of the Ganges, etc. The epic genius however sometimes created
beings of its own and gave body and life to ideal conceptions. Some of
the persons in the Rámáyan must be, in my opinion, either
personifications of the forces of nature like those which are described
with such vigour in the *Sháhnámah*, or if not exactly created,
exaggerated beyond human proportions; others, vedic personages much more
ancient than Ráma, were introduced into the epic and woven into its
narrations, to bring together men who lived in different and distant
ages, as has been the case in times nearer to our own, in the epics, I
mean, of the middle ages.

In the introduction I have discussed the antiquity of the Rámáyan; and
by means of those critical and inductive proofs which are all that an
antiquity without precise historical dates can furnish I have
endeavoured to establish with all the certainy that the subject
admitted, that the original composition of the Rámáyan is to be assigned
to about the twelfth century before the Christian era. Not that I
believe that the epic then sprang to life in the form in which we now
possess it; I think, and I have elsewhere expressed the opinion, that
the poem during the course of its rhapsodical and oral propagation
appropriated by way of episodes, traditions, legends and ancient
myths......But as far as regards the epic poem properly so called which
celebrates the expedition of Ráma against the Rákshases I think that I
have sufficiently shown that its origin and first appearance should be
placed about the twelfth century B C.; nor have I hitherto met with
anything to oppose this chronological result, or to oblige me to rectify
or reject it......But an eminent philologist already quoted, deeply
versed in these studies, A. Weber, has expressed in some of his writings
a totally different opinion; and the authority of his name, if not the
number and cogency of his arguments, compels me to say something on the
subject. From the fact or rather the assumption that Megasthenes  <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1](#fn_1207.md) who lived some time in India has made
no mention either of the Mahábhárat or the Rámáyan Professor Weber
argues that neither of these poems could have existed at that time; as
regards the Rámáyan, the unity of its composition, the chain that binds
together its different parts, and its allegorical character, show it,
says Professor Weber, to be much more recent than the age to which I
have assigned it, near to our own era, and according to him, later than
the Mahábhárat. As for Megasthenes it should be observed, that he did
not write a history of India, much less a literary history or anything
at all resembling one, but a simple description, in great part physical,
of India: whence, from his silence on literary matters to draw
inferences regarding the history of Sanskrit literature would be the
same thing as from the silence of a geologist with respect to the
literature of a country whose valleys, mountains, and internal structure
he is exploring, to conjecture that such and such a poem or history not
mentioned by him did not exist at his time. We have only to look at the
fragments of Megasthenes collected and published by Schwanbeck to see
what was the nature and scope of his *Indica*.................. But only
a few fragments of Megasthenes are extant; and to pretend that they
should be argument and proof enough to judge the antiquity of a poem is
to press the laws of criticism too far. To Professor Weber's argument as
to the more or

<span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

less recent age of the Rámáyan from the unity of its composition, I will
make one sole reply, which is that if unity of composition were really a
proof of a more recent age, it would be necessary to reduce by a
thousand years at least the age of Homer and bring him down to the age
of Augustus and Virgil; for certainly there is much more unity of
composition, a greater accord and harmony of parts in the Iliad and the
Odyssey than in the Rámáyan. But in the fine arts perfection is no proof
of a recent age: while the experience and the continuous labour of
successive ages are necessary to extend and perfect the physical or
natural sciences, art which is spontaneous in its nature can produce and
has produced in remote times works of such perfection as later ages have
not been able to equal."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[516:1](ry502.htm#fr_1053.md) *The Academy*, Vol.
III., No 43, contains an able and interesting notice of this work from
the pen of the Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Cambridge:
'The *Uttarakánda*.' Mr. Cowell remarks, 'bears the same relation to the
*Rámáyana*, as the Cyclic poems to the *Iliad*. Just as the *Cypria* of
Stasinus, the *Aethiopis* of Arctinus, and the little *Iliad* of Lesches
completed the story of the <span id="page_517">p. 517</span> *Iliad*,
and not only added the series of events which preceded and followed it,
but also founded episodes of their own on isolated allusions in Homer,
so the *Uttarakánda* is intended to complete the *Rámáyana*, and at the
same time to supplement it by intervening episodes to explain casual
allusions or isolated incidents which occur in it. Thus the early
history of the giant Rávana and his family fills nearly forty Chapters,
and we have a full account of his wars with the gods and His conquest of
Lanká, which all happened long before the action of the poem commences,
just as the *Cypria* narrated the birth and earlv history of Helen, and
the two expeditions of the Greeks against Troy; and the latter chapters
continue the history of the hero Ráma after his triumphant return to his
paternal kingdom, and the poem closes with his death and that of his
brothers, and the founding by their descendants of various kingdoms in
different parts of India.'

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[518:1](ry502.htm#fr_1054.md) Muir, *Sanskrit
Texts,* Part IV., pp. 414 ff.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[519:1](ry502.htm#fr_1055.md) MUIR, *Sanskrit
Texts*, Part IV, 391, 392.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[520:1](ry502.htm#fr_1056.md) See *Academy*,
III., 43.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[521:1](ry502.htm#fr_1057.md) *Academy*, Vol.
III., No. 43.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[522:1](ry502.htm#fr_1058.md) E. B. Cowell.
*Academy*, No. 48. The story of Sítá's banishment will be found roughly
translated from the *Raghurans'a*, in the Additional Notes.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[522:2](ry502.htm#fr_1059.md) E. B. Cowell.
*Academy*, Vol, III, No. 48.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[523:1](ry502.htm#fr_1060.md) Muir, *Sanskrit
Texts*, Part IV., Appendix.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[545:1](ry502.htm#fr_1061.md) Ghí: clarified
butter. Gur: molasses.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[545:2](ry502.htm#fr_1062.md) Haridwar (Anglicè
Hurdwar) where the Ganges enters the plain country.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[550:\*](ry502.htm#fr_1063.md) Campbell in
'Journ. As. Soc. Bengal,' 1866, Part ii, p. 182; Latham, 'Descr. Eth.'
Vol. ii. p. 456; Tod,'Annals of Rajasthan,' Vol. i. p. 114.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[550:1](ry502.htm#fr_1064.md) Said by the
commentator to be an eastern people between the Himálayan and Vindhyan
chains.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[550:2](ry502.htm#fr_1065.md) Videha was a
district in the province of Behar, the ancient Mithilá or the modern
Tirhoot.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[550:3](ry502.htm#fr_1066.md) The people of
Malwa.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[550:4](ry502.htm#fr_1067.md) "The Kás'ikos'alas
are a central nation in the Váyu Purána. The Rámáyana places them in the
east. The combination indicates the country between Benares and Oude....
Kos'ala is a name variously applied. Its earliest and most celebrated
application is to the country on the banks of the Sarayú, the kingdom of
Ráma, of which Ayodhyá was the capital.... In the Mahábhárata we have
one Kos'ala in the east and another in the south, besides the
Prák-Kos'alas and Uttara Kos'alas in the east and north. The Puránas
place the Kos'alas amongst the people on the back of Vindhya; and it
would appear from the Váyu that Kus'a the son of Ráma transferred his
kingdom to a more central position; he ruled over Kos'ala at his capital
of Kús'asthali of Kus'avatí, built upon the Vindhyan precipices."
WILSON'S *Vishnu Púrana*, Vol. II. pp. 157, 172.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[550:5](ry502.htm#fr_1068.md) The people of south
Behar.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[550:6](ry502.htm#fr_1069.md) The Pundras are
said to be the inhabitants of the western provinces of Bengal. "In the
*Aitareyabráhmana*, VII. 18, it is said that the elder sons of
Vis'vamitra were cursed to become progenitors of most abject races, such
as Andhras, Pundras, S'abaras, Pulindas, and Mútibas." WILSON'S *Vishnu
Purána* Vol. II. 170.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[550:7](ry502.htm#fr_1070.md) Anga is the country
about Bhagulpore, of which Champá was the capital.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[550:8](ry502.htm#fr_1071.md) A fabulous people,
'men who use their ears as a covering.' So Sir John Maundevile says:
"And in another Yle ben folk that han gret Eres and long, that hangen
down to here knees,' and Pliny, lib, iv. c. 13: "In quibus nuda alioquin
corpora praegrandes ipsorum aures tota contegunt." Strabo calls them
ἐνωτόκοιτοι'. Isidore calls them Panotii.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[550:9](ry502.htm#fr_1072.md) 'Those whose ears
hang down to their lips.'

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[550:10](ry502.htm#fr_1073.md) 'The Iron-faces.'

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[551:1](ry502.htm#fr_1074.md) 'The One-footed.'

"In that Contree," says Sir Jhon Maundevile, "ben folk, that han but o
foot and thei gon so fast that it is marvaylle: and the foot is so large
that it schadeweth alle the Body azen the Sonne, when thei wole lye and
rest hem." So Pliny, Natural History, lib. vii. c. 2: speaks of Hominumn
gens...singulis cruribus, mirae pernicitatis ad saltum; eosdemque
Sciopodas vocari, quod in majori aestu, humi jacentes resupini, umbrâ se
pedum protegant."

These epithets are, as Professor Wilson remarks, "exaggerations of
national ugliness, or allusions to peculiar customs, which were not
literally intended, although they may have furnished the Mandevilles of
ancient and modern times." *Vishnu Purána*, Vol. II. p. 162.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[551:2](ry502.htm#fr_1075.md) The Kirrhadae of
Arrian: a general name for savage tribes living in woods and mountains

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[551:3](ry502.htm#fr_1076.md) Said by the
commentator to be half tigers half men.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[551:4](ry502.htm#fr_1077.md) The kingdom seems
to have corresponded with the greater part of Berar and Khandesh.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[551:5](ry502.htm#fr_1078.md) The Bengal
recension has Kishikas, and places them both in the south and the north.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[551:6](ry502.htm#fr_1079.md) The people of
Mysore.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[551:7](ry502.htm#fr_1080.md) "There are two
Matsyas, one of which, according to the Yantra Samráj, is identifiable
with Jeypoor. In the Digvijaya of Nakula he subdues the Matsyas further
to the west, or Gujerat." WILSON'S *Vishnu Purána*, Vol. II. 158. Dr.
Hall observes: "In the *Mahábhárata Sabhá-parwan*, 1105 and 1108, notice
is taken of the king of Matsya and of the Aparamatsyas; and, at 1082,
the Matsyas figure as an eastern people. They are placed among the
nations of the south in the *Rámáyana Kishkindhá-kánda*, XLI., II, while
the Bengal recension, *Kishkindhá-kánda*, XLlV., 12, locates them in the
north."

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[551:8](ry502.htm#fr_1081.md) The Kalingas were
the people of the upper part of the Coromandel Coast, well known, in the
traditions of the Eastern Archipelago, as Kling. Ptolemy has a city in
that part, called Caliga; and Pliny Calingae proximi mari." WILSON'S
*Vishnu Purána*, Vol. II. l56, Note.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[551:9](ry502.htm#fr_1082.md) The Kaus'ikas do
not appear to be identifiable.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[551:10](ry502.htm#fr_1083.md) The Andhras
probably occupied the modem Telingana.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[551:11](ry502.htm#fr_1084.md) The Pundras have
already been mentioned in Canto XL.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[551:12](ry502.htm#fr_1085.md) The inhabitants of
the lower part of the Coromandel Coast; so called, after them,
Cholamandala.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[551:13](ry502.htm#fr_1086.md) A people in the
Deccan.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[551:14](ry502.htm#fr_1087.md) The Keralas were
the people of Malabar proper.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[552:1](ry502.htm#fr_1088.md) A generic term for
persons speaking any language but Sanskrit and not conforming to the
usual Hindu institutions.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[552:2](ry502.htm#fr_1089.md) "Pulinda is applied
to any wild or barbarous tribe. Those here named are some of the people
of the deserts along the Indus; but Pulindas are met with in many other
positions, especially in the mountains and forests across Central India,
the haunts of the Bheels and Gonds. So Ptolemy places the Pulindas along
the banks of the Narmadá, to the frontiers of Larice, the Látá or Lár of
the Hindus,--Khandesh and part of Gujerat." WILSON'S *Vishnu Purána*,
Vol. II. 159, Note.

Dr. Hall observes that "in the Bengal recension of the *Rámáyana* the
Pulindas appear both in the south and in the north. The real *Rámáyana*
K.-k., XLIII., speaks of the northern Pulindas."

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[552:3](ry502.htm#fr_1090.md) The S'úrasenas were
the inhabitants of Mathurá, the Suraseni of Arrian.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[552:4](ry502.htm#fr_1091.md) These the Mardi of
the Greeks and the two preceding tribes appear to have dwelt in the
north-west of Hindustan.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[552:5](ry502.htm#fr_1092.md) The Kámbojas are
said to be the people of Arachosia. They are always mentioned with the
north-western tribes.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[552:6](ry502.htm#fr_1093.md) "The term Yavanas,
although, in later times, applied to the Mohammedans, designated
formerly the Greeks.... The Greeks were known throughout Western Asia by
the term Yavan, or Ion, Ιάονες ; the पवन of the Hindus.... That the
Macedonian or Bactrian Greeks were most usually intended is not only
probable from their position and relations with India, but from their
being usually named in concurrence with the north-western tribes,
Kámbojas, Daradas, Páradas, Báhlíkas, S'akas &c., in the Rámáyana.
Mahábhárata, Puránas, Manu, and in various poems and plays." WILSON'S
*Vishnu Purána* Vol. II. p. 181, Note.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[552:7](ry502.htm#fr_1094.md) These people, the
Sakai and Sacae of classical writers, the Indo-Scythians of Ptolemy,
extended, about the commencement of our era, along the west of India,
from the Hindu Kosh to the mouths of the Indus.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[552:8](ry502.htm#fr_1095.md) The corresponding
passage in the Bengal recension has instead of Varadas Daradas the Dards
or inhabitants of the modern Dardistan along the course of the Indus,
above the Himálayas, just before it descends to India.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[556:\*](ry502.htm#fr_1096.md) From the word
yonder it would appear that the prayer is to be repeated at the rising
of the Sun.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[556:1](ry502.htm#fr_1097.md) The creator of the
world and the first of the Hindu triad.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[556:2](ry502.htm#fr_1098.md) He who pervades all
beings; or the second of the Hindu triad who preserves the world.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[556:3](ry502.htm#fr_1099.md) The bestower of
blessings; the third of the Hindu triad and the destroyer of the world

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[556:4](ry502.htm#fr_1100.md) A name of the
War-God; also one who urges the senses to action.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[556:5](ry502.htm#fr_1101.md) The lord of
creatures; or the God of sacrifices.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[556:6](ry502.htm#fr_1102.md) A name of the King
of Gods; also all-powerful.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[556:7](ry502.htm#fr_1103.md) The giver of
wealth. A name of the God of riches.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[556:8](ry502.htm#fr_1104.md) One who directly
urges the mental faculties to action.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[556:9](ry502.htm#fr_1105.md) One who moderates
the senses, also the God of the regions of the dead.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[556:10](ry502.htm#fr_1106.md) One who produces
nectar (amrita) or one who is always possessed of light; or one together
with Umá (Ardhanárís'vara).

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[556:11](ry502.htm#fr_1107.md) The names or
spirits of departed ancestors.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[556:12](ry502.htm#fr_1108.md) Name of a class of
eight Gods, also wealthy.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[557:1](ry502.htm#fr_1109.md) They who are to be
served by Yogís; or a class of Gods named Sádhyas.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[557:2](ry502.htm#fr_1110.md) The two physicians
of the Gods: or they who pervade all beings.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[557:3](ry502.htm#fr_1111.md) They who are
immortal; or a class of Gods forty-nine in number.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[557:4](ry502.htm#fr_1112.md) Omniscient; or the
first king of the world.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[557:5](ry502.htm#fr_1113.md) He that moves;
life; or the God of wind.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[557:6](ry502.htm#fr_1114.md) The God of fire.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[557:7](ry502.htm#fr_1115.md) Lord of creatures.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[557:8](ry502.htm#fr_1116.md) One who prolongs
our lives.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[557:9](ry502.htm#fr_1117.md) The material cause
of knowledge and of the seasons.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[557:10](ry502.htm#fr_1118.md) One who shines.
The giver of light.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[557:11](ry502.htm#fr_1119.md) The hymn entitled
the Ádityahridaya begins from this verse and the words, thou art, are
understood in the beginning of this verse.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[557:12](ry502.htm#fr_1120.md) One who enjoys all
(pleasurable) objects; The son of Aditi, the lord of the solar disk.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[557:13](ry502.htm#fr_1121.md) One who creates
the world i.e. endows beings with life or soul, and by his rays causes
rain and thereby produces corn.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[557:14](ry502.htm#fr_1122.md) One who urges the
world to action or puts the world in motion, who is omnipresent.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[557:15](ry502.htm#fr_1123.md) One who walks
through the sky; or pervades the soul.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[557:16](ry502.htm#fr_1124.md) One who nourishes
the world i. e. is the supporter.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[557:17](ry502.htm#fr_1125.md) One having rays
(Gabhasti) or he who is possessed of the all-pervading goddess Lakshmí.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[557:18](ry502.htm#fr_1126.md) One resembling
gold.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[557:19](ry502.htm#fr_1127.md) One who is
resplendent or who gives light to other objects.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[557:20](ry502.htm#fr_1128.md) One whose seed
(Retas) is gold; or quicksilver, the material cause of gold.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[557:21](ry502.htm#fr_1129.md) One who is the
cause of day.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[557:22](ry502.htm#fr_1130.md) One whose horses
are of tawny colour; or one who pervades the whole space or quarters.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[557:23](ry502.htm#fr_1131.md) One whose
knowledge is boundless or who has a thousand rays.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[557:24](ry502.htm#fr_1132.md) One who urges the
seven (Pránas) that is the two eyes, the two ears, the nostrils and the
organ of speech, or whose chariot, is drawn by seven horses.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[557:25](ry502.htm#fr_1133.md) Vide Gabhastimán.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[557:26](ry502.htm#fr_1134.md) One who destroys
darkness, or ignorance.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[557:27](ry502.htm#fr_1135.md) One from whom our
blessings or the enjoyments of Paradise come.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[557:28](ry502.htm#fr_1136.md) The architect of
the gods; or one who lessens the miseries of our birth and death.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[557:29](ry502.htm#fr_1137.md) One who gives life
to the lifeless world.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[557:30](ry502.htm#fr_1138.md) One who pervades
the internal and external worlds; or one who is resplendent.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[557:31](ry502.htm#fr_1139.md) He who is
identified with the Hindu triad, i.e. the creator (Brahmá) the supporter
(Vishnu) and the destroyer (S'iva)

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[557:32](ry502.htm#fr_1140.md) Cold or good
natured. He is so called because he allays the three sorts of pain.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[557:33](ry502.htm#fr_1141.md) One who is the
lord of all.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[557:34](ry502.htm#fr_1142.md) Vide Divákara.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[557:35](ry502.htm#fr_1143.md) One who teaches
Brahmá and others the Vedas.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[557:36](ry502.htm#fr_1144.md) One from whom
Rudra the destroyer or the third of the Hindu triad springs.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[557:37](ry502.htm#fr_1145.md) One who is
knowable through Aditi i.e. the eternal Brahmavidyá.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[557:38](ry502.htm#fr_1146.md) Great happiness or
the sky

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[557:39](ry502.htm#fr_1147.md) The destroyer of
cold or stupidity.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[557:40](ry502.htm#fr_1148.md) The Lord of the
sky.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[557:41](ry502.htm#fr_1149.md) Vide
Timironmathana.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[557:42](ry502.htm#fr_1150.md) One who is known
through the Upanishads.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[558:1](ry502.htm#fr_1151.md) He who is the cause
of heavy rain.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[558:2](ry502.htm#fr_1152.md) He who is a friend
to the good, or who is the cause of water.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[558:3](ry502.htm#fr_1153.md) One who moves in
the solar orbit.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[558:4](ry502.htm#fr_1154.md) One who determines
the creation of the world; or who is possessed of heat.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[558:5](ry502.htm#fr_1155.md) One who has a mass
of rays; or who has Kaustubha and other precious stones as his
ornaments.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[558:6](ry502.htm#fr_1156.md) He who urges all to
action; or who is yellow in colour.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[558:7](ry502.htm#fr_1157.md) One who is the
destroyer of all.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[558:8](ry502.htm#fr_1158.md) One who is
omniscient; or a poet.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[558:9](ry502.htm#fr_1159.md) One who is
identified with the whole world.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[558:10](ry502.htm#fr_1160.md) One who is of huge
form.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[558:11](ry502.htm#fr_1161.md) One who pleases
all by giving nourishment; or who is red in colour.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[558:12](ry502.htm#fr_1162.md) One who is the
cause of the whole world.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[558:13](ry502.htm#fr_1163.md) One who protects
the whole world.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[558:14](ry502.htm#fr_1164.md) The most glorious
of all that are glorious.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[558:15](ry502.htm#fr_1165.md) One who is
identical with the twelve months.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[558:16](ry502.htm#fr_1166.md) One who gives
victory over all the worlds to those who are faithfully devoted to him;
or the porter of Brahmá, named Jaya.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[558:17](ry502.htm#fr_1167.md) One who is
identical with the blessing which can be obtained by conquering all the
worlds; or with the porter of Brahmá named Jayabhadra.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[558:18](ry502.htm#fr_1168.md) One who has
Hanúmán as his conveyance.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[558:19](ry502.htm#fr_1169.md) One who controls
the senses; or is furious with those who are not his devotees.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[558:20](ry502.htm#fr_1170.md) He who is free in
moving the senses; or urges all beings to action.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[558:21](ry502.htm#fr_1171.md) He who can be
known through the Pranava (the mystical Om-kára.)

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[558:22](ry502.htm#fr_1172.md) One who is the
knowledge of Brahmá.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[558:23](ry502.htm#fr_1173.md) One who devours
all things.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[558:24](ry502.htm#fr_1174.md) He who is the
destroyer of all pains; and of love, and hate, the causes of pain; and
ignorance which is the cause of love and hate.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[558:25](ry502.htm#fr_1175.md) One who is bliss;
or the mover.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[558:26](ry502.htm#fr_1176.md) One who destroys
ignorance and its effects.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[558:27](ry502.htm#fr_1177.md) The doer of all
actions.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[558:28](ry502.htm#fr_1178.md) One who beholds
the universe; who is a witness of good and bad actions.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[558:29](ry502.htm#fr_1179.md) Sacrifice of the
five sensual fires.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[560:1](ry502.htm#fr_1180.md) According to
Ápastamba (says the commentator) it should have been placed on the nose:
this must therefore have been done in conformity with some other
Sútras."

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[560:2](ry502.htm#fr_1181.md) A class of eight
gods.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[560:3](ry502.htm#fr_1182.md) A class of eleven
gods called Rudras.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[560:4](ry502.htm#fr_1183.md) Named Viryaván.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[560:5](ry502.htm#fr_1184.md) A class of divine
devotees named Sádhyas.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[561:1](ry502.htm#fr_1185.md) One who resides in
the water.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[561:2](ry502.htm#fr_1186.md) The third
incarnation of Vishnu, that bore the earth on his tusk.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[561:3](ry502.htm#fr_1187.md) One whose armies
are everywhere.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[561:4](ry502.htm#fr_1188.md) One who controls
the senses.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[561:5](ry502.htm#fr_1189.md) He who resides in
the heart, or who is full, or all-pervading.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[561:6](ry502.htm#fr_1190.md) Vámana, or the
Dwarf incarnation of Vishnu.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[561:7](ry502.htm#fr_1191.md) The killer of
Madhu, a demon.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[561:8](ry502.htm#fr_1192.md) He from whose
navel, the lotus, from which Brahmá was born, springs.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[561:9](ry502.htm#fr_1193.md) He who has a
thousand horns. The horns are here the Sákhás of the Sáma-veda.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[561:10](ry502.htm#fr_1194.md) One who has a
hundred heads. The heads are here meant to devote a hundred commandments
of the Vedas.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[561:11](ry502.htm#fr_1195.md) Siddhas are those
who have already gained the summit of their desires.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[561:12](ry502.htm#fr_1196.md) Sádhyas are those
that are still trying to gain the summit.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[561:13](ry502.htm#fr_1197.md) A mystic syllable
uttered in Mantras.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[561:14](ry502.htm#fr_1198.md) A mystic syllable
made of the letters अ उ म which respectively denote Brahmá, Vishnu, and
S'iva.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[561:15](ry502.htm#fr_1199.md) A class of divine
gods.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[561:16](ry502.htm#fr_1200.md) Sanskáras are
those sacred writings through which the divine commands and prohibitions
are known.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[562:1](ry502.htm#fr_1201.md) Bali. a demon whom
Vámana confined in Pátála.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[562:2](ry502.htm#fr_1202.md) Vishnu, the second
of the Hindu triad.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[562:3](ry502.htm#fr_1203.md) Krishna, (black
coloured) one of the ten incarnations of Vishnu.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[564:1](ry502.htm#fr_1204.md) A. Weber,
*Akademische Vorlesungen*, p. 181.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[564:2](ry502.htm#fr_1205.md) Systema
brahmanicum, liturgicum, mythologicum, civile, exmonumentis Indicis,
etc.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[565:1](ry502.htm#fr_1206.md) Not only have the
races of India translated or epitomized it, but foreign nations have
appropriated it wholly or in part, Persia, Java, and Japan itself.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[566:1](ry502.htm#fr_1207.md) In the third
century B. C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Principal Names](ry503.md)
