[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl04) [Next](yl06.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## III AKITI THE HUNTER

A <span class="small">FAMOUS</span> hunter and wrestler named Akiti
boasted that he was stronger than any other man or animal. He had easily
overcome a giant, a leopard, a lion, a wolf, and <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> a boa-constrictor, and as nobody else opposed his claim, he
called himself “the King of the forest.”

 Wherever he went, he sang his triumphant wrestling-song, and everyone
feared and respected him. But he had forgotten the Elephant, who is a
very wise animal and knows many charms. One day the Elephant challenged
him and declared that he had no right to call himself “King,” as the
Elephant himself was the monarch of the forest and could not be
defeated.

 Akiti thereupon flung his spear at his enemy, but because of the
Elephant’s charm, the weapon glanced off his hide and did him no harm.
Akiti next tried his bow and poisoned arrows, and his hunting-knife, but
still without effect.

 However, the hunter also possessed a charm, and by using it, he changed
himself into a lion and flew at the Elephant, but the Elephant flung him
off. Next he became a serpent, but he could not succeed in crushing the
Elephant to death.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

 At last he changed himself into a fly, and flew into the Elephant’s
large flapping ear. He went right down inside until he came to the
heart, and then he changed himself into a man again and cut up the heart
with his hunting-knife. At last the Elephant fell dead, and Akiti
stepped out of his body in triumph, for he was now without question “the
King of the forest.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl06.md)
