[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl07) [Next](yl09.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## VI WHY PEOPLE CRY “LONG LIVE THE KING!” WHEN THUNDER FOLLOWS LIGHTNING

K<span class="small">ING</span> S<span class="small">ANGO</span> was
acquainted with many deadly charms, and he once happened to discover a
preparation by which he could attract lightning.

 He foolishly decided to try the effect of the charm first of all on his
own palace, which was at the foot of a hill.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

 Ascending the hill with his courtiers, the King employed the charm: a
storm suddenly arose, the palace was struck by lightning and burnt to
the ground, together with Sango’s whole family.

 Overcome with grief at having lost his possessions, and above all his
sons, the impetuous King resolved to retire to a corner of his kingdom
and to rule no more. Some of his courtiers agreed with him, and others
tried to dissuade him from the plan; but Sango in his rage executed a
hundred and sixty of them—eighty who had disagreed with him, and eighty
who had agreed too eagerly!

 Then, accompanied by a few friends, he left the place and started on
his long journey. One by one his friends deserted him on the way, until
he was left alone, and in despair he decided to put an end to his life,
which he rashly did.

 When they heard of the deed, his people came to the spot and gave him
an honourable funeral, and he was ever afterwards <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> worshipped as the god of thunder and lightning. So, among all
the Yorubas, when people see the flash of lightning followed by the
sullen roar of thunder, they remember Sango’s rage after the destruction
of his palace, and exclaim: “Long live the King!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl09.md)
