[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl10) [Next](yl12.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

## IX ORISA OKO

O<span class="small">RISA</span> O<span class="small">KO</span> was a
poor hunter, solitary save for his fife and his dog. If ever he lost his
way out in the fields or the forest, he would begin to play some
plaintive melody on his fife, and the sounds would lead the faithful dog
to his side to guide him home.

 He earned a meagre living by trapping in his nets guinea-fowls on the
land of rich farmers, but because of his solitary life and his habit of
silence, he was respected as a man possessed of secret knowledge which
he did not care to divulge.

 As years went by, he grew too old for hunting, and took up his
residence in a cave. People now thought him more mysterious than ever,
and came to him for advice about the future, so that in a short time he
won great renown as a soothsayer. From far and near people came to
consult him, and in this way he managed to live very comfortably.

 In those days witchcraft was punished <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
by death, and it became the custom in the country that anyone suspected
of the evil art should be dragged to Orisa Oko’s cave. If the soothsayer
found him innocent, he led him forth by the hand, but if he were judged
guilty, his head was cut off and thrown to the waiting crowd by the
demon Polo, which Orisa Oko kept in the cave.

 This went on until the old hunter’s death. His followers now wished to
continue the practice, and so they hid in the cave a very strong man to
act as the demon Polo. When anyone accused of witchcraft was brought to
the cave, his head was usually cut off and thrown out as before.

 However, it once happened that a very tall and muscular man was
suspected of magic arts, and his accusers succeeded in dragging him to
the cave. A large crowd waited with eagerness to learn the result. What
was their dismay to see the head of the supposed “demon” come rolling
out of the cave, for the strong man had proved too much for him, and
soon reappeared unharmed and triumphant.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

 The people were indignant to learn how they had been deceived, and from
that day the cave of Orisa Oko was deserted.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl12.md)
