[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl11) [Next](yl13.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## X MOR<u>E</u>MI

A <span class="small">NOBLEMAN</span> of Ile-Ife had a beautiful and
virtuous wife named Mor<u>e</u>mi, and a handsome young son, Ela.

 The country of the Ifes was at that time subject to fierce raids by a
tribe called the Igbos, who were of such an uncanny appearance in battle
that the Ifes thought them not human, but a visitation sent by the gods
in punishment for some evil. In vain did they offer sacrifices to the
gods; the raids of these strange beings continued, and the land was
thrown into a state of pamc.

 Now the heroic Mor<u>e</u>mi, desiring to bring an end to this
condition of affairs, resolved to let herself be captured during one of
the raids, so that she might be <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> carried
as a prisoner to the land of the Igbos and learn all their secrets.

 Bidding farewell to her husband and her little son, she went to a
certain stream and promised the god of the stream that, if her attempt
was successful, she would offer to him the richest sacrifice she could
afford.

 As she had planned, she was captured by the Igbos and carried away to
their capital as a prisoner. On account of her beauty she was given to
the King of the Igbos as a slave; and on account of her intelligence and
noble heart she soon gained the respect of all and rose to a position of
importance.

 Before she had been in the country very long, she had learnt all the
secrets of her enemies. She found that they were not gods but ordinary
men. On going into battle they wore strange mantles of grass and bamboo
fibre, and this accounted for their unnatural appearance. She also
learned that because of these mantles of dry grass, they were much
afraid of fire, and that if the Ifes were to rush among <span
id="page_16">p. 16</span> them with lighted torches, they would quickly
be defeated. As soon as it was possible, she escaped from the palace and
from the territory of the Igbos and returned to her own people. Her
tidings were joyfully received at Ile-Ife, and shortly afterwards the
Igbos were utterly defeated by the trick Mor<u>e</u>mi had suggested.

 Mor<u>e</u>mi now went to the stream and made a great sacrifice of
sheep, fowls, and bullocks; but the god of the stream was not satisfied
and demanded the life of her son.

 Sorrowing, Mor<u>e</u>mi was forced to consent, and sacrificed the
handsome boy Ela. The Ifes wept to see this sad spectacle, and they
promised to be her sons and daughters for ever, to make up for her loss.

 But lo! Ela as he lay upon the ground was only half dead, and when the
people had departed, he recovered consciousness and sprang up. Making a
rope of grass, he climbed up to heaven, and it is certain that he will
some day return to reap the benefits of his mother’s noble sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl13.md)
