[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl16) [Next](yl18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XV THE VOICES OF BIRDS

A <span class="small">MAGICIAN</span> once passed through a grove in the
forest where a great many brown birds fluttered from tree to tree and
filled the air with songs. For a long time he sat and listened,
enraptured by their beautiful melodies, but in the end he became very
jealous, for he himself could not sing.

 At last he felt that he must by some means or other possess the voices
of these singing birds, so he called them all together and said:

 “It grieves me that the gods have given you all such poor, ugly brown
feathers. <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> How happy you would be if you
were brilliantly coloured with red, blue, orange, and green!”

 And the birds agreed that it was a great pity to be so ugly.

 The magician then suggested that by means of his charms he could give
them all beautiful feathers in exchange for their voices—which were,
after all, of very little use to them, since nobody came into the grove
to hear them.

 The birds thought over his words, and desired very much the beauty he
promised them. So they foolishly agreed to give him their voices, which
the magician placed all together in a large calabash. He then used his
charms to turn the dull brown feathers of the birds into orange and
green and red, and they were very pleased.

 The magician hurried away, and as soon as he came to a deserted place
he opened the calabash and swallowed its contents. From that day he had
an exceedingly sweet voice, and people came from far and near to listen
to his songs.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

 But the birds were satisfied with their bright feathers. And this is
why the most beautiful birds are quite unable to sing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl18)
