[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl19) [Next](yl21)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

## XVIII THE TWIN BROTHERS

A <span class="small">CERTAIN</span> Yoruba King, Ajaka, had a favourite
wife of whom he was very fond; but, alas for his hopes! she gave birth
to twins.

 At that time it was the universal custom to destroy twins immediately
at birth, and the mother with them. But the King had not the heart to
put this cruel law into execution, and he secretly charged one of his
nobles to conduct the royal mother and her babes to a remote place where
they might live in safety.

 Here the twin brothers grew to manhood, and loved one another greatly.
They were inseparable, and neither of them had any pleasure except in
the company of the other. When one brother began to speak, the other
completed his phrase, so harmonious were their thoughts and
inclinations.

 Their mother, before she died, informed them of their royal birth, and
from this <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> moment they spent the time
vainly regretting their exile, and wishing that the law of the country
had made it possible for them to reign.

 At last they received the news that the King their father was dead,
leaving no heir, and it seemed to the brothers that one of them ought to
go to the capital and claim the throne. But which?

 To settle this point they decided to cast stones, and the one who made
the longer throw should claim the throne, and afterwards send for his
brother to share in his splendour.

 The lot fell on the younger of the twins, and he set off to the
capital, announced himself as the Ol<u>o</u>fin’s son, and soon became
King with the consent of all the people. As soon as possible he sent for
his brother, who henceforth lived with him in the palace and was treated
with honour and distinction.

 But alas! jealousy began to overcome his brotherly affection, and one
day as he walked with the King by the side of the <span id="page_35">p.
35</span> river, he pushed his brother suddenly into the water, where he
was drowned.

 He then gave out in the palace that his brother was weary of kingship,
and had left the country, desiring him to reign in his stead.

 The King had certainly disappeared, and as no suspicion fell on the
twin brother, he was made King and so realized his secret ambition.

 Some time later, happening to pass by the very spot where his brother
had been drowned, he saw a fish rise to the surface of the water and
begin to sing:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Your brother lies here,<br />
Your brother lies here.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 The King was very much afraid. He took up a sharp stone and killed the
fish.

 But another day when he passed the spot, attended by his nobles and
shielded by the royal umbrella made of the skins of rare animals, the
river itself rose into waves and sang:

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Your brother lies here,<br />
Your brother lies here.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

 In astonishment the courtiers stopped to listen. Their suspicions were
aroused, and when they looked into the water they found the body of the
King.

 Thus the secret of his disappearance was disclosed, and the wicked
brother was rejected in horror by his people. At this disgrace he took
poison and so died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl21)
