[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl25) [Next](yl27)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XXIV OLURONBI

I<span class="small">N</span> a certain village no children had been
born for many years, and the people were greatly distressed.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

 At last all the women of the village went together into the forest, to
the magic tree, the Iroko, and implored the spirit of the tree to help
them.

 The Iroko-man asked what gifts they would bring if he consented to help
them, and the women eagerly promised him corn, yams, fruit, goats, and
sheep; but Oluronbi, the young wife of a wood-carver, promised to bring
her first child.

 In due course children came to the village, and the most beautiful of
all the children was the one born to Oluronbi. She and her husband so
greatly loved their child that they could not consent to give it up to
the Iroko-man.

 The other women took their promised gifts of corn, yams, fruit, goats,
and sheep; but Oluronbi took nothing to propitiate. the tree.

 Alas! one day as Oluronbi passed through the forest, the Iroko-man
seized her and changed her into a small brown bird, which sat on the
branches of the tree and plaintively sang:

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“One promised a sheep,<br />
One promised a goat,<br />
One promised fruit,<br />
But Oluronbi promised her child.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 When the wood-carver heard the bird’s song, he realized what had
happened, and tried to find some means of regaining his wife.

 After thinking for many days, he began to carve a large wooden doll,
like a real child in size and appearance, and with a small gold chain
round its neck. Covering it with a beautiful native cloth, he laid it at
the foot of the tree. The Iroko-man thought that this was Oluronbi’s
child, so he transformed the little bird once more into a woman and
snatched up the child into the branches.

 Oluronbi joyfully returned home, and was careful never to stray into
the forest again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl27)
