[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl27) [Next](yl29)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

## XXVI THE ELEPHANT’S TRUNK

N<span class="small">OW</span> it is a matter of common knowledge that
Elephant has a long trunk, which he uses both as a nose and as a sort of
hand—a very useful trunk indeed. But he was once without it, and had a
very ordinary short snout like other animals.

 Elephant was always inquisitive and went sniffing about the forest,
prying into the secrets of the other animals. One day he came across a
dark hole in the ground, and into this hole he poked his nose, to see
what was there.

 He at once regretted his curiosity, for a large snake, who lived in the
hole, seized him by the nose and tried to swallow him. At this, Elephant
made a great uproar, and his wife came rushing to his assistance. She
seized his tail and pulled and pulled, and Elephant himself also pulled
and pulled, but the snake would not leave go.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

 And as a result, Elephant’s nose was drawn out into the long trunk
which he still has.

 At first he was ashamed to appear in the forest, on account of his
trunk, but now the other animals envy him.

 One day the monkey, which imitates everybody, looked down the same
hole, thinking it would be good to have a long trunk so as to be able to
swing from the trees by his nose. But the big snake who lived in the
hole swallowed him, and since then nobody else has tried to imitate
Elephant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl29)
