[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl32) [Next](yl34.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

## XXXI THE GHOST-CATCHER

K<span class="small">ING</span> A<span class="small">BIPA</span> took a
fancy to remove his whole court to a new capital, and for this purpose
he decided to build a town on a certain hill which pleased him.

 His nobles, however, did not at all desire the change, and some of them
met together to make a plan which would turn the King away from his
project.

 They agreed to send certain slaves of repulsive appearance, whom they
possessed, to haunt the hill after the manner of ghosts, so that the
King would be afraid to build his capital there. One noble sent a
hunchback, another an albino, another a leper, and a fourth a dwarf.

 When the King’s messengers arrived to survey the hill, they saw these
strange apparitions leaping about with torches in their hands, and
shouting with one voice: “Ko si aye! Ko si aye!” (No room! No room!).

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

 They returned in terror to the King, and told him that the hill was
haunted by ghosts.

 However, one of the royal advisers suspected a plot, and advised the
King to send hunters to the hill to capture the “ghosts.”

 The King took this advice, and the hunters returned with the supposed
“ghosts,” who were, of course, in abject terror at being discovered.
Instead of killing them, however, the King kept them hidden and invited
all his nobles to a banquet. When they had feasted merrily, he sent
round to each noble a calabash of beer by the hands of a slave.

 What was the dismay of the four rebellious nobles to receive the
calabash, one from his hunchback, another from his albino, and the
others from the hands of the leper and the dwarf!

 Obviously the plot had been discovered, and all four nobles expected to
be put to death for opposing the King; but the wise <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> Abipa said no word about the matter, and the
banquet ended in silence.

 Soon afterwards the court removed to the new town without any
opposition, and henceforth the King was known as “the Ghost-Catcher.”

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl34.md)
