[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl34) [Next](yl36)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

## XXXII TORTOISE AND THE KING

O<span class="small">NE</span> year the Elephant had done a great deal
of damage, breaking down the trees, drinking up the water in a time of
scarcity, and eating the first tender crops from the fields.

 The King’s hunters tried in vain to destroy him, for Elephant knew many
charms, and always escaped from their traps.

 At last the King offered the hand of his daughter in marriage to anyone
who would rid the country of the pest.

 Tortoise went to the palace and offered to catch Elephant, and then
made his preparations. Outside the town a large pit was dug, and on the
top of it was laid a thin platform covered with velvet cloths and
leopard-skins, like a throne.

 Then Tortoise set off into the forest, accompanied by slaves and
drummers. Elephant was very much surprised to see <span id="page_66">p.
66</span> his little friend Tortoise riding in such state, and suspected
a trap; but Tortoise said that the old King was dead and the people all
wished Elephant to rule over them, because he was the greatest of all
animals. When he heard this, Elephant was flattered, and agreed to
accompany Tortoise to the town. But when he went up on to the platform
to be crowned King, the wood gave way beneath him, and he crashed down
into the pit and was speedily slain by the King’s hunters.

 All the people rejoiced, and praised the cunning of Tortoise, who went
to the palace to receive his bride. But the King refused to give his
daughter to such an insignificant creature, and Tortoise determined to
have a revenge. When the new crops were just ripening, he called
together all the field-mice and elves, and asked them to eat up and
carry away the corn. They were only too pleased with the idea, and the
farmers in distress found the fields quite bare.

 Now there was prospect of a famine in <span id="page_67">p. 67</span>
the land, and the King offered the same reward as before to anyone who
would rid the country of the pests.

 Tortoise once again appeared in the palace and offered his help. The
King was eager enough to accept it, but Tortoise cautiously refused to
do anything until the Princess became his bride.

 The King was thus forced to consent to the marriage, and when it had
taken place, Tortoise, true to his word, called together all the mice
and elves and showed them a platform loaded with dainty morsels of food.
He then addressed them as follows:

 “The people are so distressed at the damage you have done, that they
have prepared this feast for you, and they promise to do the same twice
every year, before the harvesting of the first and second crops, if you
will agree not to touch the corn in the fields.”

 The little creatures all consented, and marched in a great crowd to the
platform, which they soon cleared.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

 The King and his people were not very pleased to hear of this
arrangement, but they were so afraid of Tortoise that they could not
complain, and after that the mice and elves never troubled the country
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](yl36)
