[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](yl42)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## XL TORTOISE AND THE RAIN

T<span class="small">ORTOISE</span> and a Cloud once made the following
agreement: Whenever Tortoise very much desired fine weather, he was to
stand outside his house and call: “Pass! Pass!” and then the Cloud would
roll away <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> and allow the sun to shine.
And when Tortoise desired rain, he was to cry: “Fall! Fall!” and the
rain would pour down. In payment for this service, Tortoise was to place
on the ground each time a certain number of cowries.

 Tortoise was delighted with this arrangement, and at first he duly
placed the sum of money on the ground every time he asked the Cloud for
fine or wet weather.

 One day, the occasion of a Chief’s wedding, the sky was very cloudy,
and it seemed likely to rain. Tortoise heard the Chief complaining: “We
have promised the drummers a great deal of money, but if it rains nobody
will come to see the maidens dance at my wedding!”

 Tortoise went to the Chief and said: “If you will give me a certain
sum, I will hold up the clouds on my hard back and there will be no
rain.”

 The Chief readily agreed to pay the cowries Tortoise demanded, and
Tortoise stood at the back of his hut and cried to the Cloud: “Pass!
Pass!” The Cloud <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> rolled back, the sun
shone brightly, and the wedding took place with much rejoicing.

 But Tortoise did not lay any money on the ground, and instead, he kept
the whole amount for himself.

 The next day a man came to Tortoise’s house and offered him much money
if he would cause the rain to fall. “For,” he said, “my fishing-stakes
are too high, but if it rains the river will swell and the fish will
come into my baskets.”

 “Very well,” replied Tortoise. “I will throw a spear into the clouds,
and the rain will fall.”

 Then he stood at the back of his house, where he could not be seen, and
cried to the Cloud: “Fall! Fall!” It began to pour with rain.

 But again he neglected to lay money on the ground and kept it all for
himself. Soon, in this way, he grew rich and famous, and almost every
day someone asked for fine or rainy weather. He stored many bags of
cowries in his house and gave nothing to the Cloud.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

 When two people asked him for rain and sunshine on the same day,
Tortoise pretended that he had grown tired with holding up the clouds on
his back, and so the rain fell.

 But after some time, seeing how rich Tortoise became, the hard-working
Cloud was angry and decided to punish him.

 One day Tortoise wished to set out on a journey with his family, so he
stood outside his house and cried: “Pass! Pass! Let the sun shine on my
journey!”

 But as soon as he had set out, the Cloud rolled back again and rain
poured down in torrents, causing a great flood in which Tortoise and all
his famiIy were drowned.

 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY  
BILLING AND SONS LTD., GUILDFORD AND ESHER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index)
