[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap17) 
[Next](chap19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 18

### Of Things that Take Away the Bad Smell from the Armpit and Sexual Parts of Women and Contract the Latter

Know, O Vizir (God be good to you!), that bad exhalations from the vulva
and from the armpits are, as is also a wide vagina, the greatest of
evils.

If a woman wants this bad odour to disappear she must pound red myrrh,
then sift it, and knead this powder with myrtle-water, and rub her
sexual parts with this wash. All disagreeable emanation will disappear
from her vulva.

Another remedy is obtained by pounding lavender, and kneading it
afterwards with musk-rose water. Saturate a piece of woollen stuff with
it, and rub the vulva with the same until it is hot. The bad smell will
be removed by this.

If a woman intends to contract her vagina, she has only to dissolve alum
in water, and wash her sexual parts with the solution, which may be made
still more efficacious by the addition of a little bark of the walnut
tree, the latter substance being very astringent.

Another remedy to be mentioned is the following, which is well known for
its efficacy. Boil well in water carobs (locusts), freed from their
kernels. and bark of the pomegranate tree. The woman takes a sits bath
in the decoction thus obtained, which must be as hot as she can bear it;
when the bath gets cold, it must be warmed and used again, and this
immersion is to be repeated several times. The same result may be
obtained by fumigating the vulva with cow-dung.

To do away with the bad smell of the armpits, one takes antimony and
mastic, which are to be pounded together, and put with water into an
earthen vase. The mixture is then rubbed against the sides of the vase
until it turns red; when it is ready for use, rub it into the armpits,
and the bad smell will be removed. It must be used repeatedly, until a
radical cure is effected.

The same result may be arrived at by pounding together antimony
(*hadida*) and mastic, setting the mixture afterwards on to a stove over
a low fire, until it is of the consistency of bread, and rubbing the
residue with a stone until the pellicle, which will have formed, is
removed. Then rub it into the armpits, and you may be sure that the bad
smell will soon be gone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19: Instructions with Regard to Pregnancy](chap19)
