[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap09) 
[Next](chap11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 10

### Concerning the Organs of Generation of animals

Know, O Vizir (God's blessing be with you!), that the sexual organs of
the various male animals are not analogous with the different natures of
the virile members which I have mentioned.

The verges of animals are classed according to the species to which they
belong, and these species are four in number.

1\. The verges of animals with hoofs, as the horse, mule, ass, which
verges are of large size.

El vermoul, the colossus *Abou dommar*, the one with a head *El kass*,
the serpent rolled up *Abou beurnita*, the one with a hat *El fellag*,
the splitter *El keurkite*, the pointed staff *El zellate*, the club *El
keuntra*, the bridge *El heurmak*, the indomitable *El rezama*, the
mallet *El meunefoukh*, the swollen *Abou sella*, the fighter

2\. The verges of animals which have the kind of feet called *akhefaf*
as, for instance, the camel.

El mâloum, the well-known *El beurkal*, the swinging one *El tonil*, the
long one *El mokheubbi*, the hidden one *El cherita*, the riband *El
châaf* the tuft *El mostakime*, the firm one *Tsequil el ifaha*, the
slow-coach

3\. The verges of animals with split hoofs, like the ox, the sheep, etc.

El aceub, the nerve *Requig er ras*, the small head *El heurbadj*, the
rod *El tonil*, the long one *El sonte*, the whip *El aïcoub*, the
nervous (for the ram)

4\. And lastly, the members of animals with claws, as the lion, fox,
dog, and other animals of this species.

El kedib, the verge *El metemerole*, the one that will lengthen *El
kibouss*, the great gland

It is believed that of all the animals of God's creation the lion is the
most expert in respect to coition. If he meets the lioness he examines
her before copulation. He will know if she has already been covered by a
male. When she comes to him he smells at her, and if she has allowed
herself to be crossed by a boar he knows it immediately by the odour
that animal has left upon her. He then smells her urine, and if the
examination proves unfavourable, he gets into a rage, and begins to lash
with his tail right and left. Woe to the animal that comes at that time
near him; it is certain to be torn to pieces. He then returns to the
lioness, who, seeing that he knows all, trembles with terror. He smells
again at her, utters a roar which makes the mountains shake, and,
falling upon her, lacerates her back with his claws. He even will go so
far as to kill her, and then befoul her body with his urine.

It is said that the lion is the most jealous and most intelligent of all
animals. It is also averred that he is generous, and spares him who gets
round him by fair words.

A man who on meeting a lion uncovers his sexual parts causes him to take
to flight.

Whoever pronounces before a lion the name of Daniel (hail be to him!)
also sends him flying, because the prophet (hail be to him!) has
enjoined this upon the lion in respect to the invocation of his name.
Therefore, when this name is pronounced, the lion departs without doing
any Ii arm. Several cases which prove this fact are cited.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11: On the Deceits and Treacheries of Women](chap11)
