[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap16) 
[Next](chap18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 17

### Prescriptions for Increasing the Dimensions of Small Members and for Making Them Splendid

Know, O Vizir (God be good to you!), that this chapter, which treats of
the size of the virile member, is of the first importance both for men
and women. For the men because from a good-sized and vigorous member
there springs the affection and love of women; for the women, because it
is by such members that their amorous passions are appeased, and the
greatest pleasure is procured for them. This is evident from the fact
that many men, solely by reason of their insignificant members, are, as
far as coition is concerned, objects of aversion to women, who likewise
entertain the same sentiment with regard to those whose members are
soft, nerveless, and relaxed. Their whole happiness consists in the use
of robust and strong members.

A man, therefore, with a small member, who wants to make it grand or
fortify it for the coitus, must rub it before copulation with tepid
water, until it gets red and extended by the blood flowing into it, in
consequence of the heat; he must then anoint it with a mixture of honey
and ginger, rubbing it in sedulously. Then let him join the woman; he
will procure for her such pleasure that she objects to him getting off
her again.

Another remedy consists in a compound made of a moderate quantity of
pepper, lavender, galanga, and musk, reduced to powder, sifted, and
mixed up with honey and preserved ginger. The member after having been
first washed in warm water, is then vigorously rubbed with the mixture;
it will then grow large and brawny, and afford to the woman a marvellous
feeling of voluptuousness.

A third remedy is the following: wash the member in water until it
becomes red, and enters into erection. Then take a piece of soft
leather, upon which spread hot pitch, and envelop the member with it. It
will not be long before the member raises its head, trembling with
passion. The leather is to be left on until the pitch grows cold, and
the member is again in a state of repose. This operation, several times
repeated, will have the effect of making the member strong and thick.

A fourth remedy is based upon the use made of leeches, but only of such
as live in water (*sic*), You put as many of them into a bottle as can
be got in, and fill it up with oil Then expose the bottle to the sun,
until the heat of the same has effected a complete mixture. With the
fluid thus obtained the member is to be rubbed several consecutive days,
and It will, by being thus treated, become of a good size and of full
dimensions.

For another procedure I will here note the use of an ass's member.
Procure one and boil it, together with onions and a large quantity of
corn. With this dish feed fowls, which you eat afterwards. One can also
macerate the ass's verge in oil, and use the fluid thus obtained for
anointing one's member, and drinking of it.

Another way is to bruise leeches with oil, and rub the verge with this
ointment; or, if it is preferred, the leeches may be put into a bottle,
and, thus enclosed, buried in a warm dung-hill until they are dissolved
into a coherent mass and form a sort of liniment, which is used for
repeatedly anointing the member. The member is certain greatly to
benefit by this.

One may likewise take rosin and wax, mixed with tubipore, asphodel, and
cobbler's glue, with which mixture rub the member, and the result will
be that its dimensions will be enlarged.

The efficacy of all these remedies is well known, and I have tested
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18: Of Things that Take Away the Bad Smell from the
Armpit and Sexual Parts of Women and Contract the Latter](chap18)
