[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](note)  [Next](chap01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## INTRODUCTION

### General Remarks about Coition

PRAISE BE GIVEN TO God, who has placed man's greatest pleasure in the
natural parts of woman, and has destined the natural parts of man to
afford the greatest enjoyment to woman.

He has not endowed the parts of woman with any pleasurable or
satisfactory feeling until the same have been penetrated by the
instrument of the male; and likewise the sexual organs of man know
neither rest nor quietness until they have entered those of the female.

Hence the mutual operation. There takes place between the two actors
wrestling, intertwinings, a kind of animated conflict. Owing to the
contact of the lower parts of the two bellies, the enjoyment soon comes
to pass. The man is at work as with a pestle, while the woman seconds
him by lascivious movements; finally comes the ejaculation.

The kiss on the mouth, on the two cheeks, upon the neck, as well as the
sucking up of flesh lips, are gifts of God, destined to provoke erection
at the favourable moment. God also is it who has embellished the chest
of the woman with breasts, has furnished her with a double chin, and has
given brilliant colours to her cheeks.

He has also gifted her with eyes that inspire love, and with eyelashes
like polished blades.

He has furnished her with a rounded belly and a beautiful navel, and
with a majestic crupper; and all these wonders are borne up by the
thighs. It is between these latter that God has placed the arena of the
combat; when the same is provided with ample flesh, it resembles the
head of a lion. It is called the vulva. Oh! how many men's deaths lie at
her door? Amongst them how many heroes!

God has furnished this object with a mouth, a tongue, two lips; it is
like the impression of the hoof of the gazelle in the sands of the
desert.

The whole is supported by two marvellous columns, testifying to the
might and the wisdom of God; they are not too long nor too short; and
they are graced with knees, calves, ankles, and heels, upon which rest
precious rings.

Then the Almighty has plunged woman into a sea of splendours, of
voluptuousness, and of delights, and covered her with precious
vestments, with brilliant girdles and provoking smiles.

So let us praise and exalt him who has created woman and her beauties,
with her appetizing flesh; who has given her hails, a beautiful figure,
a bosom with breasts which are swelling, and amorous ways, which awaken
desires.

The Master of the Universe has bestowed upon them the empire of
seduction; all men, weak or strong, are subjected to a weakness for the
love of woman. Through woman we have society or dispersion, sojourn or
emigration.

The state of humility in which are the hearts of those who love and are
separated from the object of their love, makes their hearts burn with
love's fire; they are oppressed with a feeling of servitude, contempt
and misery; they suffer under the vicissitudes of their passion: and all
this as a consequence of their burning desire for contact.

I, the servant of God, am thankful to him that no one can help falling
in love with beautiful women, and that no one can escape the desire to
possess them, neither by change, nor flight, nor separation.

I testify that there is only one God, and that he has no associate. I
shall adhere to this precious testimony to the day of the last judgment.

I likewise testify as to our lord and master, Mohammed, the servant and
ambassador of God, the greatest of the prophets (the benediction and
pity of God be with him and with his family and disciples!). I keep
prayers and benedictions for the day of retribution, that terrible
moment.

## The Origin of This Work

I have written this magnificent work after a small book called *The
Torch of the World*, which treats of the mysteries of generation.

This latter work came to the knowledge of the Vizir of our master,
Abd-el-Aziz, the ruler of Tunis.

This illustrious Vizir was his poet, his companion, his friend and
private secretary. He was good in council, true, sagacious and wise, the
best learned man of his time, and well acquainted with all things. He
called himself Mohammed ben Ouana ez Zounaoui, and traced his origin
from Zounaoua. He had been brought up at Algiers, and in that town our
master Abd-el-Aziz el Hafsi had made his acquaintance.

On the day when Algiers was taken, that ruler took flight with him to
Tunis (which land may God preserve in his power till the day of
resurrection), and named him his Grand Vizir.

When the above-mentioned book came into his hands, he sent for me, and
invited me pressingly to come and see him. I went forthwith to his
house, and he received me most honourably.

Three days after, he came to me and, showing me my book, said, 'This is
your work.' Seeing me blush, he added, 'You need not be ashamed;
everything you have said in it is true; no one need be shocked at your
words. Moreover, you are not the first who has treated of this matter;
and I swear by God that it is necessary to know this book. It is only
the shameless bore and the enemy of all science who will not read it, or
will make fun of it. But there are sundry things which you will have to
treat about yet.' I asked him what these things were, and he answered,
'I wish that you would add to the work a supplement, treating of the
remedies of which you have said nothing, and adding all the facts
appertaining thereto, omitting nothing. You will describe in the same
the motives of the act of generation, as well as the matters that
prevent it. You will mention the means for undoing spells
(aiguillettes), and the way to increase the size of the virile member,
when too small, and to make it resplendent. You will further cite those
means which remove the unpleasant smells from the armpits and the
natural parts of women, and those which will contract those parts. You
will further speak of pregnancy, so as to make your book perfect and
wanting in nothing. And, finally, you will have done your work, if your
book satisfy all wishes.'

T replied to the Vizir: 'Oh, my master, all you have said here is not
difficult to do, if it is the pleasure of God on high.'

I forthwith went to work with the composition of this book, imploring
the assistance of God (may he pour his blessing on his prophet, and may
happiness and pity be with him).

I have called this work, *The Perfumed Garden for the Souls Recreation
(Er Roud el Âater p'nezaha el Khater*).

And we pray to God, who directs everything for the best (and there is no
other God than He, and there is nothing good that does not come from
Him), to lend us His help, and lead us in good ways; for there is no
power nor joy but in the high and mighty God.

I have divided this book into chapters, in order to make it easier
reading for the *taleb* (student) who wishes to learn, and to facilitate
his search for what he wants. Each chapter relates to a particular
subject, be it physical, or anecdotal, or treating of the wiles and
deceits of women.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1: Concerning Praiseworthy Men](chap01)
