[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15100)  [Next](sbe15102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### SECOND ADHYÂYA.

1 <span id="fr_730"></span>[1](#fn_728). Savit*ri* (the sun), having
first collected his mind and expanded his thoughts, brought Agni (fire),
when he had discovered his light, above the earth.

2 <span id="fr_731"></span>[2](#fn_729). With collected minds we are at
the command of the divine Savit*ri*, that we may obtain blessedness.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

3 <span id="fr_732"></span>[1](#fn_730). May Savit*ri*, after he has
reached with his mind the gods as they rise up to the sky, and with his
thoughts (has reached) heaven, grant these gods to make a great light to
shine.

4 <span id="fr_733"></span>[2](#fn_731). The wise sages of the great
sage collect their mind and collect their thoughts. He who alone knows
the law (Savit*ri*) has ordered the invocations; great is the praise of
the divine Savit*ri*.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

5 <span id="fr_734"></span>[1](#fn_732). Your old prayer has to be
joined <span id="fr_735"></span>[2](#fn_733) with praises. Let my song
go forth like the path of the sun! May all the sons of the Immortal
listen, they who have reached their heavenly homes.

6\. Where the fire is rubbed <span id="fr_736"></span>[3](#fn_734),
where the wind is checked, where the Soma flows over, there the mind is
born.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

7\. Let us love the old Brahman by the grace of Savit*ri*; if thou make
thy dwelling there, the path will not hurt thee <span
id="fr_737"></span>[1](#fn_735).

8\. If a wise man hold his body with its three erect parts (chest, neck,
and head) even <span id="fr_738"></span>[2](#fn_736), and turn his
senses with the mind towards the heart, he will then in the boat of
Brahman <span id="fr_739"></span>[3](#fn_737) cross all the torrents
which cause fear.

9\. Compressing his breathings let him, who has subdued all motions,
breathe forth through the nose with gentle breath <span
id="fr_740"></span>[4](#fn_738). Let the wise man without fail restrain
his mind, that chariot yoked with vicious horses <span
id="fr_741"></span>[5](#fn_739).

10\. Let him perform his exercises in a place <span
id="fr_742"></span>[6](#fn_740)

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

level, pure, free from pebbles, fire, and dust, delightful by its
sounds, its water, and bowers, not painful to the eye, and full of
shelters and caves.

11\. When Yoga is being performed, the forms which come first, producing
apparitions in Brahman, are those of misty smoke, sun, fire, wind,
fire-flies, lightnings, and a crystal moon <span
id="fr_743"></span>[1](#fn_741).

12\. When, as earth, water, light, heat, and ether arise, the fivefold
quality of Yoga takes place <span id="fr_744"></span>[2](#fn_742), then
there is no longer illness, old age, or pain <span
id="fr_745"></span>[3](#fn_743) for him who has obtained a body,
produced by the fire of Yoga.

13\. The first results of Yoga they call lightness, healthiness,
steadiness, a good complexion, an easy pronunciation, a sweet odour, and
slight excretions.

14\. As a metal disk (mirror), tarnished by dust, shines bright again
after it has been cleaned, so is the one incarnate person satisfied and
free from grief, after he has seen the real nature of the Self <span
id="fr_746"></span>[4](#fn_744).

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

15\. And when by means of the real nature of his self he sees, as by a
lamp, the real nature of Brahman, then having known the unborn, eternal
god, who is beyond all natures <span id="fr_747"></span>[1](#fn_745), he
is freed from all fetters.

16\. He indeed is the god who pervades all regions: he is the first-born
(as Hira*n*yagarbha), and he is in the womb. He has been born, and he
will be born <span id="fr_748"></span>[2](#fn_746). He stands behind all
persons, looking everywhere.

17\. The god <span id="fr_749"></span>[3](#fn_747) who is in the fire,
the god who is in the water, the god who has entered into the whole
world, the god who is in plants, the god who is in trees, adoration be
to that god, adoration!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_728"></span>[238:1](sbe15101.htm#fr_730) The seven
introductory verses are taken from hymns addressed to Savit*ri* as the
rising sun. They have been so twisted by *S*aṅkara, in order to make
them applicable to the teachings of the Yoga philosophy, as to become
almost nonsensical. I have given a few specimens of *S*aṅkara's
renderings in the notes, but have translated the verses, as much as
possible, in their original character. As they are merely introductory,
I do not understand why the collector of the Upanishad should have seen
in them anything but an invocation of Savit*ri*.

These verses are taken from various Sa*m*hitâs. The first yu*ñg*âna*h*
prathamam is from Taitt. Sa*m*h. IV, 1, 1, 1, 1; Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XI, 1;
see also *S*at. Br. VI, 3, 1, 12. The Taittirîya-text agrees with the
Upanishad, the Vâ*g*asaneyi-text has dhiyam for dhiya*h*, and agne*h*
for agnim. Both texts take tatvâya as a participle of tan, while the
Upanishad reads tattvâya, as a dative of tattva, truth. I have
translated the verse in its natural sense. *S*aṅkara, in explaining the
Upanishad, translates: 'At the beginning of our meditation, joining the
mind with the Highest Self, also the other prâ*n*as, or the knowledge of
outward things, for the sake of truth, Savit*ri*, out of the knowledge
of outward things, brought Agni, after having discovered his brightness,
above the earth, in this body.' He explains it: 'May Savit*ri*, taking
our thoughts away from outward things, in order to concentrate them on
the Highest Self, produce in our speech and in our other senses that
power which can lighten all objects, which proceeds from Agni and from
the other favourable deities.' He adds that 'by the favour of Savit*ri*,
Yoga may be obtained.'

<span id="fn_729"></span>[238:2](sbe15101.htm#fr_731) The second verse
is from Taitt. Sa*m*h. IV, 1, 1, 1, 3; Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XI, 2. The
Vâ*g*asaneyi-text has svargyâya for svargeyâya, and *s*aktyâ for
*s*aktyai. *S*aṅkara explains: 'With a mind that has been joined <span
id="page_239">p. 239</span> by Savit*ri* to the Highest Self, we, with
the sanction of that Savit*ri*, devote ourselves to the work of
meditation, which leads to the obtainment of Svarga, according to our
power.' He explains Svarga by Paramâtman. Sâya*n*a in his commentary on
the Taittirîya-sa*m*hitâ explains svargeyâya by svargaloke
gîyamânasyâgne*h* sampâdanâya; *S*aṅkara, by svargaprâptihetubhûtâya
dhyânakarma*n*e. *S*aktyai is explained by *S*aṅkara by yathâsâmarthyam;
by Sâya*n*a, by *s*aktâ bhûyâsma. Mahîdhara explains *s*aktyâ by
svasâmarthyena. I believe that the original reading was svargyâya
*s*aktyai, and that we must take *s*aktyai as an infinitive, like ityai,
construed with a dative, like d*ri*saye sûryâya, for the seeing of the
sun. The two attracted datives would be governed by save, 'we are under
the command of Savit*ri*,' svargyâya *s*aktyai, 'that we may obtain
svargya, life in Svarga or blessedness.'

<span id="fn_730"></span>[239:1](sbe15101.htm#fr_732) The third verse is
from Taitt. Sa*m*h. IV, 1, 1, 1, 2; Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XI, 3. The
Taittirîyas read yuktvâya manasâ; the Vâ*g*asaneyins, yuktvâya savitâ.
*S*aṅkara translates: 'Again he prays that Savit*ri*, having directed
the devas, i.e. the senses, which are moving towards Brahman, and which
by knowledge are going to brighten up the heavenly light of Brahman, may
order them to do so; that is, he prays that, by the favour of Savit*ri*,
our senses should be turned away from outward things to Brahman or the
Self.' Taking the hymn as addressed to Savit*ri*, I have translated deva
by gods, not by senses, suvaryata*h* by rising to the sky, namely, in
the morning. The opposition between manasâ and dhiyâ is the same here as
in verse 1, and again in verse 4.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[239:2](sbe15101.htm#fr_733) This verse is from
Taitt. Sa*m*h. IV, 1, 1, 1, 4; I, 2, 13, 1, 1; Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. V, 14; XI,
4; XXXVII, 2; *Ri*g-veda V, 81, 1; *S*at. Br. III, 5, 3, 11; VI, 3, 1,
16. *S*aṅkara explains this verse again in the same manner as he did the
former verses, while the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a supplies two different
ritual explanations.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[240:1](sbe15101.htm#fr_734) For this verse,
see Taitt. Sa*m*h. IV, 1, 1, 2, 1; Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XI, 5; Atharva-veda
XVIII, 3, 39; *Ri*g-veda X, 13, 1. The Vâ*g*asaneyins read vi *s*loka
etu for vi *s*lokâ yanti; sûre*h* for sûrâ*h*; *srin*vantu for
*srin*vanti; and the *Ri*g-veda agrees with them. The dual vâm is
accounted for by the verse belonging to a hymn celebrating the two
*s*akatas, carts, bearing the offerings (havirdhâne); most likely,
however, the dual referred originally to the dual deities of heaven and
earth. I prefer the text of the *Ri*g-veda and the Vâ*g*asaneyins to
that of the Taittirîyas, and have translated the verse accordingly. In
the Atharva-veda XVIII, 39, if we may trust the edition, the verse
begins with svâsasthe bhavatam indave na*h*, which is really the end of
the next verse (Rv. X, 13, 2), while the second line is, vi *s*loka eti
pathyeva sûri*h* *srin*vantu vi*s*ve am*ri*tâsa etat. I see no sense in
pathyeva sûrâ*h*. *S*aṅkara explains pathyeva by pathi sanmârge, athavâ
pathyâ kîrti*h*, while his later commentary, giving *srin*vantu and
putrâ*h* sûrâtmano hira*n*yagarbhasya, leads one to suppose that he read
sûre*h* *srin*vantu. *S*âyana (Taitt. Sa*m*h. IV, 1, 1, 2) explains
pathyâ sûrâ iva by gîrvâ*n*amârga antarikshe sûryara*s*mayo yathâ
prasaranti tadvat. The same, when commenting on the *Ri*g-veda (X, 13,
1), Says: pathyâ-iva sûre*h*, yathâ stotu*h* svabhûtâ pathyâ
pari*n*âmasukhâvahâhutir vi*s*vân devân prati vividha*m* ga*kkh*ati
tadvat. Mahîdhara (Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XI, 5) refers sûre*h* (pa*nd*itasya)
to *s*loka*h*, and explains pathyeva by patho 'napetâ pathyâ
ya*gñ*amârgaprav*ri*ttâhuti*h*.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[240:2](sbe15101.htm#fr_735) Yu*g*é cannot
stand for yu*ñg*e, as all commentators and translators suppose, but is a
datival infinitive. Neither can yu*ñg*ate in the following verse stand
for yuṅkte (see Boehtlingk, s. v.), or be explained as a subjunctive
form. A. reads adhirudhyate, B. abhirudhyate, with a marginal note
abhinudyate. It is difficult to say whether in lighting the fire the
wind should be directed towards it, or kept from it.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[240:3](sbe15101.htm#fr_736) That is, at the
Soma sacrifice, after the fire has been kindled and stirred by the wind,
the poets, on partaking of the juice, are <span id="page_241">p.
241</span> inspirited for new songs. *S*aṅkara, however, suggests
another explanation as more appropriate for the Upanishad, namely,
'Where the fire, i.e. the Highest Self, which burns all ignorance, has
been kindled (in the body, where it has been rubbed with the syllable
Om), and where the breath has acted, i.e. has made the sound peculiar to
the initial stages of Yoga, there Brahman is produced.' In fact, what
was intended to be taught was this, that we must begin with sacrificial
acts, then practise yoga, then reach samâdhi, perfect knowledge, and
lastly bliss.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[241:1](sbe15101.htm#fr_737) We must read
k*rin*avase, in the sense of 'do this and nothing will hurt thee,' or,
if thou do this, thy former deeds will no longer hurt thee.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[241:2](sbe15101.htm#fr_738) Cf. Bhagavadgîtâ
VI, 13. Sama*m* kâya*s*irogrîva*m* dhârayan. *S*aṅkara says: trî*n*y
unnatâny urogrîva*s*irâ*m*sy unnatâni yasmin *s*arire.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[241:3](sbe15101.htm#fr_739) Explained by
*S*aṅkara as the syllable Om.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[241:4](sbe15101.htm#fr_740) Cf. Bhagavadgîtâ
V, 27. Prâ*n*âpânau samau k*ri*tvâ nâsâbhyantara *k*âri*n*au. See
Telang's notes, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii, p. 68 seq.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[241:5](sbe15101.htm#fr_741) A similar metaphor
in Ka*th*. Up. III, 4-6; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv, p. 13.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[241:6](sbe15101.htm#fr_742) The question is
whether *s*abda*g*alâsrayâdibhi*h* should be referred to mano 'nukûle,
as I have translated it, or to vivar*g*ite, as *S*aṅkara seems to take
it, because he renders *s*abda, sound, by noise, and <span
id="page_242">p. 242</span> â*s*raya by ma*nd*apa, a booth. See
Bhagavadgîtâ VI, 11. In the Maitr. Up. VI, 30, Râmatîrtha explains
su*k*au de*s*e by girinadîpulinaguhâdi*s*uddhastâne. See also Â*s*v.
G*ri*hya-sûtras III, 2, 2.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[242:1](sbe15101.htm#fr_743) Or, it may be, a
crystal and the moon.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[242:2](sbe15101.htm#fr_744) The Yogagu*n*a is
described as the quality of each element, i.e. smell of the earth, taste
of water, &c. It seems that the perception of these gunas is called
yogaprav*ri*tti. Thus by fixing the thought on the tip of the nose, a
perception of heavenly scent is produced; by fixing it on the tip of the
tongue, a perception of heavenly taste; by fixing it on the point of the
palate, a heavenly colour; by fixing it on the middle of the tongue, a
heavenly touch; by fixing it on the roof of the tongue, a heavenly
sound. By means of these perceptions the mind is supposed to be
steadied, because it is no longer attracted by the outward objects
themselves. See Yoga-sûtras I, 35.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[242:3](sbe15101.htm#fr_745) Or no death, na
m*ri*tyu*h*, B.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[242:4](sbe15101.htm#fr_746) Pareshâm pâ*th*e
tadvat sa tattvam prasamîkshya dehîti.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[243:1](sbe15101.htm#fr_747) Sarvatattvair
avidyâtatkâryair vi*s*uddham asa*m*sp*ri*sh*t*am.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[243:2](sbe15101.htm#fr_748) This verse is
found in the Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XXXII, 4; Taitt. Âr. X, 1, 3, with slight
modifications. The Vâgasaneyins read esho ha (so do A. B.) for esha hi;
sa eva *g*âta*h* (A. B.) for sa vi*g*âta*h*; *g*anâs (A. B.) for
*g*anâ*m*s. The Âra*n*yaka has sa vi*g*âyamâna*h* for sa vi*g*âta*h*,
pratyaṅmukhâs for pratya*ñg*anâ*m*s, and vi*s*vatomukha*h* for
sarvatomukha*h*. Colebrooke (Essays, I, 57) gives a translation of it.
If we read ganâ*h*, we must take it as a vocative.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[243:3](sbe15101.htm#fr_749) B. (not A.) reads
yo rudro yo 'gnau.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Adhyâya III](sbe15102)
