[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15053)  [Next](sbe15055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A <span id="fr_255"></span>[6](#fn_255).

1\. In the beginning there was nothing (to be perceived)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

here whatsoever. By Death indeed all this was concealed,--by hunger; for
death is hunger. Death (the first being) thought, 'Let me have a body.'
Then he moved about, worshipping. From him thus worshipping water was
produced. And he said: 'Verily, there appeared to me, while I worshipped
(ar*k*ate), water (ka).' This is why water is called ar-ka <span
id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_256). Surely there is water (or pleasure) for
him who thus knows the reason why water is called arka.

2\. Verily water is arka. And what was there as the froth of the water,
that was hardened, and became the earth. On that earth he (Death)
rested, and from him, thus resting and heated, Agni (Virâ*g*) proceeded,
full of light.

3\. That being divided itself threefold, Âditya (the sun) as the third,
and Vâyu (the air) as the third <span id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_257).
That spirit (prâ*n*a) <span id="fr_258"></span>[3](#fn_258) became
threefold. The head was the Eastern quarter, and the arms this and that
quarter

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (i. e. the N. E.
and S. E., on the left and right sides). Then the tail was the Western
quarter, and the two legs this and that quarter (i. e. the N. W. and S.
W.) The sides were the Southern and Northern quarters, the back heaven,
the belly the sky, the dust the earth. Thus he (M*ri*tyu, as arka)
stands firm in the water, and he who knows this stands firm wherever he
goes.

4\. He desired <span id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_259), 'Let a second body
be born of me,' and he (Death or Hunger) embraced Speech in his mind.
Then the seed became the year. Before that time there was no year.
Speech <span id="fr_260"></span>[2](#fn_260) bore him so long as a year,
and after that time sent him forth. Then when he was born, he (Death)
opened his mouth, as if to swallow him. He cried Bhâ*n*! and that became
speech <span id="fr_261"></span>[3](#fn_261).

5\. He thought, 'If I kill him, I shall have but little food.' He
therefore brought forth by that speech and by that body (the year) all
whatsoever exists, the *Rik*, the Ya*g*us, the Sâman, the metres, the
sacrifices, men, and animals.

And whatever he (Death) brought forth, that he resolved to eat (ad).
Verily because he eats everything, therefore is Aditi (Death) called
Aditi. He who thus knows why Aditi is called Aditi, becomes an eater of
everything, and everything becomes his food <span
id="fr_262"></span>[4](#fn_262).

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

6\. He desired to sacrifice again with a greater sacrifice. He toiled
and performed penance. And while he toiled and performed penance,
glorious power <span id="fr_263"></span>[1](#fn_263) went out of him.
Verily glorious power means the senses (prâ*n*a). Then when the senses
had gone out, the body took to swelling (*s*va-yitum), and mind was in
the body.

7\. He desired that this body should be fit for sacrifice (medhya), and
that he should be embodied by it. Then he became a horse (a*s*va),
because it swelled (a*s*vat), and was fit for sacrifice (medhya); and
this is why the horse-sacrifice is called A*s*va-medha.

Verily he who knows him thus, knows the A*s*vamedha. Then, letting the
horse free, he thought <span id="fr_264"></span>[2](#fn_264), and at the
end of a year he offered it up for himself, while he gave up the (other)
animals to the deities. Therefore the sacrificers offered up the
purified horse belonging to Pra*g*âpati, (as dedicated) to all the
deities.

Verily the shining sun is the A*s*vamedha-sacrifice, and his body is the
year; Agni is the sacrificial fire (arka), and these worlds are his
bodies. These two are the sacrificial fire and the
A*s*vamedha-sacrifice, and they are again one deity, viz. Death. He (who
knows this) overcomes another death, death does not reach him, death is
his Self, he becomes one of those deities.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265).

1\. There were two kinds of descendants of Pra*g*âpati, the Devas and
the Asuras <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_266). Now the Devas were
indeed the younger, the Asuras the elder ones <span
id="fr_267"></span>[3](#fn_267). The Devas, who were struggling in these
worlds, said: 'Well, let us overcome the Asuras at the sacrifices (the
*G*yotish*t*oma) by means of the udgîtha.'

2\. They said to speech (Vâ*k*): 'Do thou sing out for us (the
udgîtha).' 'Yes,' said speech, and sang (the udgîtha). Whatever delight
there is in speech, that she obtained for the Devas by singing (the
three pavamânas); but that she pronounced well (in the other nine
pavamânas), that was for herself. The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this
singer they will overcome us.' They therefore rushed at the singer and
pierced her with evil. That evil which consists in saying what is bad,
that is that evil.

3\. Then they (the Devas) said to breath (scent): 'Do thou sing out for
us.' 'Yes,' said breath, and sang. Whatever delight there is in breath
(smell), that he obtained for the Devas by singing; but that he smelled
well, that was for himself. The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this
singer they will overcome us.' They therefore rushed at the singer, and

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

pierced him with evil. That evil which consists in smelling what is bad,
that is that evil.

4\. Then they said to the eye: 'Do thou sing out for us.' 'Yes,' said
the eye, and sang. Whatever delight there is in the eye, that he
obtained for the Devas by singing; but that he saw well, that was for
himself The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this singer they will overcome
us.' They therefore rushed at the singer, and pierced him with evil.
That evil which consists in seeing what is bad, that is that evil.

5\. Then they said to the ear: 'Do thou sing out for us.' 'Yes,' said
the ear, and sang. Whatever delight there is in the ear, that he
obtained for the Devas by singing; but that he heard well, that was for
himself. The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this singer they will
overcome us.' They therefore rushed at the singer, and pierced him with
evil. That evil which consists in hearing what is bad, that is that
evil.

6\. Then they said to the mind: 'Do thou sing out for us.' 'Yes,' said
the mind, and sang. Whatever delight there is in the mind, that he
obtained for the Devas by singing; but that he thought well, that was
for himself. The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this singer they will
overcome us.' They therefore rushed at the singer, and pierced him with
evil. That evil which consists in thinking what is bad, that is that
evil.

Thus they overwhelmed these deities with evils, thus they pierced them
with evil.

7\. Then they said to the breath in the mouth <span
id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_268): 'Do thou sing for us.' 'Yes,' said the
breath, and sang. The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this singer

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

they will overcome us.' They therefore rushed at him and pierced him
with evil. Now as a ball of earth will be scattered when hitting a
stone, thus they perished, scattered in all directions. Hence the Devas
rose, the Asuras fell. He who knows this, rises by his self, and the
enemy who hates him falls.

8\. Then they (the Devas) said: 'Where was he then who thus stuck to
us <span id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_269)?' It was (the breath) within
the mouth (âsye 'ntar <span id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_270)), and
therefore called Ayâsya; he was the sap (rasa) of the limbs (aṅga), and
therefore called Âṅgirasa.

9\. That deity was called Dûr, because Death was far (dûran) from it.
From him who knows this, Death is far off.

10\. That deity, after having taken away the evil of those deities, viz.
death, sent it to where the end of the quarters of the earth is. There
he deposited their sins. Therefore let no one go to a man, let no one go
to the end (of the quarters of the earth <span
id="fr_271"></span>[3](#fn_271)), that he may not meet there with evil,
with death.

11\. That deity, after having taken away the evil of those deities, viz.
death, carried them beyond death.

12\. He carried speech across first. When speech had become freed from
death, it became (what it had been before) Agni (fire). That Agni, after
having stepped beyond death, shines.

13\. Then he carried breath (scent) across. When breath had become freed
from death, it became

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vâyu (air). That
Vâyu, after having stepped beyond death, blows.

14\. Then he carried the eye across. When the eye had become freed from
death, it became Âditya (the sun). That Âditya, after having stepped
beyond death, burns.

15\. Then he carried the ear across. When the ear had become freed from
death, it became the quarters (space). These are our quarters (space),
which have stepped beyond death.

16\. Then he carried the mind across. When the mind had become freed
from death, it became the moon (*K*andramas). That moon, after having
stepped beyond death, shines. Thus does that deity carry him, who knows
this, across death.

17\. Then breath (vital), by singing, obtained for himself eatable food.
For whatever food is eaten, is eaten by breath alone, and in it breath
rests <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_272).

The Devas said: 'Verily, thus far, whatever food there is, thou hast by
singing acquired it for thyself. Now therefore give us a share in that
food.' He said: 'You there, enter into me.' They said Yes, and entered
all into him. Therefore whatever food is eaten by breath, by it the
other senses are satisfied.

18\. If a man knows this, then his own relations come to him in the same
manner; he becomes their supporter, their chief leader, their strong
ruler <span id="fr_273"></span>[2](#fn_273). And if ever anyone tries to
oppose <span id="fr_274"></span>[3](#fn_274) one who is possessed of
such knowledge among his own relatives, then he

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

will not be able to support his own belongings. But he who follows the
man who is possessed of such knowledge, and who with his permission
wishes to support those whom he has to support, he indeed will be able
to support his own belongings.

19\. He was called Ayâsya Âṅgirasa, for he is the sap (rasa) of the
limbs (aṅga). Verily, breath is the sap of the limbs. Yes, breath is the
sap of the limbs. Therefore from whatever limb breath goes away, that
limb withers, for breath verily is the sap of the limbs.

20\. He (breath) is also B*ri*haspati, for speech is B*ri*hatî
(*Ri*g-veda), and he is her lord; therefore he is B*ri*haspati.

2 1. He (breath) is also Brahma*n*aspati, for speech is Brahman
(Ya*g*ur-veda), and he is her lord; therefore he is Brahma*n*aspati.

He (breath) is also Sâman (the Udgîtha), for speech is Sâman
(Sama-veda), and that is both speech (sâ) and breath (ama) <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275). This is why Sâman is called Sâman.

22\. Or because he is equal (sama) to a grub, equal to a gnat, equal to
an elephant, equal to these three worlds, nay, equal to this universe,
therefore he is Sâman. He who thus knows this Sâman, obtains union and
oneness with Sâman.

23\. He (breath) is Udgîtha <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276).
Breath verily is Ut, for by breath this universe is upheld (uttabdha);
and speech is Gîthâ, song. And because he is ut and gîthâ, therefore he
(breath) is Udgîtha.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

24\. And thus Brahmadatta *K*aikitâneya (the grandson of *K*ikitâna),
while taking Soma (râ*g*an), said: 'May this Soma strike my head off, if
Ayâsya Âṅgirasa sang another Udgîtha than this. He sang it indeed as
speech and breath.'

25\. He who knows what is the property of this Sâman, obtains property.
Now verily its property is tone only. Therefore let a priest, who is
going to perform the sacrificial work of a Sama-singer, desire that his
voice may have a good tone, and let him perform the sacrifice with a
voice that is in good tone. Therefore people (who want a priest) for a
sacrifice, look out for one who possesses a good voice, as for one who
possesses property. He who thus knows what is the property of that
Sâman, obtains property.

26\. He who knows what is the gold of that Sâman, obtains gold. Now
verily its gold. is tone only. He who thus knows what is the gold of
that Sâman, obtains gold.

27\. He who knows what is the support of that Sâman, he is supported.
Now verily its support is speech only. For, as supported in speech, that
breath is sung as that Sâman. Some say the support is in food.

Next follows the Abhyâroha <span id="fr_277"></span>[1](#fn_277) (the
ascension) of the Pavamâna verses. Verily the Prastot*ri* begins to sing
the Sâman, and when he begins, then let him (the sacrificer) recite
these (three Ya*g*us-verses):

'Lead me from the unreal to the real! Lead me

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

from darkness to light! Lead me from death to immortality!'

Now when he says, 'Lead me from the unreal to the real,' the unreal is
verily death, the real immortality. He therefore says, 'Lead me from
death to immortality, make me immortal.'

When he says, 'Lead me from darkness to light,' darkness is verily
death, light immortality. He therefore says, 'Lead me from death to
immortality, make me immortal.'

When he says, 'Lead me from death to immortality,' there is nothing
there, as it were, hidden (obscure, requiring explanation) <span
id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_278).

28\. Next come the other Stotras with which the priest may obtain food
for himself by singing them. Therefore let the sacrificer, while these
Stotras are being sung, ask for a boon, whatever desire he may desire.
An Udgât*ri* priest who knows this obtains by his singing whatever
desire he may desire either for himself or for the sacrificer. This
(knowledge) indeed is called the conqueror of the worlds. He who thus
knows this Sâman <span id="fr_279"></span>[2](#fn_279), for him there is
no fear of his not being admitted to the worlds <span
id="fr_280"></span>[3](#fn_280).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_255"></span>[74:6](sbe15054.htm#fr_255) Called the
Agni-brâhma*n*a, and intended to teach the origin of <span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> Agni, the fire, which is here used for the
Horse-sacrifice. It is found in the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a,
Mâdhyandina-*s*âkhâ X, 6, 5, and there explained as a description of
Hira*n*yagarbha.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[75:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_256) We ought to read
arkasyârkatvam, as in Poley's edition, or ark-kasyârkkatvam, to make the
etymology still clearer. The commentator takes arka in the sense of
fire, more especially the sacrificial fire employed at the
Horse-sacrifice. It may be so, but the more natural interpretation seems
to me to take arka here as water, from which indirectly fire is
produced. From water springs the earth; on that earth he (Mri*t*yu or
Pra*g*âpati) rested, and from him, while resting there, fire (Virâ*g*)
was produced. That fire assumed three forms, fire, sun, and air, and in
that threefold form it is called prâ*n*a, spirit.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[75:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_257) As Agni, Vâyu, and
Âditya.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[75:3](sbe15054.htm#fr_258) Here Agni (Virâ*g*)
is taken as representing the fire of the altar at the Horse-sacrifice,
which is called Arka. The object of the whole Brâhma*n*a was to show the
origin and true character of that fire (arka).

<span id="fn_259"></span>[76:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_259) He is the same as
what was before called m*ri*tyu, death, who, after becoming
self-conscious, produced water, earth, fire, &c. He now wishes for a
second body, which is the year, or the annual sacrifice, the year being
dependent on the sun (Âditya).

<span id="fn_260"></span>[76:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_260) The commentator
understands the father, instead of Speech, the mother.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[76:3](sbe15054.htm#fr_261) The interjectional
theory.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[76:4](sbe15054.htm#fr_262) All these are
merely fanciful etymologies of a*s*vamedha and arka.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[77:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_263) Or glory (senses)
and power. Comm.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[77:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_264) He considered
himself as the horse. Roer.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[78:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_265) Called the
Udgîtha-brâhma*n*a. In the Mâdhyandina-*s*âkhâ, the Upanishad, which
consists of six adhyâyas, begins with this Brâhma*n*a (cf. Weber's
edition, p. 104 7; Commentary, p. 1109).

<span id="fn_266"></span>[78:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_266) The Devas and
Asuras are explained by the commentator as the senses, inclining either
to sacred or to worldly objects, to good or evil.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[78:3](sbe15054.htm#fr_267) According to the
commentator, the Devas were the less numerous and less strong, the
Asuras the more numerous and more powerful.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[79:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_268) This is the chief
or vital breath, sometimes called mukhya.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[80:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_269) Asakta from sa*ñg*,
to embrace; cf. Rig-veda I, 33, 3. Here it corresponds to the German
anhänglich.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[80:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_270) See Deussen,
Vedanta, p. 359.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[80:3](sbe15054.htm#fr_271) To distant people.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[81:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_272) This is done by the
last nine Pavamânas, while the first three were used for obtaining the
reward common to all the prâ*n*as.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[81:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_273) Here annâda is well
explained by anâmayâvin, and vyâdhirahita, free from sickness, strong.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[81:3](sbe15054.htm#fr_274) Read pratiprati*h*;
see Poley, and Weber, p. 1180.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[82:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_275) Cf. *Kh*ând. Up. V,
2, 6.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[82:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_276) Not used here in
the sense of song or hymn, but as an act of worship connected with the
Sâman. Comm.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[83:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_277) The ascension is a
ceremony by which the performer reaches the gods, or becomes a god. It
consists in the recitation of three Ya*g*us, and is here enjoined to
take place when the Prastotri priest begins to sing his hymn.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[84:1](sbe15054.htm#fr_278) See Deussen,
Vedânta, p. 86.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[84:2](sbe15054.htm#fr_279) He knows that he is
the Prâ*n*a, which Prâ*n*a is the Sâman. That Prâ*n*a cannot be defeated
by the Asuras, i.e. by the senses which are addicted to evil; it is
pure, and the five senses finding refuge in him, recover there their
original nature, fire, &c. The Prâ*n*a is the Self of all things, also
of speech (*Ri*g-ya*g*u*h*-sâmodgîtha), and of the Sâman that has to be
sung and well sung. The Prâ*n*a pervades all creatures, and he who
identifies himself with that Prâ*n*a, obtains the rewards mentioned in
the Brâhma*n*a. Comm.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[84:3](sbe15054.htm#fr_280) In connection with
loka*g*it, lokyatâ is here explained, and may probably have been
intended, as worthiness to be admitted to the highest world. Originally
lokyatâ and alokyatâ meant right and wrong. See also I, 5, 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 4](sbe15055)
