[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe15057)  [Next](sbe15059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMBWG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*The Upanishads, Part 2 (SBE15)*, by Max Müller, \[1879\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

## SECOND ADHYÂYA <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313).

### FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A <span id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314).

1\. There <span id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315) was formerly the proud
Gârgya Bâlâki <span id="fr_316"></span>[4](#fn_316), a man of great
reading. He said to A*g*âta*s*atru of Kâ*s*i, 'Shall I tell you
Brahman?' A*g*âta*s*atru said: 'We give a thousand (cows) for that
speech (of yours), for verily all people run away, saying, *G*anaka (the
king of Mithilâ) is our father (patron) <span
id="fr_317"></span>[5](#fn_317).'

2\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the sun <span
id="fr_318"></span>[6](#fn_318), that I adore as Brahman.'
A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore
him

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

verily as the supreme, the head of all beings, the king. Whoso adores
him thus, becomes Supreme, the head of all beings, a king.'

3\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the moon (and in the mind), that
I adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak
to me on this. I adore him verily as the great, clad in white raiment,
as Soma, the king.' Whoso adores him thus, Soma is poured out and poured
forth for him day by day, and his food does not fail <span
id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_319).

4\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the lightning (and in the
heart), that I adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no!
Do not speak to me on this. I adore him verily as the luminous.' Whoso
adores him thus, becomes luminous, and his offspring becomes luminous.

5\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the ether (and in the ether of
the heart), that I adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No,
no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore him as what is full, and
quiescent.' Whoso adores him thus, becomes filled with offspring and
cattle, and his offspring does not cease from this world.

6\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the wind (and in the breath),
that I adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not
speak to me on this. I adore him as Indra Vaiku*nth*a, as the
unconquerable army (of the Maruts).' Whoso adores him thus, becomes
victorious, unconquerable, conquering his enemies.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

7\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the fire (and in the heart),
that I adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not
speak to me on this. I adore him as powerful.' Whoso adores him thus,
becomes powerful, and his offspring becomes powerful.

8\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the water (in seed, and in the
heart), that I adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no!
Do not speak to me on this. I adore him as likeness.' Whoso adores him
thus, to him comes what is likely (or proper), not what is improper;
what is born from him, is like unto him <span
id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_320).

9\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the mirror, that I adore as
Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak to me on
this. I adore him verily as the brilliant.' Whoso adores him thus, he
becomes brilliant, his offspring becomes brilliant, and with whomsoever
he comes together, he outshines them.

10\. Gârgya said: 'The sound that follows a man while he moves, that I
adore as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak to
me on this. I adore him verily as life.' Whoso adores him thus, he
reaches his full age in this world, breath does not leave him before the
time.

11\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in space, that I adore as
Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak to me on
this. I adore him verily as the second who never leaves us.'

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

Whoso adores him thus, becomes possessed of a second, his party is not
cut off from him,

12\. Gârgya said: 'The person that consists of the shadow, that I adore
as Brahman.' A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak to me on
this. I adore him verily as death.' Whoso adores him thus, he reaches
his whole age in this world, death does not approach him before the
time.

13\. Gârgya said: 'The person that is in the body <span
id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_321), that I adore as Brahman.'
A*g*âta*s*atru said to him: 'No, no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore
him verily as embodied.' Whoso adores him thus, becomes embodied, and
his offspring becomes embodied <span id="fr_322"></span>[2](#fn_322).

Then Gârgya became silent.

14\. A*g*âta*s*atru said: 'Thus far only?' 'Thus far only,' he replied.
A*g*âta*s*atru said: 'This does not suffice to know it (the true
Brahman).' Gârgya replied: 'Then let me come to you, as a pupil.'

15\. A*g*âta*s*atru said: 'Verily, it is unnatural that a Brâhma*n*a
should come to a Kshatriya, hoping that he should tell him the Brahman.
However, I shall make you know him clearly,' thus saying he took him by
the hand and rose.

And the two together came to a person who was asleep. He called him by
these names, 'Thou, great one, clad in white raiment, Soma, King <span
id="fr_323"></span>[3](#fn_323).' He

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

did not rise. Then rubbing him with his hand, he woke him, and he arose.

16\. A*g*âta*s*atru said: 'When this man was thus asleep, where was then
the person (purusha), the intelligent? and from whence did he thus come
back?' Gârgya did not know this?

17\. A*g*âta*s*atru said: 'When this man was thus asleep, then the
intelligent person (purusha), having through the intelligence of the
senses (prâ*n*as) absorbed within himself all intelligence, lies in the
ether, which is in the heart <span id="fr_324"></span>[1](#fn_324). When
he takes in these different kinds of intelligence, then it is said that
the man sleeps (svapiti) <span id="fr_325"></span>[2](#fn_325). Then the
breath is kept in, speech is kept in, the ear is kept in, the eye is
kept in, the mind is kept in.

18\. But when he moves about in sleep (and dream), then these are his
worlds. He is, as it were, a great king; he is, as it were, a great
Brâhma*n*a; he rises, as it were, and he falls. And as a great king
might keep in his own subjects, and move about, according to his
pleasure, within his own domain, thus does that person (who is endowed
with intelligence) keep in the various senses (prâ*n*as) and move about,
according to his pleasure, within his own body (while dreaming).

19\. Next, when he is in profound sleep, and knows

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

nothing, there are the seventy-two thousand arteries called Hita, which
from the heart spread through the body <span
id="fr_326"></span>[1](#fn_326). Through them he moves forth and rests
in the surrounding body. And as a young man, or a great king, or a great
Brâhma*n*a, having reached the summit of happiness, might rest, so does
he then rest.

20\. As the spider comes out with its thread, or as small sparks come
forth from fire, thus do all senses, all worlds, all Devas, all beings
come forth from that Self The Upanishad (the true name and doctrine) of
that Self is 'the True of the True.' Verily the senses are the true, and
he is the true of the true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_313"></span>[100:1](sbe15058.htm#fr_313) Mâdhyandina text,
p. 1058.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[100:2](sbe15058.htm#fr_314) Whatever has been
taught to the end of the third (according to the counting of the
Upanishad, the first) Adhyâya, refers to avidyâ, ignorance. Now,
however, vidyâ, the highest knowledge, is to be taught, and this is
done, first of all, by a dialogue between Gârgya D*ri*ptabâlâki and king
A*g*âta*s*atru, the former, though a Brâhma*n*a, representing the
imperfect, the latter, though a Kshatriya, the perfect knowledge of
Brahman. While Gârgya worships the Brahman as the sun, the moon, &c., as
limited, as active and passive, A*g*âta*s*atru knows the Brahman as the
Self.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[100:3](sbe15058.htm#fr_315) Compare with this
the fourth Adhyâya of the Kaushîtaki-upanishad, Sacred Books of the
East, vol. i, p. 300; Gough, Philosophy of the Upanishads, p. 144.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[100:4](sbe15058.htm#fr_316) Son of Balâkâ, of
the race of the Gârgyas.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[100:5](sbe15058.htm#fr_317) *G*anaka, known as
a wise and liberal king. There is a play on his name, which means
father, and is understood in the sense of patron, or of teacher of
wisdom. The meaning is obscure; and in the Kaush. Up. IV. i, the
construction is still more difficult. What is intended seems to be that
A*g*âta*s*atru is willing to offer any reward to a really wise man,
because all the wise men are running after *G*anaka and settling at his
court.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[100:6](sbe15058.htm#fr_318) The commentator
expatiates on all these answers and brings them more into harmony with
Vedanta doctrines. Thus he adds that the person in the sun is at the
same time the person in the eye, who is both active and passive in the
heart, &c.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[101:1](sbe15058.htm#fr_319) We miss the
annasyâtmâ, the Self of food, mentioned in the Kaush. Up., and evidently
referred to in the last sentence of our paragraph. Suta and prasuta,
poured out and poured forth, are explained as referring to the principal
and the secondary sacrifices.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[102:1](sbe15058.htm#fr_320) Here the Kaush.
Up. has the Self of the name, instead of pratirûpa, likeness. The
commentator thinks that they both mean the same thing, because a name is
the likeness of a thing. Another text of the Kaush. Up. gives here the
Self of light. Pratirûpa in the sense of likeness comes in later in the
Kaush. Up., § 11.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[103:1](sbe15058.htm#fr_321) 'In the Âtman, in
Pra*g*âpati, in the Buddhi, and in the heart.' Comm.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[103:2](sbe15058.htm#fr_322) It is difficult to
know what is meant here by âtman and âtmanvin. In the Kaush. Up.
A*g*âta*s*atru refers to Pra*g*âpati, and the commentator here does the
same, adding, however, buddhi and h*ri*d. Gough translates âtmanvin by
'having peace of mind.' Deussen, p. 195, passes it over.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[103:3](sbe15058.htm#fr_323) These names are
given here as they occur in the Kaushîtaki-upanishad, not as in the
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka-upanishad, where the <span id="page_104">p.
104</span> first name was atish*th*â*h* sarveshâm bhûtânâm mûrdhâ
râ*g*â. This throws an important light on the composition of the
Upanishads.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[104:1](sbe15058.htm#fr_324) The ether in the
heart is meant for the real Self. He has come to himself, to his Self,
i.e. to the true Brahman.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[104:2](sbe15058.htm#fr_325) Svapiti, he
sleeps, is explained as sva, his own Self, and apiti for apyeti, he goes
towards, so that 'he sleeps' must be interpreted as meaning 'he comes to
his Self.' In another passage it is explained by svam apîto bhavati. See
*S*aṅkara's Commentary on the B*ri*h. Âr. Up. vol. i, p. 372.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[105:1](sbe15058.htm#fr_326) 'Not the
pericardium only, but the whole body.' Comm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 2](sbe15059)
