[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt403)  [Next](pt405) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### I. OSSIAN. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) II. TRADITIONS, &c. III. MYTHOLOGY.

I have learned from my reviewers that the Ossianic controversy survives,
and that the vigorous centenarian is studied with interest; that these
Highland stories which bear upon Celtic mythology are most valued by
those who know most about popular lore, and that I am blamed for not
holding opinions as to the origin of such stories. At the risk, then, of
floundering out of my depth, I will endeavour to tell what I know, and
what I think about these three subjects.

### I. OSSIAN.

In 1760, and during some following years, certain English compositions,
the work of James MacPherson, were published. There is no dispute so
far; he composed the English Ossian, but he described his works as
"translations," and it was asserted that they were his "original
compositions."

It is well to define these two expressions here, for their meaning has
been obscured in the controversy.

1\. By a "close literal translation," I mean that every word, phrase,
and sentence in a composition in one language, has its proper equivalent
in another.

2\. By a "free literal translation," that every phrase

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

and sentence, but not necessarily every word, is rendered.

3\. By a "close translation," the expression in one language of the very
same ideas which are expressed in another--such as the metrical
translations of the Psalms; but prose may be verse, or verse prose.

4\. By a "free translation," I understand the same thing less accurately
done--such works as "Pope's Homer."

In the strictest rendering, a "translator" has the choice of many words,
and may thus lean towards the one language or the other. These volumes,
for example, generally aim at a "close literal translation," with a
leaning towards the Gaelic idiom, but the loosest "translator" has no
right to add one idea of his own, or omit anything.

5\. The next step is not easy to define. The first "Scripture
paraphrase" is not an "original composition," yet it is hardly a
"translation." It is a "paraphrase." If compared with its model, it
gives the general sense, but it also gives something which belongs to
the author of the paraphrase. There is no authority for "smiling ray,"
"ancient night," and a great deal is left out.

6\. The next step where original composition begins is still harder to
define. The "Idylls of the King" are original compositions, but only a
step removed from paraphrases, for they are founded on, and contain
whole lines taken from old poems and stories: and so there are endless
gradations. English and Scotch popular ballads, for example, owe
something to Percy, Ramsay, Burns, Scott, and others, but they are old
nevertheless. Some have equivalents in Danish, Koempe Visar, of great
antiquity, and part of the story of the Heir of Linne is in Grimm's
Eastern Tales. It would be hard to discover

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

any one composition of any modern author in which something apparently
borrowed from some other cannot be traced. Gray's poems, for example,
are full of lines which are traced to the classics, and pointed out as
beauties, the originals are quoted to enhance the poet's fame, and yet
these are original compositions.

7\. There are compositions which seem to have scarcely any relation to
any that have gone before, such as "Vathek," and one question for
argument is, to which of these seven classes do the "Poems of Ossian"
belong?

Another question, and an important one is, "Wherein does the authority
consist?" In the story or in the words; in the rhythm or metre of
poetry, or its theme, or its ornaments and illustrations? Who, for
example, will be the author of "Morte Arthur " when Tennyson's poem is
completed?

In 1807, after MacPherson's death, the Highland Society of London
published certain Gaelic manuscripts which were all in MacPherson's
handwriting. These contained Gaelic poems, and are the equivalents of
nearly the whole of his English prose; the one is in fact a free
translation of the other. The argument is concerning these. Were they
composed by Ossian in the third century as MacPherson "surmises?" Or by
some other ancient or modern Gaelic poet? Or by MacPherson himself?

Were they translated from the published English prose, or the English
prose from the Gaelic verse?

Were they compounded by any collector or collectors of other men's
works, or were they original Gaelic compositions of the man in whose
handwriting they were found

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

If they were compounded, from what originals

If they be original compositions, how far are the ideas contained in
them and their language borrowed from older known compositions in
Gaelic, or in any other language? Are they to be classed No. I or No. 7?
for they must be classed somewhere. These are some of the questions for
argument; the prevailing opinions differ as widely.

1st, The commonest English opinion is, that the "poems of Ossian" were
composed in English prose by James MacPherson about 1760; that he was
the inventor of the character and incidents, and that the poems had no
previous existence in any shape.

To support this it must be shown that throughout all known Gaelic
literature there is no mention of these names and incidents previous to
1760, and that no Gaelic poems concerning them existed previous to 1807.

To refute this it is only necessary to quote some earlier mention of the
characters, and some one early Gaelic poem, Irish or Scotch, concerning
their exploits.

This sweeping English theory, which ranks the poems in the seventh
class, is quite untenable. The groundwork of much which is in Ossian
certainly existed in Gaelic in Scotland long before MacPherson was born.
There are many passages in ancient works written in some dialect of
English, which prove beyond dispute that the chief characters figured in
Gaelic compositions centuries ago, and Gaelic songs by well-known
ancient bards, allude so constantly to Fionn, the Feinne, Oisein, etc.,
that there is no standing ground left for this theory. The *West of
Scotland Magazine* for 1858 gives much information on this point, in a
series of

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

able articles on the poetry and traditions of the Highland clans.

2d, An opinion still prevails amongst a limited number of Scotchmen,
that Ossian's poems are historical; that the Gaelic is genuine old
poetry composed by a bard of the third century, who witnessed many of
the exploits recorded; and that those passages which are said to
resemble passages in Milton, may be the sources whence Milton borrowed
ideas.

To support this opinion, it is necessary to produce some proof, some
early manuscript containing the poems, or one of them, or some early
account of them, or it must at least be shewn that their language
resembles in some sort the earliest attainable specimens of Gaelic as
written by rule or by ear; or that these very poems, or parts of them,
are still, or were at some time, commonly known to some class of the
population, and that they agree with all that is known of the history of
these times.

It is not now easy to support or refute this opinion, or prove a
negative. The language of traditional poems alters, manuscripts get
lost, manners change, and men die; but it might be shewn that, so far as
anything is known of early Gaelic literature, there were no such poems,
and that their language is not that of some one period between the third
and the eighteenth centuries, or that some one event which is mentioned
happened later than the supposed date of the poet; and so argue on
probabilities.

I could quote modern books which assert that the works of Milton and
Shakspeare were composed by Scotchmen, while Ossian's poetry is a
genuine work of the third century; and MacPherson tried to persuade the
world that the poems were of that date. He maintained

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

that they had been traditionally preserved in the Highlands, and written
in ancient manuscripts which be had discovered there; that according to
Irish history, Fingal died 283, and Osgur 296, and that these were the
King of Morven and his grandson; that Caracul was the Roman Caracalla;
and that Ossian, the son of Fingal, survived his father, and disputed
with a Culdee concerning the Christian religion towards the latter end
of the third or beginning of the fourth century; that Fingal in his
youth, about 210, performed exploits against the son of the Roman
Emperor Severus; that Oscar, the son of Ossian and grandson of Fingal,
fought the Roman usurper Carausius at the winding Carron, which runs in
the neighbourhood of Agricola's wall; and that Ossian sang of these
deeds--all of which it is extremely difficult to disprove or believe.

3d, There is an Irish opinion, ably set forth in the fifth volume of the
Transactions of the Ossianic Society of Dublin, and probably held by
many, though it is not held by some of the best Irish scholars. It may
be thus stated.

MacPherson stole the well-known poems of Oisin, who was an Irish bard of
the third century, the son of Fionn and father of Osgur, and who shared
in their exploits and survived them, and disputed with St. Patrick
concerning the Christian religion, and boasted of his youthful deeds in
his old age. These Irish poems were translated into English prose, and
subsequently into Scotch Gaelic verse, and the Gaelic published in 1807
is the result of this double process, and of numerous forgeries,
falsifications, and alterations, done and committed by James MacPherson
to discredit Ireland.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

To support this sweeping claim it is necessary to produce the Irish
poems in question, and prove that they are genuine, old, and Irish--the
work of Oisin and no one else; and then to point out the passages which
are translations, and shew that they are not paraphrases, or the
original compositions of MacPherson, or of some other ancient or modern
bard.

To upset this claim it is necessary to produce old Scotch versions of
the Gaelic poems claimed, and to shew that they were known in Scotland,
or published there, before they were published in Ireland.

I hold that all these current theories are erroneous and as the Irish is
the most modern, the best supported, and the most opposed to the common
English view, which is furthest from the truth, I will endeavour to shew
how far I agree with its supporters, and wherein they seem to me to err.
I would willingly add all that I can to the larger stock of knowledge
possessed by others, and I would gladly discover the truth if I could.

The arguments now used by the supporters of the Scotch and Irish
controversy will be found in the publications of the Ossianic Society of
Dublin, and in the *West of Scotland Magazine*, which works are well
worth the attention of all who care for Celtic literature, and admire
Celtic combativeness. Valuable information is given, but valuable space
is occupied by suicidal. attacks on Celts, their language and their
literature; old rusty taunts, which great men hurled at each other in
their rage nearly a century ago, are picked up by smaller men, and
thrown freely about still, though they have lost their point and fall
harmless. Irish writers attack writers on the Scotch side, who
retaliate, and the others retort, and so the cause of Celtic literature
is damaged

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

by both; for each is intent on injuring the other, on pulling down
rather than building up. The only writer who has attacked me is a
brother Celt, who uses a borrowed weapon which owed its sting to its
owner's fame, and says, that I am so intensely Scotch as to "love
Scotland better than truth," whereas I simply stated my opinion about
the controversy which generated the taunt. I am ready to admit that
Ossian or Oisin was an Irishman, when it is proved. I know that
traditional and manuscript poems attributed to him have been known in
Ireland for centuries. It is true that most of the old Gaelic
manuscripts are written in the so-called Irish character; but
nevertheless, I hold that the Irish scholar who writes the following
passages does not succeed in proving that MacPherson stole his materials
from Ireland:--

"It has also been shewn, on unquestionable authorities, that the Gael of
Caledonia were colonies from Ireland, and spoke and wrote in the
language of their mother country. From the continued intercourse carried
on between the two nations from the third to the sixteenth century, it
is evident that the same manners and customs, the same traditions,
legends, historical compositions, poems, songs, and music, were common
to both." \[Page 227, Vol. V., Transactions of the Ossianic Society.\]

In the first place, it is not clear that all the Gael in Caledonia
emigrated from Ireland. It seems probable that a Gaelic-speaking
population of Celtic tribes once pervaded the greater part of Europe and
the whole of Great Britain; and some of these surely travelled north
overland, if others crossed the sea from Ireland to Scotland. There are
plenty of cases in which whole tribes have passed from Scotland to
Ireland, for example, the MacLeans migrated from Islay. But be that as
it

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

may, if it be true, as it is asserted, that "many of the poems of Oisin,
the Irish bard, and other Fenian poets, are still preserved in Irish
manuscripts," some "as old as the eleventh and twelfth centuries;" if
"these poems made their way to Scotland at an. early period," and if
"there cannot be a stronger proof of their great antiquity than their
preservation in that country for so many centuries by oral tradition,
although with dialectic changes: "if all this be true, and. I neither
admit nor deny the statement here, it does not prove the writer's case,
though it supports mine.

He asserts that MacPherson stole Ossian from Irish originals; I hold
that he did not; and he shews that the very poems on which he founds his
case have been known for ages where MacPherson asserts that he found his
originals, and that they existed in a traditional vernacular Scotch
costume.

He proves, mayhap, that the muse who, for any thing I know, wears gilded
vellum in Ireland, is a barefooted lassie dressed in ordinary homespun
in Scotland; but who is to say which is nearest to the Poems of Oisin,
the language of the people, or that of cultivated scribes? Who is to
decide whether these were popular ballads or courtly poems at first?
MacPherson has enough to answer for without making him worse than he is;
and it seems unjust to accuse him of stealing things which he found at
home.

Ossian resembles those ancient Irish poems which I have seen, less than
it does the traditional ballads collected and printed in Scotland at the
end of last century, many of which were again collected from the people
last year.

But this Irish "Introduction to the poems of Ossian by MacPherson" will
astonish an English reader unacquainted

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

with the Celtic side of this curious controversy. The arguments fight
amongst themselves, and the authorities quoted contradict each other,
while the writer contends with friends, and allies himself with foes.
We, children of the Gael, walk "shoulder to shoulder," but we are apt to
dig our elbows into each other's ribs. Thus it is argued that--

"If Ossian wrote his poems in North Britain in the third century, he
must have been either an Irishman, or the descendant of an Irishman, who
had recently come from ancient Scotia (Ireland) to settle in that
country (Scotland); and his language must have been pure Irish,
undefiled, of that period, and not the corrupt patois ascribed to him by
MacPherson."

But at page 199 it is said that "the language of the poems, if properly
spelled, and read by an Irish scholar, would be intelligible to the most
illiterate peasant in Ireland."

But if Ossian's Gaelic is Scotch, modern, and a corrupt patois, and
comprehensible in Ireland, so is the Gaelic of the traditional poems
claimed, and Irish must be a corrupt patois also.

Further on, at page 227, the preservation in Scotland of certain poems
in this Gaelic patois, common to modern Irish and Scotch Gael, is quoted
to prove their Irish origin and their antiquity.

But if the preservation of poems in patois traditionally on one side of
the water be proof of their antiquity and origin on the other, ancient
Gaelic manuscripts, wherever found, should at least be common property,
and count for both sides, for there are no manuscripts in the Gaelic of
the third century, and one of the earliest known is attributed to
Columbkill, the founder of Iona.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

At page 179 Martin is quoted as mentioning the existence of Irish
manuscripts in the Western Islands in 1716; and at page, 190 it is
stated that the Bishop of Clonfert, in 1784, found Gaelic manuscript
poems there, on which MacPherson had founded some of his English; but it
is said--"It is now pretty certain that he (MacPherson) had no originals
and Dr. Johnson's authority is used to show that "the poems of Ossian
never existed in any other form than that in which we have seen them,"
that is, in English. These authorities disagree sadly. It is asserted,
p. 178, that

"Fragments of the compositions of the Irish bard Oisin were conveyed to
the Highlands of Scotland from time to time by the Irish Shanachies.
They were there committed to memory by story-tellers, and recited as
they had been in Ireland."

\[paragraph continues\] But a Shanachie means a teller of old tales and
traditions, and some must surely have gone to Eirinn from Scotland since
the supposed date of Ossian.

Martin, Johnson, the Bishop of Clonfert, and the writer who quotes them,
cannot all be right. It is argued that Irish and Scotch Gael and Gaelic
were identical in the third century, and are almost the same still;
Gaelic manuscripts found in Scotland are quoted and claimed for Ireland,
while it is said that the people bad all things in common, and are the
same. MacPherson, it is said, had *no* originals--and stole them from
Ireland. Johnson says there was nothing but English; Martin that there
were old Irish MSS.; the Bishop that there were, and that they contained
poems which were the foundations of the English: but if MacPherson had
access to "Shanachies" in the Western Islands, and there found old
manuscripts which contained poems

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

which he used, then he had originals; and the Doctor and the essayist
who quotes him are in error. If he had none of these things the Doctor
is right; but the essayist errs again, for in that case the English
Ossian was the original composition, and Ireland has no claim at all,
unless she will accept of MacPherson, who certainly was an original,
whether he was a poet or not.

So, whether MacPherson mistranslated Irish originals, or invented the
English of Ossian's poems, the charge of theft is unjust, for a Scotch
Celt had a right to use common Celtic property found in Scotland, and an
author has a right to use his own ideas.

If the story told in Drummond's Ancient Irish Minstrelsy, page 11, be
true, MacPherson could not have used ancient Irish MSS. if he had found
them in Scotland. He was shewn some in the Bodleian Library, and was
forced to acknowledge that he could neither read nor translate them. If
so, he must have worked from Scotch traditions, or manuscripts more
easily read, or from his own head.

Again, the essayist, having made out that ancient and modern "Irish" and
"Earse" were and are the same, at page 180, quotes Johnson--"There are
not in the Gaelic language five hundred lines that can be proved to be
one hundred years old." He quotes the venerable Charles O'Connor of
Balingare, who, in 1775, said the same on the great Doctor's authority;
and Dr. Young, afterwards Bishop of Clonfert, who, in 1784, held that
"*Earse*" was not a written language till within a few years of the time
when he was in the Highlands.

But at page 219, an account is given of an ancient "*Irish*" vellum
manuscript, compiled in the twelfth

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

century, which "contained two poems by Oisin, who lived in the third,"
and it is added--

"We have no reason to doubt their genuineness as being originally the
compositions of Oisin, when we remember the many liberties of
modernizing the language usually taken by the scribes, through whom they
have been handed down to us. One of these poems by Oisin relates to the
battle of Gaura, and has appeared in one of the volumes of the Ossianic
Society."

If the poem meant be that on the "Battle of Gabhra," the first book of
Temora is founded upon the same incidents; and a traditional version, of
1860, is at page 304 of this volume, and that is almost the same as the
traditional version printed at Perth in 1786, and got in Scotland. So
the argument is all for MacPherson and against the authorities, for it
proves that Temora is founded on incidents which were made the subject
of Gaelic poems in the Twelfth century. A man cannot eat his cake and
have his cake; he cannot claim property as common, and deny the right of
a joint tenant; he cannot claim tradition, and withhold manuscripts;
assert, and in the same breath deny the identity of Scotch and Irish
Celts. Johnson, who knew neither Earse nor Irish, might err, but a
writer who knows both should not use his authority, point out, and then
adopt his error.

At page 190 it is said--"It is notorious that the poems of Ossian are
not mentioned in any Scotch history a hundred years old;" but at 186 is
a quotation from Bishop Carswell's Gaelic Prayer Book, printed in
Scotland in 1567, nearly three hundred years ago:--

"They (the Scotch Celts) for whom the book was printed, desire and
accustom themselves more to compose, maintain, and cultivate idle,
turbulent, lying, worldly stories concerning the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tuath Dedanans, the sons of Milesius, the
heroes, and concerning Fioun MacCumhaill and na Fhianaibh ."

This seems to dispose of a good deal of the argument; it proves that
Gaelic was not only written, but printed for Scotchmen to read at a very
early date, and that Scotch Gael then composed and delighted in
compositions relative to the same heroes who figure in Ossian, in
ancient Gaelic MSS., and in modern traditional poems, Scotch and Irish.
But Dean MacGregor's Gaelic MS. was written in 1530, in Scotland, and is
mentioned in books which are quoted by the essayist; so those who held
that Gaelic was an unwritten [language](errata.htm#0) till the
eighteenth century clearly erred; and he who knows the error should not
use their authority.

Again, it has been said that MacPherson had no originals, but at page
190 the Bishop of Clonfert is quoted to prove that he had. The bishop
made a tour of the Highlands in 1784 to collect ancient Gaelic poems,
and he there found several of the "Irish" poems on which, as he
surmised, MacPherson had founded some of his English. These were
contained in manuscripts which the bishop copied, and he points out how
these supposed originals had been altered by the translator. He says
(191)--

"Till the poems themselves be published, it will certainly be impossible
to distinguish the ancient from the modern, the real from the
fictitious, and therefore, however we may admire them as beautiful
compositions, we can never rely on their authenticity in any question of
history, antiquity, or criticism.

"When MacPherson professed to be merely a translator, he was not
justified to omit what appeared to him to be modern fabrications, and in
their stead to add passages of his own, as acknowledged by his
advocates; he should have neither added nor

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

mutilated his originals, but ought to have permitted the world to judge
in these cases for themselves."

Against such reasonable arguments there is nothing to be said, but the
Introduction to the Poems of Ossian aims at a great deal more. Its
argument seems to amount to this--

The Gael of Scotland were an Irish colony who crossed from Ireland to
Scotland before the third century, and placed about sixteen miles of sea
between themselves and the mother country; they have been in constant
communication with her ever since; they wrote Irish, and spoke Irish,
and still speak a corrupt dialect of that language. Scotch lowlanders
called it Earse, meaning thereby Irish; Celts call it Gaelic, and mean
the same. Scotland means the land of an Irish tribe, from whom Ireland
should be called Scotia; the Celts on both sides have gone on repeating
the same poems and legends for centuries; they have all things in
common, and are the same people; but the people on one side have no
claim to anything.

Irishmen took over the Scone stone, and founded the dynasty which has
been crowned upon it ever since. Ireland sent Columbkill to Iona, where
a series of Irish, English, Scandinavian, and Scotch kings and chiefs
were buried; and yet during all that long period of time, which includes
nearly the whole history of England, and a large portion of that of the
world--whilst the Norsemen, who possessed the islands of Scotland and a
large part of Ireland, and migrated thence to people Iceland, were
sailing about from Labrador to Constantinople, conquering Normandy and
England, and making themselves a mighty name, and whilst Irish
churchmen, some of whom reached Iceland

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

before the Norsemen, wandered over great part of Europe, and Iona was a
refuge for learning--the small strait between Ireland and Kintyre
allowed no reflux. Whatever is Celtic is Irish.

I hold that this is claiming too much, and that MacPherson was scarcely
more unjust when be threw discredit upon Irish antiquities. He made
himself and a particular class of Gaelic poetry famous; but what be
found was common property derelict--old Celtic poetry, little noticed
before his day. When he claimed the whole, for Scotland, or altered what
he got, he was unfair; but to maintain the identity of a people from the
third century till now, and deny the right of Celts to Celtic
literature, is unreasonable.

Whatever may be said, the poems of Ossian are printed in the Scotch
dialect, in modern orthography, and Roman type, and some Gaelic poet
must have composed them before 1807; they are poems, not prose
translations from English prose; and their existence refutes this Irish
theory, whose supporters refute each other. For example, at page 193 is
the story of Colonel Shaw, secretary to the Marquess of Wellesley, who,
when a boy, went to London and astonished an old lady there, who read
him some of MacPherson's Ossian in English, by saying, "I have heard all
these stories before from my nurse in Ireland, who related them in the
original Irish."

Then, were they genuine, and composed by some Irishman? No, for at p.
195 is the other story that MacPherson, who was not Irish, acknowledged
to a private friend "the imposition of this English publication, with
the attempt of translating it into modern Earse."

Both these cannot be true, so it is best to believe

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

neither, and follow the advice of O'Flanagan, who is quoted, p. 194:--

Let us both, modern Scotch and Irish, pursue the more honourable end of
preserving the valuable remains of our own ancient literature, which was
of yore, and may again be our common property."

So say I also; but common property does not mean, "What's your's is
mine, what's mine's my own," as it seems to do in the "Introduction to
the poems of Ossian." Let Ireland take her fair share of all the fame
and all the blame that belongs to James MacPherson, for he was a Celt,
and let her sons cease to run down poems which have gained a world-wide
celebrity, because incidents recorded in old Irish manuscript poems can
be traced in them, and Celtic worthies and real Irish wars are clearly
referred to. Let Irish nurses, shanachies, and scribes, take their fair
share of credit for preserving what is old and genuine, but without
refusing the credit due to old Scotch Highlanders who have done the
same. Above all, let us search for the truth rather than seek out
faults, for Ossian is perhaps the most famous publication of modern
times, and it is Gaelic now, and was founded upon genuine old Gaelic
poems and traditions, all argument and authority notwithstanding.

While MacPherson's misdeeds meet their reward, let it be remembered that
others similarly tempted have fallen and failed. Chatterton had no
foundation for his attempt, and failed. MacPherson had a wide
foundation, and built upon it, and succeeded, and made a fortune and a
name; but honest Welsh Owen Jones, who followed them both, and whose
work is all solid foundation, dug out of old manuscripts, is still
almost unknown,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

though his patient industry commands the respect of all who know his
history. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

I hold, then, that an unprejudiced man who has read this Irish argument,
must attribute much of the groundwork of the poems of Ossian to unknown
bards far older than MacPherson, but not one line as it now stands to
Ossian, Oisein, or Oisin, if that bard lived in the third century. I
doubt if any one old popular traditional ballad now exists anywhere in
the same words in which it was originally composed, and I think that
this national squabble between England, Wales, Scotland, and Ireland,
Highlands and Lowlands, about poems which belong to the literature of
the whole United Kingdom, should now cease. It is as if a man should
fall out with himself, rap his own knuckles, tread on his own toes,
punch his own head, bite off his nose to spite his face, and use his
brains and his tongue to persuade and summon the rest of the world to
help him to extinguish himself.

The common opinion amongst Lowland Scots is expressed at the fourth page
of Irving's History of Scottish Poetry, a work of great research,
published in 1861; in which it is shewn that lowland authors, of all
ages, have had a fling at Celts and their literature.

"It is no longer pretended that any Gaelic poetry has been preserved in
early manuscripts, and indeed the period when Gaelic can be traced as a
written language is comparatively modem."

But the next sentence admits that ancient poems were preserved in the
Highlands of Scotland, and the notes flatly contradict the text. The
Bishop of Clonfert and

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the report of the Highland Society are quoted. The discoveries of the
one in 1784 are mentioned above, the other gives an account of many
ancient Gaelic manuscripts which contain poems, including Dean
MacGregor's, which is some forty years older than the MS. of George
Bannatyne, and contains 11,000 lines of poetry, at least as old as 1530.

Welsh writers who have taken part in the Ossianic, controversy have
generally taken a similar view.

And now, having said this much as to opinions and arguments from which I
differ, let me give the facts which I have been able to gather during
the last two years, and state my own opinions, so that others may judge
for themselves, and give their verdict.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:1](pt404.htm#fr_0) The names in the following
pages are variously spelt on principle according to the authority
referred to. Oisean is probably the correct modern orthography, but the
sound has been expressed in many ways and I prefer to preserve them.
Osin is perhaps the oldest form extant.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[22:1](pt404.htm#fr_1) Relies of Welsh Bards, by
E. Jones, 3 vols. 4to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Authorities](pt405)
