[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44007) 
[Next](sbe44009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6">11:1:6</span></span>

### SIXTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:1">11:1:6:1</span></span>1.
Verily, in the beginning this (universe) was water, nothing but a sea of
water. The waters desired, 'How can we be reproduced?' They toiled and
performed fervid devotions <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100), when
they were becoming heated, a golden egg was produced. The year, indeed,
was not then in existence: this golden egg floated about for as long as
the space of a year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:2">11:1:6:2</span></span>2. In a
year's time a man, this Pra*g*âpati, was produced therefrom; and hence a
woman, a cow, or a mare brings forth within the space of a year; for
Pra*g*âpati was born in a year. He broke open this golden egg. There was
then, indeed, no resting-place: only this golden egg, bearing him,
floated about for as long as the space of a year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:3">11:1:6:3</span></span>3. At
the end of a year he tried to speak. He said 'bhû*h*': this (word)
became this earth;--'bhuva*h*': this became this air;--'sva*h*': this
became yonder sky. Therefore a child tries to

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

speak at the end of a year, for at the end of a year Pra*g*âpati tried
to speak.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:4">11:1:6:4</span></span>4. When
he was first speaking Pra*g*âpati spoke (words) of one syllable and of
two syllables; whence a child, when first speaking, speaks (words) of
one syllable and of two syllables.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:5">11:1:6:5</span></span>5.
These (three words consist of), five syllables: he made them to be the
five seasons, and thus there are these five seasons. At the end of the
(first) year, Pra*g*âpati rose to stand on these worlds thus produced;
whence a child tries to stand up at the end of a year, for at the end of
a year Pra*g*âpati stood up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:6">11:1:6:6</span></span>6. He
was born with a life of a thousand years: even as one might see in the
distance the opposite shore, so did he behold the opposite shore (the
end) of his own life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:7">11:1:6:7</span></span>7.
Desirous of offspring, he went on singing praises and toiling. He laid
the power of reproduction into his own self. By (the breath of) his
mouth he created the gods: the gods were created on entering the sky;
and this is the godhead of the gods (deva) that they were created on
entering the sky (div). Having created them, there was, as it were,
daylight for him; and this also is the godhead of the gods that, after
creating them, there was, as it were, daylight (diva) for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:8">11:1:6:8</span></span>8. And
by the downward breathing he created the Asuras: they were created on
entering this earth. Having created them there was, as it were, darkness
for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:9">11:1:6:9</span></span>9. He
knew, 'Verily, I have created evil for myself since, after creating,
there has come to be, as it were, darkness for me.' Even then he smote

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

them with evil, and owing to this it was that they were overcome; whence
people say, 'Not true is that regarding (the fight between) the gods and
Asuras which is related partly in the tale and partly in the legend; for
it was even then that Pra*g*âpati smote them with evil, and it was owing
to this that they were overcome.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:10">11:1:6:10</span></span>10.
Therefore it is with reference to this that the *Ri*shi has said, 'Not
for a single day hast thou fought, nor hast thou any enemy, O Maghavan
illusion is what they say concerning thy battles; no foe hast thou
fought either to-day or aforetime.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:11">11:1:6:11</span></span>11.
Now what daylight, as it were, there was for him, on creating the gods,
of that he made the day; and what darkness, as it were, there was for
him, on creating the Asuras, of that he made the night: they are these
two, day and night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:12">11:1:6:12</span></span>12.
Pra*g*âpati bethought himself, 'Everything (sarva), indeed, I have
obtained by stealth (tsar) who have created these deities:' this became
the 'sarvatsara,' for 'sarvatsara,' doubtless, is the same as
'sa*m*vatsara (year).' And, verily, whosoever thus knows 'sa*m*vatsara'
to be the same as 'sarvatsara <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101),' is
not overcome by any evil which, by magic art, steals upon him (tsar);
and whosoever thus knows 'sa*m*vatsara' to be the same as 'sarvatsara,'
overcomes against whomsoever he practises magic art.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:13">11:1:6:13</span></span>13.
Pra*g*âpati bethought himself, 'Verily, I have created here a
counterpart of myself, to wit, the year;' whence they say, 'Pra*g*âpati
is the year;' for he created it to be a counterpart of himself:

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

inasmuch as 'sa*m*vatsara (year),' as well as 'Pra*g*âpati,' consists of
four syllables, thereby it (the year) is a counterpart of him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:14">11:1:6:14</span></span>14.
Now, these are the deities who were created out of Pra*g*âpati,--Agni,
Indra, Soma, and Paramesh*th*in Prâ*g*âpatya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:15">11:1:6:15</span></span>15.
They were born with a life of a thousand years: even as one would see in
the distance the opposite shore, so did they behold the opposite shore
of their own life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:16">11:1:6:16</span></span>16.
They went on singing praises and toiling. Then Paramesh*th*in, son of
Pra*g*âpati, saw that sacrifice, the New and Full-moon offerings, and
performed these offerings. Having performed them, he desired, 'Would I
were everything here!' He became the waters, for the waters are
everything here, inasmuch as they abide in the furthest place; for he
who digs here on earth finds indeed water; and, in truth, it is from
that furthest place, to wit, from yonder sky that he <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102) rains, whence the name Paramesh*th*in
(abiding in the furthest, highest place).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:17">11:1:6:17</span></span>17.
Paramesh*th*in spake unto his father Pra*g*âpati, 'I have discovered a
sacrifice which fulfils wishes: let me perform this for thee!'--'So be
it!' he said. He accordingly performed it <span
id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) for him. Having sacrificed, he
(Pra*g*âpati) desired, 'Would I were everything here!' He became the
breath (vital air), for breath is everything here: Pra*g*âpati is that
breath which blows here (the wind); and whatsoever knows that it is thus
he blows is his (Pra*g*âpati's) eyesight; and whatsoever is endowed

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

with breath is Pra*g*âpati. And, verily, whosoever thus knows that
eyesight of Pra*g*âpati becomes, as it were, manifest,

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:18">11:1:6:18</span></span>18.
Pra*g*âpati spake unto his son Indra, 'Let me perform for thee this
wish-fulfilling sacrifice which Paramesh*th*in has just performed for
me.'--'So be it!' he said. He accordingly performed it for him. Having
sacrificed, he (Indra) desired, 'Would that I were everything here!' He
became speech (vâ*k*), for speech is everything here; whence they say,
'Indra is Vâ*k*.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:19">11:1:6:19</span></span>19.
Indra spake unto his brothers Agni and Soma, 'Let me perform for you
this wish-fulfilling sacrifice which our father Pra*g*âpati has just
performed for me.'--'So be it!' they said. He accordingly performed it
for them. Having sacrificed, those two desired, 'Would that we were
everything here!' One of them became the eater of food, and the other
became food: Agni became the eater of food, and Soma food; and the eater
of food, and food, indeed, are everything here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:20">11:1:6:20</span></span>20.
These five deities, then, performed that wish-fulfilling sacrifice; and
for whatever wish they sacrificed, that wish of theirs was fulfilled;
and, verily, for whatever wish one performs that sacrifice, that wish of
his is fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:21">11:1:6:21</span></span>21.
When they had sacrificed they beheld (discovered) the eastern quarter,
and made it the eastern (front) quarter; as it now is that eastern
(front) quarter: therefore creatures here move in a forward direction,
for they (the gods) made that the front quarter. 'Let us improve
it <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) from here!'

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

they said, and made it to be strength, 'May we see <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) this strength!' they said; and it became
yonder sky <span id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106).

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:22">11:1:6:22</span></span>22.
They then beheld the southern quarter, and made it the southern quarter;
and it now is that southern (right, dakshi*n*â) quarter: whence the
dakshi*n*â (cows) stand to the south (of the altar) <span
id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_107), and are driven up from the south, for
they made that the southern one (dakshi*n*â). 'Let us improve it from
here!' they said, and made it to be space. 'May we see this space!' they
said; and it became this air, for that (air) is space; for even as the
resting-place here in this world is clearly the earth, so the
resting-place there in yonder world is clearly this air; and because,
whilst being here on earth, one does not see that space, therefore
people say, 'That space (or, yonder world) is invisible.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:23">11:1:6:23</span></span>23.
They then beheld the western quarter, and made it (to represent)
hope,--wherefore it is only when <span id="fr_108"></span>[4](#fn_108),
after going forwards (to the east), one

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

obtains (his object) that he goes (back) to that (western) quarter; for
they (the gods) made that (quarter to represent) hope. 'Let us improve
it from here!' they said, and made it to be prosperity (or distinction).
'May we see this prosperity!' they said; and it became this earth, for
this (earth) is indeed (the source of) prosperity; whence he who obtains
most therefrom becomes the most prosperous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:24">11:1:6:24</span></span>24.
They then beheld the northern quarter, and made it the waters. 'Let us
improve it from here!' they said, and made it (to represent) the law,
for the waters are the law: hence whenever the waters come (down) to
this (terrestrial) world everything here comes to be in accordance with
the law; but whenever there is drought, then the stronger seizes upon
the weaker, for the waters are the law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:25">11:1:6:25</span></span>25.
These then are eleven deities <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109),--there are five fore-offerings, two
butter-portions, the Svish*t*ak*ri*t, and three after-offerings:--

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:26">11:1:6:26</span></span>26.
These are eleven offerings,--it was, indeed, by these offerings that the
gods gained these worlds, and these quarters; and in like manner does
this (Sacrificer), by these offerings, gain these worlds, and these
quarters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:27">11:1:6:27</span></span>27.
And the four Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as are the four intermediate quarters; and,
indeed, it was by the four Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as that the gods gained the
intermediate quarters; and by means of them this (Sacrificer) now gains
the intermediate quarters.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:28">11:1:6:28</span></span>28.
And as to the I*d*â,--thereby the gods gained food; and in like manner
does this (Sacrificer) thereby gain food. This, then, is the
completeness of the New and Full-moon sacrifices as regards the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:29">11:1:6:29</span></span>29.
Now as to the body:--there are in man these five breathings, not
including the eyes; they are the five fore-offerings, and the two
butter-portions are the eyes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:30">11:1:6:30</span></span>30.
The Svish*t*ak*ri*t is the same as this downward breathing; and because
he offers that (oblation), as it were, apart from the other
oblations <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110), therefore all the
breathings recoil from that breathing; and because for the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t he cuts portions from all the sacrificial dishes,
therefore everything that enters these (channels of the other)
breathings meets in (the channel of) that breathing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:31">11:1:6:31</span></span>31.
The three after-offerings are the three male organs <span
id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111); and that which is the chief
after-offering is, as it were, the chief organ. 'He should offer it
without drawing breath <span id="fr_112"></span>[3](#fn_112),' they say,
'for thus it becomes unfailing for him.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:32">11:1:6:32</span></span>32.
He may, however, draw breath once, for that (organ) has one joint; but
if it were jointless, it

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

either would only stand erect, or it would hang down; whilst now it both
becomes erect and hangs down: he may therefore draw breath once.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:33">11:1:6:33</span></span>33.
The four Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as are the two arms (or front legs) and the two
thighs--the support, in fact <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113); and
the I*d*â is this vital air (in the centre); and inasmuch as that
(I*d*â) is not offered in the fire, but remains as unburnt, therefore
this (central) vital air is undivided.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:34">11:1:6:34</span></span>34.
The invitatory and offering-formulas are the bone, and the
offering-material is the flesh. The invitatory and offering-formulas are
(in) measured metre, whence the bones of a fat and a lean person are
alike: but inasmuch as he takes now more, now less, offering-material,
therefore the flesh of a fat person is fat, and the flesh of a lean
person is lean. This sacrifice he performs to any deity he pleases and
for whom there is a sacrificial dish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="11:1:6:35">11:1:6:35</span></span>35.
Now, these are offerings from which nothing must be omitted; but were
one to omit anything of them, it would be as if he were to break off
some limb, or knock out some (channel of the) vital air. Other
oblations, indeed, are either added to or omitted.

36\. These, then, are sixteen offerings, for man consists of sixteen
parts, and the sacrifice is the Man (Purusha): hence there are sixteen
offerings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[12:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_100) Or, they toiled and
became heated (with fervid devotion). For this cosmological legend, see
J. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, iv, p. 24.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[14:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_101) Or, whosoever knows
the 'all-stealing' power of the year.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[15:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_102) Viz. Par*g*anya,
the rain-god, according to Sâya*n*a.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[15:2](sbe44008.htm#fr_103) Viz. officiating as
his, Pra*g*âpati's, priest.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[16:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_104) Or, perhaps, raise
it, bring it nearer. The St. Petersb. Dict. <span id="page_17">p.
17</span> takes 'upa-kurute' here in the sense of 'to cherish (hegen,
pflegen);' Professor Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, p. 238, doubtfully in
that of 'worship, revere (verehren);'--enâm prâ*k*î*m* di*s*am upetya
ita*h* para*m* kurvîmahi kâryântara*m* s*rig*emahi, Sây.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[17:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_105) The particle
'khalu' might perhaps be rendered by 'really,' or--'could we but see
it,' 'were it but (really) visible to us.'

<span id="fn_106"></span>[17:2](sbe44008.htm#fr_106) That is, it was
moved up to them.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[17:3](sbe44008.htm#fr_107) See IV, 3, 4, 14.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[17:4](sbe44008.htm#fr_108) It seems hardly
possible to take 'yad--tena' here in the usual causal sense,--it is only
because (or, inasmuch as) one obtains (one's object) after going
forwards that one goes to the western quarter. What is implied, in any
case, is that first some hope, or desire, is conceived the
accomplishment of which is only brought about by a forward movement, or
by action; and that success in attaining the object sought for is
followed by the conception of fresh desires. For the same force of
'yad--tena' (when--then) see [XI, 3, 3,
4](sbe44020.htm#11:3:3:4)-[6](sbe44020.htm#11:3:3:6).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[18:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_109) Viz. the four
quarters and the objects enumerated as represented by them.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[19:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_110) See I, 7, 3, 21,
where I would now translate, He offers apart (sideways), as it were,
from the other oblations,--the oblation to Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t being
poured out on the north side of the fire, so as not to come in contact
with the chief oblations and the butter-portions.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[19:2](sbe44008.htm#fr_111) That is, including
the testicles.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[19:3](sbe44008.htm#fr_112) Or, rather,--at the
third after-offering (viz. that to Agni Svish*t*ak*ri*t),--the Hot*ri*
should (according to some authorities) pronounce the offering-formula,
which is considerably longer than those of the two other offerings,
without making a pause; whilst others allow him to pause once.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[20:1](sbe44008.htm#fr_113) Bâhudvayam
ûrudvaya*m* *k*atvâra*h* patnîsa*m*yâ*g*â*h*, atas te
pratish*th*âtmakâ*h*; ayam eva madhyama*h* prâ*n*a i*d*â, Sây.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI, 1, 7. Seventh Brâhma*n*a](sbe44009)
