[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44057) 
[Next](sbe44059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1">12:4:1</span></span>

### FOURTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### EXPIATORY CEREMONIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE AGNIHOTRA.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:1">12:4:1:1</span></span>1.
Verily, they who perform an Agnihotra enter upon a long sacrificial
session:--the Agnihotra, indeed, is a sacrificial session ensuring death
in old age <span id="fr_506"></span>[1](#fn_506), for people are set
free from it either by old age or by death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:2">12:4:1:2</span></span>2.
Here, now, they say, 'If either a team (yukta) were to drive through, or
people were to walk to and fro, between the two fires of such a one
performing an Agnihotra, and (being thus) a performer of a long session,
what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' He may,
indeed, perform an expiation, and also offer an ish*t*i; but let him
disregard it, for he who lays down his two fires doubtless spreads
himself all over these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:3">12:4:1:3</span></span>3. His
Gârhapatya is this (terrestrial) world, his Anvâhâryapa*k*ana (or
southern fire) the air-world, and his Âhavanîya yonder (heavenly) world;
and freely, indeed, birds, both combined (yukta) and single, pass to and
fro in these worlds; and even if a whole crowd were to pass through
between his fires, let him know that no harm and no hurt will come to
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:4">12:4:1:4</span></span>4.
'But, surely, there are three unclean animals, a vicious boar, a vicious
ram <span id="fr_507"></span>[2](#fn_507) and a dog: if any

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

one of these runs about between (the fires) whilst the
Agnihotra-offering is put on (the fire), what rite and what expiation
would there be in that case?' Well, some poke out the ashes from the
Gârhapatya, and keep throwing it down from the Âhavanîya, with this
verse (*Ri*g-veda I, 22, 17), 'Here Vish*n*u strode <span
id="fr_508"></span>[1](#fn_508),' saying, 'Vish*n*u is the sacrifice: by
the sacrifice we thus continue the sacrifice, and with ashes we bestrew
its track.' But let him not do it in this way, for if, in that case, any
one were to say of him, 'Surely this (priest) has scattered about <span
id="fr_509"></span>[2](#fn_509) the Sacrificer's ashes: he will soon
scatter his last ashes, the chief's household will be wailing,' then
that would indeed be likely to come to pass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:5">12:4:1:5</span></span>5. Let
him proceed in this way:--Having taken either a bowl of water, or a pot
of water, let him go on pouring it out from in front of the Gârhapatya
up to the Âhavanîya, with this verse, 'Here Vish*n*u strode;' for
Vish*n*u being the sacrifice, he thus continues the sacrifice by the
sacrifice; and whatever is injured or unpropitiated in the sacrifice,
for all that the water is the means of propitiation, and by water, as a
means of propitiation, he thus propitiates it. Such, then, is the rite
performed in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:6">12:4:1:6</span></span>6. They
also say, 'If any one's Agnihotra (milk) were to be spilled whilst he
gets it milked, what rite and what expiation would there be in that

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

case?' Having touched (the spilled milk) with the (formula of) expiation
for spilling, and poured water on it, let him make offering with what
(milk) is left. But if the bowl were to be turned upside down, or if it
were to break, let him touch (the spilled milk) with the (formula of)
expiation, and, having poured water on it, let him make offering with
what other (milk) he can procure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:7">12:4:1:7</span></span>7. Now,
in case there should be a spilling (of milk), let him touch it with, 'It
hath been shed, it hath been implanted: birth hath ensued;' for when
(seed) is shed then it is implanted; and when it is implanted then birth
takes place. And, indeed, this (earth) is a womb, and the milk is seed:
he thus implants seed in that womb, and forthwith that shed seed of him
who so knows this is born forth. And, indeed, it rains from yonder sky,
and herbs and trees are produced here on earth; and seed flows from man
and animals, and therefrom everything here is generated: let him
therefore know that abundant production has accrued unto him, that he
will be multiplied in offspring and cattle, and that he will become more
prosperous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:8">12:4:1:8</span></span>8. And
in case there should be a breaking (of the vessel), let him pour out a
bowlful or potful of water, and, indeed, whatever is injured or
unpropitiated in the sacrifice, for all that water is the means of
propitiation, and by water, as a means of propitiation, he thus
propitiates it. He does so with these utterances, 'Bhûr bhuva*h* svar
(earth, air, sky);' for these utterances are all-expiatory <span
id="fr_510"></span>[1](#fn_510):

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

he thus makes expiation with all this (universe). Having collected the
potsherds let him throw them to where the ashes have been removed. This,
then, is the rite performed in that case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:9">12:4:1:9</span></span>9. They
also say, 'If any one's Agnihotra-cow were to lie down whilst being
milked, what rite and what expiation would there be in that case?' Well,
some make her get up by means of the Ya*g*us-formula, 'The divine Aditi
hath risen,'--Aditi, doubtless, is this (earth):--thus saying, 'It is
this (earth) we thus raise for him;'--'life hath she bestowed upon the
lord of sacrifice,' thereby saying,--'It is life we thus bestow upon
this (Sacrificer);'--'giving unto Indra his share,' thereby saying, 'It
is Indra's power we thus bestow upon him;'--'and unto Mitra and
Varu*n*a,'--Mitra and Varu*n*a, doubtless, are the in-breathing and the
up-breathing:--thus saying, 'It is the in and up-breathing we thus
bestow upon him.' At this offering he should present that (cow) to a
Brâhma*n*a whom he does not intend to visit <span
id="fr_511"></span>[1](#fn_511)--(thus they enjoin) saying, 'It was,
indeed, after perceiving the Sacrificer's suffering and evil that she
lay down: we thus fasten the suffering and evil on this
(Brâhma*n*a) <span id="fr_512"></span>[2](#fn_512).'

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:10">12:4:1:10</span></span>10.
But on this point Yâ*gñ*avalkya said, 'Surely, the cow turns from them
as from faithless ones, and they smite the offering with trouble; let
him rather do it in this way:--Let him make her get up by pushing her
with a staff.' And, indeed, as in the case of one driving about here,
Ibis horse, or his mule, or his ox yoked (to the car) might become
weary, and, by its being urged forward by means of a staff or a goad, he
completes the way he wishes to accomplish, even so does he, by that
(cow) being urged forward by means of a staff or a goad, attain that
heavenly world which he desires to reach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:11">12:4:1:11</span></span>11.
And Âru*n*i, indeed, said, 'His Agnihotra-cow, assuredly, is the sky,
her calf is that blowing (wind), and the Agnihotra-vessel is this
(earth). And, verily, the Agnihotra-cow of him who knows this does not
perish, for how could yonder (sky) perish? Neither does the calf of the
Agnihotra-cow of him who knows this perish, for how could that (wind)
perish? Nor does the Agnihotra-vessel of him who knows this break to
pieces, for how could this (earth) break to pieces? The rain-cloud
showers down blessings: let him therefore think, "Unable to bear my
glory and greatness, she (the Agnihotra-cow) has lain down: I shall
become more glorious." Let him keep her for himself <span
id="fr_513"></span>[1](#fn_513): he thereby takes glory (prosperity) to
himself,'--thus spake Âru*n*i. This, then, is the rite performed in that
case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:4:1:12">12:4:1:12</span></span>12.
They also say, 'If any one's Agnihotra-cow were to low whilst he gets it
milked, what rite and

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

what expiation would there be in that case?' Let him pluck a bunch of
grass and make her eat thereof. This is the rite performed in that case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_506"></span>[178:1](sbe44058.htm#fr_506) Literally, as
would seem, 'old-age-deathed' (garâmarva), or perhaps, 'having old age
for its extreme limit (maryâ).' The author apparently takes it in the
former sense, though interpreting the compound in his own way.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[178:2](sbe44058.htm#fr_507) According to
Molesworth's Dictionary, 'e*d*akâ' and 'me*mdh*â,' in Marâ*th*î, mean
both 'ram,' but the former 'is ordinarily understood <span
id="page_179">p. 179</span> of a ram trained to fight, or suffered to
live long enough to obtain horns.'

<span id="fn_508"></span>[179:1](sbe44058.htm#fr_508) See III, 5, 3, 13.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[179:2](sbe44058.htm#fr_509) ? Or, thrown in
(viz. into the pot, or urn). According to Â*s*v. G*ri*hy. IV, 5, 1
seqq., it is, however, only the bones which are collected and placed in
the urn.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[180:1](sbe44058.htm#fr_510) Or,
perhaps,--these (great) utterances are used with the
'Sarvaprâya*sk*ittam' (libation for expiating every mistake). According
to Kâty. XXV, I, 10, five verses are also to be muttered after <span
id="page_181">p. 181</span> the libation with the three 'great words.'
As regards the libation itself, it is to be made in the Gârhapatya with
'bhû*h*,' in the Dakshi*n*âgni with 'bhuva*h*,' and in the Âhavanîya
with 'Sva*h*'; cf. ib. sûtra 13.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[181:1](sbe44058.htm#fr_511) The commentators
on Kâty. XXV, 1, 15 are divided in interpretation of this passage;
whilst some take it in the above (and most natural) sense, others take
it to mean--to the Brâhma*n*a who will not be coming again to his (the
Sacrificer's) house.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[181:2](sbe44058.htm#fr_512) The reason why a
Brâhman is thus chosen to serve as scapegoat doubtless is that his holy
nature is supposed to be proof against such evil influences (cf. Weber,
Ind. Stud. X, p. 64).

<span id="fn_513"></span>[182:1](sbe44058.htm#fr_513) That is, he is not
to give the cow to a Brâhma*n*a; cf. Katy. XXV, 1, 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII, 4, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe44059)
