[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe44072) 
[Next](sbe44074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801458/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part V (SBE44)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1900\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3">12:9:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:1">12:9:3:1</span></span>1. Now,
Dush*t*arîtu Pau*m*sâyana had been expelled from the kingdom which had
come down to him through ten generations; and the S*riñg*ayas also
expelled Revottaras Pâ*t*ava Kâkra Sthapati.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:2">12:9:3:2</span></span>2. He
said to Dush*t*arîtu Pau*m*sâyana, 'I will perform the Sautrâma*n*î for
thee, and will comer upon thee that dominion over the S*riñg*ayas.'--'So
be it!' he replied. So he performed it for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:3">12:9:3:3</span></span>3. Now
Balhika Prâtipîya, the Kauravya king, heard (people say) this--'There is
that Dush*t*arîtu Pau*m*sâyana who has been expelled from the kingdom
which has come down to him through ten generations: for him that *K*âkra
Sthapati wants to perform the Sautrâma*n*î and to confer upon him the
dominion over the S*riñg*ayas.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:4">12:9:3:4</span></span>4. He
said, 'I will just tell him that if he wants to confer dominion upon
him, he will indeed exclude him from dominion.' He came to him at that
particular time (of the sacrifice) when the cups (of milk and liquor)
are drawn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:5">12:9:3:5</span></span>5. He
said, 'Sthapati *K*âkra, they say, Surâ-liquor must not be offered in
the Âhavanîya-fire, nor anywhere else than in the Âhavanîya: if thou
offerest

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Surâ-liquor in the
Âhavanîya thou wilt cause social confusion and a repetition in the
sacrifice <span id="fr_673"></span>[1](#fn_669), and if anywhere else
than in the Âhavanîya thou wilt exclude him (the king) from dominion,
and wilt neither place him in dominion, nor confer dominion upon him.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:6">12:9:3:6</span></span>6. He
replied, 'I shall not offer Surâ-liquor in the Âhavanîya nor anywhere
else than in the Âhavanîya thus I shall not cause social confusion nor a
repetition in the sacrifice, and shall not exclude him from dominion; I
shall place him in dominion, and shall confer dominion upon him.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:7">12:9:3:7</span></span>7. He
said, 'How, then, wilt thou do it?' He then told him this:--At first,
indeed, that Ya*gñ*a (sacrifice, m.), the Sautrâma*n*î, was with the
Asuras. He went forth towards the gods. He came to the waters, and the
waters welcomed him, whence people welcome a better man when he comes to
them. They said to him, 'We pray thee, come, reverend sir!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:8">12:9:3:8</span></span>8. He
said, 'Nay, I am afraid: lead ye me forward!'--'Whereof art thou afraid,
reverend sir?' they asked.--'Of the Asuras,' he said.--'Be it, then!'
they said. The waters led him forward, whence he who is the protector
leads forward him who is afraid; and inasmuch as the waters led him
forward (pra-*n*î) therefore the waters (themselves) are 'led forward:'
this is the reason why they are (called) Pra*n*îtâ*h* <span
id="fr_674"></span>[2](#fn_670); and, verily, firmly established is he
who thus knows that nature of the Pra*n*îtâ*h*.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:9">12:9:3:9</span></span>9. Now,
the fore-offerings had been performed, but the fire had not been carried
round <span id="fr_675"></span>[1](#fn_671) (the oblations), when the
Asuras came after him. By means of the circumambient fire the gods shut
out their hostile rivals, the Asuras, from Ya*gñ*a (the sacrifice); and
in like manner does this one now, by means of the circumambient fire,
shut out his spiteful enemy from the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:10">12:9:3:10</span></span>10.
Verily, that Âhavanîya is the womb (seat) of the gods, and those two
fires <span id="fr_676"></span>[2](#fn_672) on either side thereof are
its immortal wings: thus, when they perform the sacrifice on the
Âhavanîya, they indeed perform the sacrifice for the gods in the womb of
the gods; and, verily, the continued sacrifice inclines to him, and the
sacrifice is not cut off from him who thus knows this, or for whom,
knowing this, this sacrificial rite is performed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:11">12:9:3:11</span></span>11.
On the northern fire they offer (libations from) the cups of milk, on
the northern fire they cook the sacrificial animals: the sacrificial
animals, whilst being mortal, he thus places in the immortal womb, and
them that are mortal he causes to be born (again) from out of the
immortal womb; and, verily, whosoever thus knows this, or he for whom,
knowing this, this sacrificial rite is performed, wards off the
recurring death of his cattle, and the sacrifice is not cut off from
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:12">12:9:3:12</span></span>12.
On the southern fire they offer (libations from) the cups of
Surâ-liquor, near the southern fire

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

they purify (the liquor) with triple strainers: the Fathers, whilst
being mortal, he thus places in the immortal womb, and them that are
mortal he causes to be born (again) from out of the immortal womb; and,
verily, whosoever thus knows this, or he for whom, knowing this, this
sacrificial rite is performed, wards off the recurring death of the
Fathers, and the sacrifice is not cut off from him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:13">12:9:3:13</span></span>13.
Now, inasmuch as these two fires are taken from the Âhavanîya, they are
Âhavanîyas (offering-fires), and inasmuch as they do not again reach the
Âhavanîya, they are not Âhavanîyas: he thereby obtains both kinds of
oblations, that -which is (offered) on the Âhavanîya, and that which is
(offered) on what is not an Âhavanîya--both what is offered and what is
not offered.

He (Balhika Prâtipîya) then went home, and said, 'It is not so (as we
had thought): that kingdom of the S*riñg*ayas now belongs to
Dush*t*arîtu;--in. such and such a manner has that *K*âkra Sthapati this
day performed at the sacrifice.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:14">12:9:3:14</span></span>14.
On the northern fire they thus perform the rites of the sacrificial
animals, the (animal) cakes, and *th*e cups of milk, and what other
(rite) there is: it is the gods, in the world of the gods, he thereby
gratifies, and, thus gratified, they gratify him, and he wins the world
of the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:15">12:9:3:15</span></span>15.
In the southern fire they offer (libations from) the cups of
Surâ-liquor, near the southern fire they purify (the liquor) with triple
strainers: it is the Fathers, in the world of the Fathers, he thereby
gratifies, and, thus gratified, they gratify him, and he wins the world
of the Fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="12:9:3:16">12:9:3:16</span></span>16.
Verily, the Sautrâma*n*î is the same as the

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

body, whence it is (clearly) defined, for defined is the body. And
(Indra) Vayodhas (the bestower of strength), is the world, whence he is
undefined <span id="fr_677"></span>[1](#fn_673), for undefined is the
world. The Sautrâma*n*î is the body (trunk), and the Aindra (victim) and
(the one to) Vayodhas <span id="fr_678"></span>[2](#fn_674) are the two
arms; and inasmuch as there are those two animal offerings on both sides
(of the Sautrâma*n*î), therefore these two arms are on both sides of the
body. And as the sacrificial animal, so the sacrificial stake; and
inasmuch as there are those two stakes on both sides of the stake of the
Sautrâma*n*î (bull of Indra), therefore these two arms are on both sides
of the body <span id="fr_679"></span>[3](#fn_675).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_669"></span>[270:1](sbe44073.htm#fr_673) Probably inasmuch
as the cups of milk are offered there previously.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[270:2](sbe44073.htm#fr_674) For this jarful of
consecrated water, used at the sacrifice, see part i, pp. 9, note; 265.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[271:1](sbe44073.htm#fr_675) On the ceremony
called 'paryagnikara*n*am,' see part i, p. 145, note; part ii, p. 187,
note.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[271:2](sbe44073.htm#fr_676) See [p.
225](sbe44067.htm#page_225), note [1](sbe44067.htm#fn_584). Properly
speaking, the two fires of the two special Vedis are in front (or,
rather, north-east and south-east) of the Âhavanîya.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[273:1](sbe44073.htm#fr_677) The term
'vayodhas' is said to be undefined inasmuch as, though it is meant to
apply to Indra, the name of this god is not mentioned along with it in
the formulas.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[273:2](sbe44073.htm#fr_678) During the
performance of the Sautrâma*n*î proper (on the fourth day) three victims
are immolated, a he-goat to the A*s*vins, a ram to Sarasvatî, and
another bull to Indra. But at the beginning of the whole
performance--either before or after the first pap to Aditi (cf. [XII, 9,
2, 11](sbe44072.htm#12:9:2:11))--a bull is sacrificed to Indra; and at
the end--after the second pap to Aditi and the dish of curds to Mitra
and Varu*n*a (see p. 252, note 4 (This note does not
exist.--JBH))--another animal sacrifice is performed to Indra Vayodhas.
The sacrificial stakes for the first and last of the three victims
sacred to Indra, are to be placed north and south of that of Indra's
second bull, the one sacrificed as part of the Sautrâma*n*î proper.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[273:3](sbe44073.htm#fr_679) The object of
identifying different ceremonial acts and features with certain parts of
the body is of course to impress upon the mind of the Sacrificer the
efficacy of the Sautrâma*n*î in securing to him a new, complete body for
the other life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII, 1, 1. First Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe44074)
