[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut08)  [Next](hut10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### VI.

### Litcūwdiñ yadeLtse. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)--At Sand-place They Lived.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

Three sisters were living at Sand-place. Their father was very old. Once
it turned very cold and snowed. "The old man might sleep in the
wood-room near the fire," suggested one of the daughters. "No, he might
be cold there," said another. "Well then," the other said, "we will keep
a fire burning for him in the wood-room." To this the others agreed so
they left him there and went to bed. When one of the girls went out in
the morning she was surprised to see blood by the door. Running in again
she called to the others, "There is nothing but blood outside." Jumping
up they looked in the wood-room. He was not there. Then they began to
cry. "Don't cry," said the oldest, "dress yourselves."

Telling the youngest to stay at home the two older sisters followed the
tracks to the river. On the other side of the river they found tracks
where someone had gone toward the east. After a time they heard someone
pounding. "Come, hurry up, he is close by," said one of them. As they
were going along they saw smoke down by the creek. They found a fire
burning there at the butt of a spruce. It was plain

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

from the marks on the snow that he had arranged his load there. Blood
was scattered all about. When they had warmed themselves the oldest
sister said, "Come, let us go on. He is close by." After a time they saw
smoke again. "Don't be afraid" said the oldest sister. They went on
cautiously until they came to the house. They heard someone talking
inside. There must be two of them; don't get excited," said the oldest
sister. A dog skin blanket was hanging there over the door. "I am going
to look in," she said. An old man was saying, "Why do you sit there, why
don't you cook a piece?" "There must be two of them," she thought. When
she went through the outer door and looked in, she saw an old man
sitting alone before the fire by which a human thigh was cooking. Then
she ran in. The old man jumped up and tried to run out but she struck
him in the throat with a knife. The other sister came in and they fought
with him, and killed him. They found there the bones of their father
whom he had already eaten. They took away all the red obsidians,
fisher-skin quivers, otter-skins, dentalia and everything else of value
they found. One of the sisters carried the remains of their father. They
came back along the way they had gone, crossing the river to their home.
The next morning they prepared their father's remains and buried them.
The sisters continued to live there as before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[169:1](hut09.htm#fr_31) Told at Hupa, June
1901, by Oscar Brown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Xonsadiñ Kûntcūwiltcwil.--Xonsadiñ Young Man](hut10)
