[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut19)  [Next](hut21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

# XVII.

### The Passing of the Kīxûnai. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

At Leldiñ he grew with one son. He painted the wrists of the boy and
then buried him. The Kīxûnai who used to live there were afraid of what
he had done and fled. They went away. A white bug made medicine. The
Kīxûnai met at TakimiLdiñ outside of the large sweat-house. One of them
said, "We must not go away at once. We must leave that which the Indians
will do."

Then they made a canoe and went up the river. They landed above Medildiñ
on the opposite side of the river. They painted themselves and danced
there one night. The next morning they danced again. Then they came down
landing at Tsemita. They danced there all that night. The next day when
they had danced they dressed themselves and got into the canoe. They
headed the boat across the river and up stream. Then as they floated
down, they danced. When they had floated down opposite Miskût they
approached the shore. Ten times they came up to the shore and went back
again. Finally landing, they danced there that evening and again in the
morning. Then they went down to Tselûndiñ where they danced. After
dancing the next morning, they went up the river and landed close to
Tceïndīqotdiñ, where they danced that evening. The next morning they
went down to MeïsdiLdiñ. There they danced one afternoon and one
morning. Next they moved up to Bald Hill. They danced there that day.
The next day they danced there again. Then it was they lined up facing
the northwest. "This is the dance we will see," they said.

And then they went away. Some of them went across the ocean toward the
north. Others went across the ocean to the south. Still others went to
the southwest. Some went to the

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

world above us. And others went to the northeast. "This is the way
Indians will do when they come. We did it for them," said the Kīxûnai.

One of Kīxûnai had not gone with the rest. "Let me see where the Kīxûnai
are who were living about here," he thought. He was surprised to see
only a dog among the willows. He came up to him and the dog said, "They
have gone away and left you." "Yes," said the Kīxûnai. "I am going to
talk just this once," said the dog, "I am going to live around here and
watch the Indians. When the Indians come, I will not talk again. If I
should talk the Indians would be no more. They would die." Then the dog
ran up the hill and drove a deer out of the brush into the river. The
Kīxûnai threw the deer out of the water and then he said, "I shall not
be seen again either."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[215:1](hut20.htm#fr_50) Told at Hupa, December
1902, by Senaxon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. The Spoiling of the World](hut21)
