[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut20)  [Next](hut22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

# XVIII.

### The Spoiling of the World. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) and the two women
who were to be his wives grew at Leldiñ. When the time was near for
Indians to appear upon the earth the smoke which was a token of their
coming was seen. It hung along on the mountains as far down as those
which stand in the middle of the world. Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan got lonesome
and started to travel over the world. He went down this way through Hupa
toward the north. When he had travelled nearly around the world he saw a
handsome woman living there. He liked her. Finishing his journey he came
back where he used to live and saw his wives and his child.

Then he went away to the world's edge toward the south where the
handsome woman lived and became the father of a son. When the child was
large enough to stand, his father told him to lie down back of the fire.
Someone called out, "A Southfork man is running along from the north on
the other side. He has the cover of the fire-pit on his head." <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53) "Quick, take the boat over to him,"
Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan said. He was surprised to hear the stranger asking,
"Where is the one who lives here?" "Why, what do you want?" they asked
him. "Your child they have put in the ground still alive," said the
messenger. Immediately Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan put his hand under himself and
got up. He went into the house and girded himself.

Picking up his child he put him in his sack and crossed over. He ran
down Southfork creek to Leldiñ. There was no one to be seen walking
about. He saw his former wives sitting facing each other. He went to
that something (grave) which had been made. He dug out the child and put
it by the fire. It ran into the grave again. He dug in out ten times and
it ran back each time. It quite spoiled the world. People would never
have died but for that. "Well, let it be that way," thought
Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

Then he started down toward Hupa after the Kīxûnai who had fled. He went
on foot following those who had gone in a boat. When he came down the
hill to Djictañadiñ he found they had been gone some time. He ran on to
the mouth of the Trinity. He was surprised to see from there that they
were passing Kaikisdēke. He passed Natinōxoi Tcewilindiñ and at last ran
down to the mouth of the Klamath. There he saw the Kīxûnai dancing in a
boat which was headed across the ocean. One of them said, "Way over
there is walking the one who spoiled the world." "Wait," called
Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan, "only take my child." One of them took the child from
him, and having painted it, put it into the boat. Then they went away.

Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan tumbled about on the sand in his grief and cried. Then
Smaller hawk, Cotton-tail, Jack-rabbit, Ground-squirrel, Pine-martin,
Coyote, Wildcat, Wolf, Fox, Hawk, and Crow came to him. "Come dance, my
grandchildren," said Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan. And they danced. Then someone
said to the others, "Way over there, that one who spoiled the world is
leaving a dance." "Ye-he!" he exclaimed, "I wish something would happen
to him." Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan went back. "I wish I had left dances for them
at other places," he thought. He came back and arranged another dance.
Some bears danced this time. He came back across Redwood creek and
thought to go south. There he left two more dances. Then someone who was
living way to the north said, "I wish something would happen to that one
who did wrong." Finally he told TsōyōLtel to go and lie in the trail to
tempt Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) She did as
she was told. Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan was surprised to see her lying there but
he walked on by her toward the south. Yielding to temptation he returned
to her. Immediately she caught him against her breast and went with him
through the water back across the ocean. As often as he became
[unconscious](errata.htm#6) she held his head above water for him to
recover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[220:1](hut21.htm#fr_51) Told by McCann at Hupa,
December 1901.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[224:1](hut21.htm#fr_52) Yīmankyūwiñxoiyan,
"Old-man-across" is said to be the same as Yīmantūwiñyai.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[224:2](hut21.htm#fr_53) It is customary for
those who have touched a corpse to cover their heads lest the world be
spoiled.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[225:1](hut21.htm#fr_54) Compare [p.
132](hut04.htm#page_132) and footnote. In the former case the immortal
beings wished to prevent the Indians' renewing their youth and becoming
immortal. In this case they wished to prevent their securing the dances
which are the Peculiar possessions of the immortals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. Formula of the Jumping Dance](hut22)
