[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut27)  [Next](hut29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

# XXV.

### Origin of the KinaLdûñ Dance. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62)

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

Yīmantūwiñyai and his daughter lived by themselves. He used to fish for
eels and when he had caught some he would say to his daughter, "Cook
plenty of them and carry them to your uncle." When she had gone with
them Yīmantūwiñyai would take the house on his head and, by following a
trail higher up on the mountain, run ahead and place it where the
imaginary uncle was supposed to live. He would also bring the
sweathouse. He used to eat the eels himself. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) After his daughter had started back he
would take the house on his head again and run back, so that on her
arrival she found it as she had left it.

He used to tell her not to look up as she was carrying the eels, but one
time she did look up and saw someone carrying a house along the upper
trail. When she got to the place, the house was there. Yīmantūwiñyai ate
the eels as usual. When his daughter had gone home he took up the house
and carried it back. When the girl got home she said, "I looked up and
saw someone was carrying a house along the upper trail toward the
south." "It was wrong for you to look," said Yīmantūwiñyai, "sit down
facing the back of the house. I am going to shake a stick." He made a
kinaLdûñ dance stick. He saw no one, but after night-fall he heard the
sound of many feet. The invisible people ran in until the house was
crowded. They danced till morning. The next night more people came and
the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

night after still more. After the tenth night they ceased dancing.
Standing outside Yīmantūwiñyai threw incense root into the fire praying,
"May you live to be men."

When it was dawn he did not see them. He went into the house. When they
ceased dancing the noise stopped in the house. He sang again and
stopped. The invisible ones sang in the smoke-hole. A cloud enveloped
her and took her away. They took the girl with them to the world above.
They are dancing there now. The girl became a perpetual kinaLdûñ. They
always dance there; only when the Hupa dance here they stop up there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[237:1](hut28.htm#fr_62) Told at Hupa, June
1901, by Robinson Shoemaker, a man about 30 years of age. His father and
mother, both quite old, are unusually well supplied with myths and
formulas.

KinaLdûñ means a girl who is undergoing her first menstruation. Life and
Culture of the Hupa, p. 53.

A story similar to this is told of Coyote.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[239:1](hut28.htm#fr_63) For other devices
employed by Yīmantūwiñyai to gratify his greed, compare pp.
[129](hut04.htm#page_129), [130](hut04.htm#page_130).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. Directions and Formula for the Brush Dance](hut29)
