[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut30)  [Next](hut32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

# XXVIII.

### Formula for the Salmon Medicine. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

Three immortals came into being at Xaslindiñ. They began to talk about
what would be when Indians should come into existence. One of them went
away up the Klamath river. The other two remained waiting for him. "I
don't think we better wait for him," said one of those who remained. He
went down to the river. "Let a stone cup become," he thought. And it
became. And then in it a salmon became. "Already it has happened," he
thought. "It is finished," he told his brother.

He made the salmon swim down the Trinity and Klamath rivers to the
ocean. Then he caused it to swim along the beach southward. Having gone
entirely around the world, he came back with it from the north to the
mouth of the Klamath again. He made it swim back up the Klamath and
Trinity rivers to the starting place.

There he questioned it. "What will you do if a person with a bad body
eats you?" he asked. The salmon swam around in one place. He asked it
about every kind person. After each question it swam for a short time in
one place. Finally he asked, "What will you do if a woman who has
miscarriage eats you?" It died at once. It rose to the surface of the
water. Then he took it and placed it on the shore where it lay for five
days.

After the five days, in the morning, the two brothers went down the
river and crossed over to the place where it lay. The one who was
officiating cut the salmon and cooked it there. He put incense root in
the fire with which he cooked it. When the salmon was done they ate it.
When they were through they shot at a mark and had all kinds of games.
"This is the way Indians will do when they come," he thought.

Then he said, "All of you go away from me." Having built a fire he put
incense root in it and prayed. "Indians when they come into
[existence](errata.htm#7), will eat this happily," he thought. "They
will have plenty of food when the time comes for it to grow. The birds
will not bother it. It will be good wherever it grows. Whatever anyone
says will happen."

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

The two brothers went up the river and crossed over to their home. They
found the one who had gone up the Klamath was not yet come back. Then
they tore down the house and the sweat-house and went back to Xaiyame.
There, one on each side of the river, they took their stations to watch
their salmon.

When the one who had gone on the journey, came back to Weitchpec and
started up the Trinity he was surprised to see salmon scales scattered
about. When he got back where they had lived he found they had departed.
He tracked them to Xaiyame where he found them. "Well," he said, "I will
take my place at the Tseyekyau*w*h*w*ikût. There I will keep watch. The
salmon which a bad person would eat, if it were caught, I will take out
as it passes up. Indians when they come into existence will make mention
of us. 'At that place he did that,' they will say."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[265:1](hut31.htm#fr_69) Told at Hupa, June
1901, by Robinson Shoemaker in whose family the celebration of this
medicine is an hereditary trust. The priest performs the ceremony in
ceremonial dress, with beads around his neck, and his face painted red.
He carries a fisher-skin quiver. When he has caught the salmon at the
fishing-place in Sugar Bowl valley he cuts it with a stone knife,
holding his breath while he does it. He then builds a fire and cooks the
fish. He places incense root, *Leptotaenia Californica*, in the fire
saying, "Kyōle, may there be many salmon." For ten days following he
does not drink water. One meal a day is eaten at the exact time the sun
reaches a fixed mark in the sweat-house. The meal is eaten from new
baskets and is cooked by a woman chosen for the duty. She is dressed in
a beaded dress. A male attendant remains in the sweat-house to attend to
the fire. The priest keeps the incense root in his hand at night that he
may not have dreams. He is careful not to say evil things for what he
says or dreams will happen. He prays every night for many salmon. He
does not eat salmon during the remainder of the year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. Formula of the Rain-rock Medicine](hut32)
