[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut31)  [Next](hut33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

# XXVIII.

### Formula of the Rain-rock Medicine. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70)

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

Ten brothers lived at Yastsime. One of them went away toward the south.
At the end of the world to the south he stayed. After a time he felt the
wind blow on him. Frost rolled out of the ground in big chunks. "What is
it going to do?" he thought. He took some incense root with him and
started back south. When he came back to Yastsime he looked around. He
saw nothing. He went on and came down opposite Mīme. He was surprised to
see some one sitting there. He turned about and went again to Yastsime.
"What is the matter here?" he asked. From some place he heard a voice
say, "Indians will become." Here at the world's end toward the north
sickness flew up. "Those weather spirits who used to be here have gone
away," he told him.

Then that one, who used to stay at the world's end at the south, started
down the river. When he came to the creek above Eslick's he built a
fire. Then he went on down, coming out on the river bank south of
Xaslindiñ. He saw someone sitting

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

above Xaslindiñ. He built a fire there where a pepper wood tree was
standing. He went down to Sugar Bowl. The wind was so cold he could
hardly face it. He saw someone had taken up his abode each side of the
fishing place at Sugar Bowl.

Then crossing the river he went below Nilinkindiñ. He turned back to
Nilinkindiñ and built a fire there. "Here he will do this who knows my
body," he thought. Then he put incense root into the fire. He started
down river climbing the mountain. When he got up the hill he was warm.
"This way it will be," he thought, "when Indians come to be." He built a
fire on top of the hill and then went down to the northern side.

On the north side of the creek opposite Djictañadiñ above the trail he
built a fire. Then he commenced to talk. "Here they will build a fire,"
he thought. "I first of all will know Indians' hearts when they pass."

Then he started back. "I will lean my foot up this way. The wind will
blow up from the ground. They will call me first at the end of the world
toward the south where I used to live. Then they will call me here at
the end of the world toward the north. There he stays who first knew
it." "This way they will do if frost comes," he thought. "Just this way
it will happen to the one who talks about my body. In the fashion of the
Indian world he will let go from his hand the incense. The wind, just a
little warm, will blow gently, if they put this incense in the fire. The
fog will stay in the middle of the mountain." This way he established
it.

"West it will draw back, north too it will draw back, east too it will
draw back, south it will draw back. There will be sunshine. It will be
good weather in the world. It will be wet. The frost that used to be
will melt. It will settle down. I brought it down."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[270:1](hut32.htm#fr_70) Told at Hupa, December
1901, by Emma Lewis, whose father belonged to the southern division of
the Hupa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. Formula of Medicine for Pregnant Women (Deer's
Medicine.)](hut33)
