[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut51)  [Next](hut53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

# XLIX.

### Formula of Medicine for Spoiled Stomach. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

Yīdetūwiñyai lived here at the end of the world toward the south. He
travelled over the world all day long. He took care of the people who
died. He ate whatever he found along the river, even the dead things.

One time when he came to the middle of the world he was rather weak.
When he awoke in the morning he felt just as badly, but nevertheless he
went over the world as usual. The next night he was just as tired and in
the morning he was even worse. That which he had been in the habit of
eating along the river had caught him. The next day he was still worse.
"I won't just die here in a day without doing something," he thought. He
started from the south to come down this way. When he was at the middle
of the world, he went to sleep. After he awoke he went on a little
farther until he came to Natcilyeū*w*diñ, where he died. Only the bones
of his arms and legs were clinging to his trunk.

After a time he came to life again. When he opened his eyes he thought,
"What is that white thing standing up there? I must have done this for
the Indians who are to come into existence," he thought. Then he crawled
on his elbows to the white thing he saw standing up. It was dark when he
had succeeded in crawling there. Here to the northeast from us
dentalia's pond of water lies, in which a yellow pine stands. When he
had reached the butt of the tree, he scraped off some of the inner bark
and made an infusion of it. He drank some of it and rubbed his arms and
legs with it.

At night the dentalia eat that yellow pine. They eat as far as the
branches of the top. The abalones jump up under the top. These are the
ones that eat it up. When morning comes it stands in the water just a
naked white tree. He thought, "A second time, I am going, to spend the
night here, I am going to get well." When the sun went down in the west
the wind blew on the tree and it grew again. Across to the south the
sound of the wind went along. Across to the north, too, the

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

wind went along. Then he thought, "I wish a man may not grow up poor who
knows my medicine and does as I did, even if his stomach is spoiled."

Then he went home here to the end of the world toward the south from
which he had started out. "I can't stay here," he thought. "It is
getting near to [the](errata.htm#8) time when Indians are to come into
existence. Anyway they will talk about me. There will not be many who
will know my formula." Then he tied up his house and his sweat-house. He
poked a stick under them. "Here across to the north I am going," he
thought. Here across to the north he came to have ten dances.

There he became lost. He was afraid of the bad Indians who were going to
come into existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[346:1](hut52.htm#fr_101) Told at Hupa,
December 1901, by Emma Dusky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L. Formula of Medicine for Purification of One Who has Buried the
Dead](hut53)
