[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut52)  [Next](hut54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

# L.

### Formula of Medicine for Purification of One Who has Buried the Dead. <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102)

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha.

"I come to you who have made your abode at Xaslindiñ. They say you are
the smartest of all. I am suffering from that evil (death) which has
been left to us of the Indian world. The people are afraid of me. I do
not have a fire where the others have their fire. I have a fire by
myself. And besides, what the rest eat I do not eat. Furthermore, I do
not look at the world. So much my body frightens them. I am telling you
that you may be sorry for me."

"Yes, I saw his spirit running down on the other side of the river with
the string tied around his head. No, I am not the one. I will tell you
who is the smartest, but that which makes the Indian happy (tobacco) you
must leave for me. Hurry and go on to him who sits across the river from
Djictañadiñ."

(The priest calls up in a similar manner the spirits who live at the
following places: Djictañadiñ, Tseyekexōxū*w*, Xonsadiñ.

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

At each of these places he receives a reply similar to the one given
above. At Xonsadiñ he is told to go to the one who dwells below on the
other side of the river. There he calls as at the former places. The
reply is as follows:)

"Yes, I think so. I saw a spirit running down on the other side toward
the north, his head tied around with a string. I heard the wailing of
the Indians, then I ran away carrying with me my medicine, by means of
which my heart is made sorrowful for them. I will give it to you. Bathe
yourself with it. You will live among the people, but go on; hurry up.
Give me that which makes the Indian feel happy. Go to him who dwells at
Xōtūwaikût."

(In the same manner the priest calls upon the spirits who dwell at
Xōtūwaikût, Tcwitcnaniñadiñ, Tsenōñadiñ tanēdjit, KyūweLediñ, KiLwēdiñ.
Calling at the latter place he receives the usual reply and is told to
go on to the old woman who dwells at TseLtcediñ:)

Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha.

"I come to you old woman who dwell at TseLtcediñ" (The address is
finished as in former cases.)

"Yes, I will tell you who is the smartest. Call to the one who dwells
north, just below Mûkanadūwûladiñ.

Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha.

"No, he does not hear me."

Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha.

"Now he hears me. I have come to you, Mûkanadūwûladiñ. I am in the
sorrowful condition which has been left for those of the Indian world. I
have been in vain to all these nine places. At each they have told me
that someone else is the smartest. The Indians are afraid of me. I do
not build my fire where the Indians build theirs. I have a fire by
myself. That which the Indians eat I do not eat. Besides I do not look
at the world. This much they fear me. I am telling you that you may feel
sorry for me."

"Yes, I hear you. Do not be too much frightened. You will travel again
in the Indian world. Your body will be renewed. I will loan you this my
medicine. You shall hunt and the deer will lie still for you. It shall
be the same in regard to dentalia.

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Now look at the shrub which stands outside by my
house. As soon as it is dark, it grows up tall. To-morrow in the morning
it will be eaten down. The deer will come to feed upon it. Look at this
too which stands back of the fire. The dentalia eat it down, but it
grows up again at the break of day. It comes to my mind that it will be
that way with you. I will loan it to you. There will not be many who
will know the formula by means of which my mind is made to feel sorry
for them. Take this medicine of mine with you. Leave for me that which
makes the Indian feel happy.

(Said by the priest to the recipient as the medicine is applied to him).
Now your body will be renewed. You will be as the other Indians are.
Already your body is renewed. It will be less heavy upon you. Everything
will be easy for you to get. You will possess dentalia."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[351:1](hut53.htm#fr_102) Told at Hupa, June
1901, by Mary Marshall, who learned it from an aged relative and
employed it after his death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LI. Formula of Medicine for the Purification of Those Who Have
Buried the Dead](hut54)
