[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

# LI.

### Formula of Medicine for the Purification of Those Who Have Buried the Dead. <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103)

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

They say Yīmantūwiñyai lived with two wives at Leldiñ. One of his wives
was a Yurok, the other was from Redwood creek. Each of them bore a
child, one of them a boy and the other a girl. Yīmantūwiñyai went away
from them to the southern end of the world. There also he saw two women
and there he begot a boy.

In the morning about this time of day <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) while he was sitting outside he heard
someone calling. A man came running toward him, wearing a woodpecker
head-dress, saying, "I have just came to tell you that they have put
your children into the ground alive. The children came up again, saying,
'It is not a good place there; it is dark; we can't live there.' All of
the Kīxûnai who used to live there have gone away. They have taken all
of the dance stuff with them, but your children remain in the ground
alive."

Yīmantūwiñyai, taking only his child which he put in his sack, started
back to the south. When he came to Leldiñ he was surprised to see the
two women lying at the grave with their heads toward each other. "You
have done badly," he said to them. "Ten times the people should renew
their youth." "No," they said. "Five times at least," said
Yīmantūwiñyai. "Once, anyway," he said to them. "No," said the two
women. "We are not the only ones who will do this. Every one shall do
this way." Yīmantūwiñyai, tramping them into the ground, said to them,
"Never again will you see the games and dances of the Kīxûnai. You shall
travel a marshy way." The wife who had come from Yurok territory became
a white bug; the one from Redwood creek became a black bug.

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

Then Yīmantūwiñyai started down the river toward the north. He spent the
night at Tcexōltcwediñ, where he found the Kīxûnai were also camped. He
himself camped at one side some distance from them. The next morning
when the sun had come up from the east to about here (gesture) the
Kīxûnai started out in boats. Yīmantūwiñyai went along the bank on foot.
Just above Natinōxoi Tcewilindiñ the Kīxûnai commenced the boat dance.
The dancing sent waves to both shores of the river. They landed on the
shore at TseLtcediñ. Then Yīmantūwiñyai called to them, "Only take the
boy into the boat for me that he may become a Kīxûnai." No one looked at
him. Nevertheless Yīmantūwiñyai threw the boy across the water to the
canoe, in the middle of which he fell. When the boat had started the boy
looked back at his father, who was astonished to see that the boy's
eyebrows had become woodpecker color and that he had already become a
Kīxûnai.

Then they all went away across the ocean to the north, but Yīmantūwiñyai
remained at TseLtcediñ. There he built a sweathouse, and in the morning
went out to get sweat-house wood. He wished to make medicine for himself
because his children had been placed in the ground. He gathered young
black oaks for sweat-house wood and carried them home, but they would
not burn. Then he went out and climbed the mountain north of the mouth
of the Klamath to the resting place, where he sat down. He saw nothing
there which he could use for medicine. He went on toward the north until
he came to Yīmantūwiñyai where he stayed for awhile.

When he looked about he discovered that he was sitting in a sweat-house.
From near the door where he was sitting he saw the post back of the fire
was white from top to bottom. When he went out he saw a house was also
standing there from which he took a wood basket and a cane for a digging
stick. Then he went after medicine toward the northeast to
Danaxûnūwineh*w*il where the ridges run across. The fisher only runs
along there in whose arm-pits cling the dentalia.

"There will not be many," Yīmantūwiñyai said, "who will say of me, 'I
hear that he did this way;' he must be very clever who shall say of me,
'I hear he did that.'" Then he made

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

sweat-house wood of buck brush, to which the dentalia ever come to suck.
The brush is dry after the dentalia have been sucking it, but when the
sun comes up here (gesture) it blossoms again, then after it has
blossomed and the sun has gone down the dentalia come again.
Yīmantūwiñyai went back to the sweat-house, where he sweat himself with
the wood which he had brought. When it had finished burning, the
dentalia could be heard sucking at the pile of sweepings.

Then he went across the ocean to the north where a lake lies, along the
shore of which grows a medicine. The red eels live in that lake. Across
the ocean toward the west lives the small fork-tailed fish. Across the
ocean to the south a rock stands having folds encircling it; the
medicine, yerba buena, grows in these folds. South from there is
ILbaladiñ where the white deer come out to feed. The eyebrows of these
deer are woodpecker color. Five ridges for the white deer and five for
the vine maple run out into the water. Ten ridges in all run into the
water. There grows the vine maple, always in blossom, for which the
dentalia-maker is continually seeking.

From there Yīmantūwiñyai went still farther south to TceiLtelnaladiñ.
The Kīxûnai's salmon live there, and also those which come to this
world. The Kīxûnai's salmon are woodpecker color all over, and their
scales are as broad as a winnowing basket. They are knee-deep along the
shore where the wind blows them out from the water. The medicine grew
there with which his body when he rubbed it became perfect.

It was the mountain above the mouth of the Klamath to which the birds
brought back the dances. Yīmantūwiñyai thought, "Well, let them do
that." Then he brought to Hupa all the different dances. Had he not done
this there would not be dances in this world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[360:1](hut54.htm#fr_103) Told at Hupa, June
1901, by Lillie Hostler, wife of Henry Hostler. She is a native of
TakimiLdiñ, about 55 years of age. Compare, Life and Culture of the
Hupa, pp. 71 and 72.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[366:1](hut54.htm#fr_104) About 9 A.M.
