[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](hut49)  [Next](hut51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

# XLVII.

### Formula of Medicine for Acquiring Wealth. <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97)

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

A young man grew at Xotūwaikût. <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98)
There was no water. Gulchs came out there, but there was no water in
them nor anywhere in the world. He always went to get sweat-house wood
in the morning. He always cried. When the sun went down he finished the
sweat-bath. He always thought, "Maybe at night after I have gone in, the
water flows." He used to go over the world. In a day he used to make the
trip around, but he never found water. Ever since he had been living, he
had cried as he made the sweat-house wood.

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

"After a time he thought, "I wish I could see water." "To-morrow," he
thought, "I am going to look for water." He started in the morning. "In
the upper world only I have never looked," he thought. He went to the
world above and looked about. He was surprised to see four ridges there.
He saw someone sitting on one of the ridges. He went towards him. When
he came near him, he saw he had no eyes. A basket-bowl was sitting by
him. The Xotūwaikût young man put his hand into it and water dripped off
when he drew it out. He saw the basket was half full. He took it up and
drank, leaving a little.

"Hei," said the one who had his eyes shut, "you think you have
succeeded." "You did it for the Indians," he said, "who are going to
come into existence. Smoke hangs over the world. You think it was water
you drank. It was your own tears which you have been crying ever since
you have been living. I held this basket under to catch them one by one
as they fell. After a time there will be many Indians who will be poor.
Even if they sweat themselves, if they drink water they will be poor. If
they do that they will drink their tears." "Come, go home," he said.
While he was looking he saw him put his hand into the water in the
basket and sprinkle it everywhere. "To-morrow there will be water." That
is why there is water wherever it dropped.

The next day when he went out at dawn he heard water running. "This is
the way it will be," he said. "Even if he makes much sweat-house wood
for himself, if he drinks water he will not become a rich man. I am the
one they will say of, 'That is the one who did this way.' That one even
if he does drink water will get something for himself. He will become
rich." This one was living when there was no water but his tears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[336:1](hut50.htm#fr_97) Told at Hupa, December
1901, by Henry Hostler.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[338:1](hut50.htm#fr_98) Pactaw, opposite
Weitchpec.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVIII. Formula of Medicine for Green Vomit](hut51)
