[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nbr02)  [Next](nbr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NOTES ON THE REVELATION.

# Part Three

The nineteenth verse of chapter xi. should, I think, though a connecting
one, more properly begin the twelfth

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

chapter. Looking at the chapters as continuous, it is the direct
manifest agency of heaven upon earth, the connection of the two. It is
not now a seal opened by one who alone could do it, but the temple
opened; "and there was seen," &c.

The first thing seen was the secure and unchanging witness of God's
covenant mercy, on which all his thoughts and purposes were bent. After
the sounding of the seventh trumpet, all the relationships of things,
and their real principles and sources, came out. If we look at the
eighteenth verse of chapter xi. as closing generally the whole history
as it does, then the twelfth takes back the Church to see, abstractedly,
the principles and sources of all the events, which, in fact, will be
brought out in the last three years and a half manifestly.

These two points of view are in no way inconsistent; for the last crisis
is a bringing to a head and manifestation these very sources of action
in manifested agents and direct collision of action. On the contrary,
none can understand the crisis that takes place, unless they enter into
the sources, principles, and moving of (in some sense, we may say,
interested) agents, which are here unveiled from the beginning; and, on
the other hand, the workings of these agents and principles, and their
results, are never clearly seen until brought thus out at the end in
their very results, though faith may discern their principles long
before. Thus the Lord says in the first displays of His power, "I beheld
Satan, like lightning, fall from heaven;" and his great apostle reveals
to us, that the mystery of iniquity did already work: only there was a
letter, till he should be taken out of the way; and then the wicked
should be revealed, whom the Lord would destroy. The unveiling, then, of
these hidden, but real agents, was just the unfolding of what would be
brought into crisis: and the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

crisis is the actual manifestation of these agents in their true
character, no longer under the cover of mysteries. Hence the Church, as
admitted into heaven, knows them, and explains their manifestations when
they shew them-selves on earth.

This forms no part, properly, of the seals, then; but comes in, under
the Church's proper knowledge, by the Holy Ghost, and His revelations of
what passes in heaven; not in mere communion, as taking of the things of
Christ, but in revelation, as showing what is connected with the
manifestation of His glory. It is all based (come what will) on the
immutability of the ark of the covenant. It was the ark of the covenant
of God and the temple of God. The Church rests on this sure
faithfulness, but its direct application is to Israel, though in
peculiarly symbolical images.

This being fixed, the ways and purposes of Providence were then
discovered. There appeared a great <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)
sign in heaven. As the woman was for the man, so was the man by the
woman; and here things were revealed, not in ultimate results (that is
the knowledge of the Church always, in communion, whether as to Christ's
glory as man or God all in all), but as administered by the way, and
therefore, the man is by the woman here. So in other types of scripture.
Hence, though we see her in the glory of God's mind at first, we soon
see her in various circum stances and exigencies, to which she was, in
His wisdom. and righteousness, subjected, even to fleeing away upon
earth. Here, however, she is seen in her title of glory in heaven. The
purpose of God is in the Church; but Christ is its great subject; and,
in fact, she may be subject to ten thousand vicissitudes here below, for
the world is not

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

regulated otherwise than secretly. God may glorify her, but the woman's
place is to be subject; she does not carry on the war, and cannot in
this character. I have already mentioned, elsewhere, <span
id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) that the activity of faith, or its
failure, is, in typical scripture, spoken of as the man--the condition
of the Church or the people of God (for in this sense the Church is the
name for a condition of the people of God, this last being used in a
general sense) is represented by the woman. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55)

We have to look here, at the people of God, as in His own mind or
purpose, and therefore glorified in that; yet, as we have said, entering
into the detail of consequences, it is in the ministration of it, for it
is the man by the woman, not the woman for the man. Both have their
importance and their place. Hence the woman is seen clothed with supreme
authority--the splendour of supreme authority, and all derivative light
under her feet; <span id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_56) and derivative rule,
all lesser authority, her crown, and that in perfectness. Thus it is
viewed abstractedly, but in purpose with all God attaches to it, and
about which all God's mediate purposes or plans roll--His own glory and
Jesus ever the end. And thus shall it close, for it is true that ἀρχὴ
τῆς θεωρίας τέλος τῆς πράξεως.

For we are not speaking here of God's returning into His own infinitude,
which can hardly be called purpose: <span
id="fr_57"></span>[4](#fn_57)--Christ,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

then, the glory of the Son, was the purpose; but here, it being the
ministration of it, the woman is presented and the man hidden.

If we descend to detail, we shall find the most marked contrast: the
lowest state of the lowest condition of God's people--that under the law
broken, and they ruled over by the last form of Gentile evil, as to its
personality--that in which Christ was born; and so rightly. For by sin
the glory was all reversed; all was reversed: the throne, which ought to
be the instrument of God's justice, the instrument of slaying His Son,
at the instance and instigation (intercession, if you please) of His
priests, the leaders of His own people! What a picture of things! If we
go to the time when the Jews will actually say, "To us a child is born,"
we shall see it is after the very last and manifested form of the last
evil--the evil of the last days. The Church knows it now, for it has the
mind of Christ; and we are renewed in knowledge after the image of Him
that created us.

That which we find here, then, is the purpose of God concerning the
condition of His people producing One who was to rule all nations; and,
instead of His doing so, He is caught up to God and His throne; and the
condition of His people is left exposed to trial, misery, and pursuit of
the great enemy, who had been waiting and seeking to devour the
man-child when born. It, however, entirely escapes from him. Such is the
general picture, which throws much light on the whole of the detail. If
we apply it to Christ in person, then its accomplishment as to heavenly
purpose, whatever He might suffer here, is

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

sufficiently manifest (the condition of God's people being suffering and
trial thereon). If we apply it to the saints, who overcome here (as we
read) as He did, and to whom it is given to rule as He has received of
His Father, then we find that, though the object of the enemy was to
devour them too, they are caught up out of his way to Him who was above
his power; and the trial and persecution fall on those who are left
here--upon the woman. The details of this are entered into in what
follows in the chapter. After the child is caught up, the woman flees.
In this there are no details. It is a description of the position of the
parties, and that with all possible clearness, as with divine power and
precision. There is one of these of which, as yet, I have said but
little--this other wonder (who was opposed to the woman, this purpose of
God in His people), the great red dragon. His object was to destroy the
man-child to be brought forth by the woman whose pains of labour he
perceived, and hating all that belonged to it; for the purpose of God
and its fruits were his destruction. He failed in this, and turned his
anger against that which, in a certain sense, was left in his power.

That the dragon is the hostile power of the adversary there is no
question. We have the authority of this book (chap. xx.), I suppose no
one will deny, for saying that.

If we look to the source of power, it is there; only without the
description which gives it its formal character. It was here seen in
heaven (i. e., not in its providential forms and consequences by the
will of man, but as the Lord viewed it in its will or power of evil), as
a whole, identified in form with the beast (to which it gave its power,
it is true), yet not the beast, and not identified with it in the
specialities of its latter-day character; but the whole generic form of
Satan's power, in that which took, at a given period, that character. It
had the seven heads

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

and ten horns, but the heads were crowned, not the horns. It was Satan,
acting in the form of power, in which he countervailed--not simply the
earthly purpose <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) amongst the Jews, or
in which he attacks Jerusalem by an earthly instrument, but--the whole
heavenly <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) purposes and the glory of
God by Christ in His people. Hence, too, the death of Christ, which
closed His Jewish and earthly career, is not noticed here; because the
Jewish associations of Christ are not the question when things are seen
in the heavens. The child was caught up to God and His throne.

The tail of the serpent, his moral influence--evil moral
influence--characterized by the form of the Roman empire, the effects of
his power, and the dominant religion of the state, put down a third of
the rulers of God, and made them subordinate.

The effect on the woman was her retreat into solitude and sorrow, for so
she is seen in actual effect.

Here are the parties: the seventh verse begins a new topic. There was
war in heaven. This was not the war of the Church, but of' divine power;
not yet, however, in the manifested energy of the Son of man, the mighty
man,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the man-child; but in the more secret agencies of His will, angelic
ministrations. The Church's war, carried on in the flesh, is carried on
in suffering, and waged against the accuser by the blood of the Lamb and
by the word of their testimony; he being always there, and yet they
above him, as an overcome enemy in Christ, in their flesh wretched, and
as to that in its will, when it worked, under his power. But here it was
power to expel in service to God--the question settled whether the
dragon and his angels, should continue there: "And the dragon fought and
his angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in
heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the
Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into
the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) Then came the celebration; and in the
thirteenth verse, what followed on the earth: and the change in all this
is very important. The Church's estimate of it in heaven, too, is--"the
accuser of our brethren;" <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61) the
consequence of whose accusations and power was trial <span
id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62) and persecution upon earth. They loved not
their lives unto death, overcoming him by the blood of the Lamb and the
word of their testimony--a time then of saints' suffering, and Satan
having his place in heaven, in authority and power, and deceiving the
whole world. From this the victory of Michael and his angels cast him
down.

I apply here the same principle of providential working

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

and manifestation in crisis as throughout; and I mention it here only
particularly, and its application to the fall of idolatry, because by
modern interpreters, entirely rejected. It is not his influence in the
Church that is here in question, <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) but
his power in the rule of the world, however that might act on the
Church. The argument, then, that mischief might accrue to the Church by
the ceasing of Satan's open power in the world, because the Church
thereby sunk in the world, is nothing to the purpose: for my own part, I
admit it in the fullest manner possible, though I am sure all was wisely
ordered. But as the setting up the supreme power in Nebuchadnezzar, and
his speedy connection of it with enforced idolatry, was very important
in the divine government in the world, that power coming from God
(though Israel was, or might not he, in question in this last act), so
the entire relinquishment of idolatry by the governing power (for
whatever man does, God looks to the conduct of the governing power) was
a fact of great importance in the history of God's government of the
world. It was a setting aside Satan's direct throne in the world; for
the existence of power in the Gentiles is not Satan's direct throne (it
was transferred to them by God); it is its use and character in sinful
man that makes it Satan's. This may be merely by passions, or it may be
by the direct worship of Satan and his angels, or by open blasphemy
against God. The second of these is the open heavenly rule of Satan,
looked at in providence: and this went on in Gentile idolatry. He may
recover it secretly by what is called the Church: <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64) but the thing itself was never restored.
This appears to me a very plain and important distinction in the
exercise of Satan's power, which

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

we cannot pass by without leaving a blank in our knowledge of God's
mind, and consequently its train lost and the Church misled. Taking this
event in this point of view, it would connect itself with the
providential course of things which the Church understands in heaven,
though not yet outwardly manifested; and the consequent period would be
a period of years, the period being the period of her nourishing there,
not the date of her flight for this providential purpose. These things
are given generally in their characters, not dates, because it was a
course of progressively developed principles, although sometimes facts
may have given particular dates. As regards that which takes place
actually in the crisis, the facts are simple and plain. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)

There was war in heaven. Michael, the archangel, and his angels fought,
and the dragon; and the dragon was cast out of heaven; entirely and
*finally* out of that place of authority and power which he had held, as
ruling the world--"the rulers of the darkness of this world." As to who
Michael is, we have mention of this exalted name in Jude, as contending
with the devil; and in Daniel, as that great prince who stands up as the
ruler of providential power, in favour of the Jewish people, who are the
central object of providence in the arrangement of nations. I do not see
that it is revealed that it is Christ <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66) under a

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

mystical name, but it is certainly the direct superior agent of God's
providential purposes, and thus the immediate instrument of favour to
His people in that character. The notion of archangels is not sustained
in scripture. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) There are seven
angels, who stand in the presence of God, spoken of. But Satan was cast
out, finally out of heaven; and the announcement given that salvation,
strength, and the kingdom of our God and the power of His Christ was
come; and the reason--that the accuser of the brethren was cast down.
Satan, in his character of anti-priest, had been unceasing in his
accusations against the brethren; though, in the course of God's
dealings with the saints, during this time of trial, He had suffered
their being even put to death here below; yet they had overcome their
enemy there really as to all the questions which Satan could raise
before God. The accusations were of no avail, through the blood of the
Lamb. Satan could not over-throw their conscience; and by the word of
their testimony they maintained the truth and righteousness against him
as the father of lies. .So that while the great High Priest secured
their cause above, Satan as a liar and accuser, seeking to deceive, was
baffled and overcome; as a murderer, was submitted to, till Christ took
the power, and he was turned out. The manner in which accusations and
persecutions are connected, in principle, may be seen in the history of
the book of Job. Thereon the dwellers in heaven--for this was the ground
and place of the enmity and conflict (see Ephesians, chaps. i. ii. and
vi.)--are called on to rejoice, for this conflict is ended. Christ, as
the great High Priest, might have sustained them *in the* 

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

conflict with the accuser: but now the conflict <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) was ended. This is clearly what concerned
the Church, in this matter, as identified with Christ in His priestly
exaltation. Woe then comes upon the inhabiters of the earth and of the
sea; for the devil, not yet shut up, but cast from heaven, is come down
in great wrath, knowing he has but a short time. Here the second
paragraph of this chapter ends: the first at verse 8, where the parties
are stated, as we have seen, in the original idea and purpose; here the
actings of heaven's deliverance from his power and the consequence of
this to the Church, which properly sits in heavenly places (and indeed
all heavenly saints); then, verse 13, what the devil did when cast down
to earth, after he was cast out of heaven.

The dragon has now lost his place in heaven. He cannot rule the world,
as thence, as the prince and god of it: but he comes as a woe and
judgment from God upon those who dwelt on earth, had not followed the
heavenly calling, where it was then; and he is in great wrath, because
he has now but a short time. His enmity against Him <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) who has thus sentenced him, is exercised
against that which has any connection with Him in the now sphere of his
malice. He can no longer accuse the brethren; he persecutes the woman.
And at this period, upon earth, the woman is the Jewish people owned of
God, the woman that brought forth the man (for that was true of the
Jewish economy as to Christ, looked at in His title of power upon
earth--"To us a son is born"). But here, to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the woman is given force and speed from God; but only to flee into the
wilderness, where she is nourished for the allotted period, which,
speaking as to the closing crisis, is three years and a half; for during
this period the opportunity of her return was not afforded by the
cessation of the dragon's power.

The dragon here takes the name of serpent, as having the form of
subtlety, deceit, and malice, "that old serpent which is the devil and
Satan." It is the enmity, we are to remark, of the dragon and serpent,
not the woe on the earth which is described: that is reserved for more
detailed account in what follows, at least as to the part material for
the Church's instruction in its passage towards it. And here I must
remark the extreme importance to us of connecting the events and agents
in the crisis, in principle, character, and progress with what is
passing and the agents we see around us, or it loses its main moral
effect and its whole use for the Church. The Church is not under this
woe, I believe, at all, in the final crisis. It is on earth, to the
Jewish people, this Son is born: we belong to the heavens, whence Satan
is east out. But, by the ripened fruit in that day, as more fully
displayed in subsequent chapters, we learn the present nature and
character of the tree that bears it, as God describes man by his fruits
in Romans iii., though all men have not borne such. And thus I can judge
my own heart, and know what man is. And if the last apostate be not yet
revealed, he is but the head of a system of which God's revelation of
him, as the full fruit, makes me know the sap and character. Though the
serpent could not overcome the woman in war (for God preserved her, not
by the mighty man, but by flight; and there his direct power was
stopped; for heavenly power was in aid for her), yet the resources he
had he uses, and pours forth these waters, animated by his energy, as a

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

flood. I should suppose, from the explanation given in this book of
waters looked at as on earth, these were armies of people directly under
Satan's moral influence, flowing from his mouth, the expression of his
mind and will.

But the earth--the scene of God's providential and prophetic
agency--helped the woman by whatever providence for God teaches here the
facts of Satan's agency, not the historical providences) and swallowed
up and brought to nought this agency of Satan: it was frustrated. And he
went to make war with the remnant of her seed, the godly Jews who might
remain within his reach, who obeyed God's commandments and had received
the testimony of Jesus Christ--for so (for I am now speaking of the
final crisis) I believe the Jews, *i.e.*, the remnant, will. But I do
not say further than a *prophetic* testimony; "for the spirit of
prophecy is the testimony of Jesus." The dragon (for he is not now
spoken of in his subtle actings, but identified again in his character
and acting in the sphere and character of power) was wroth with the
woman whom he could not touch, and went to make war with, to use
violence towards, the remnant of the seed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[54:1](nbr02.htm#fr_52) At least is connected
with a wider scope of results.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[56:1](nbr03.htm#fr_53) Another sign begins
chapter xv.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[57:1](nbr03.htm#fr_54) "Christian Witness,"
volume iii., page 146.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[57:2](nbr03.htm#fr_55) But as to direct
historic application the woman here is the Jewish people (or Jerusalem)
seen in heaven and glory first, then cast out and persecuted by the
dragon--in God's mind, and then the object of Satan's enmity.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57:3](nbr03.htm#fr_56) Thus all the previous
state of heart in which reflected light was shadowed out for the people
is put under their feet.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[57:4](nbr03.htm#fr_57) Purpose has rather the
force of the thing purposed here, than intention. If I am understood, I
have no anxiety as to metaphysical <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>
precision. The word purpose evidently includes both, but may apply
specially to either (*i.e.*, the intention and the thing intended).

<span id="fn_58"></span>[60:1](nbr03.htm#fr_58) \[The Son born was
caught up, but was to rule all nations: the heavenly condition is here
the answer and remedy for an effort directed against one who was to rule
over the earthly. His rule and power is the matter in question.\]

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60:2](nbr03.htm#fr_59) This is true, even in
Antichrist; for that is association with the Jews and possession of
Jerusalem, to hold it as the centre of earthly power against the Lord,
as coming from heaven. The "scornful men" that dwell at Jerusalem "have
made a covenant with death and are at agreement with hell" \[I have not
altered the abstract applications: it would be changing the book, (and
they afford a kind of dictionary to the symbols,) but I add here and
there the particular prophetic events in which they are fulfilled--as I
believe, that to which they apply.\]

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61:1](nbr03.htm#fr_60) \[But they are not as
yet replaced by the saints there.\]

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61:2](nbr03.htm#fr_61) \[Note here, the victory
is celebrated; they overcame, they are not therefore in this conflict
any more.\]

<span id="fn_62"></span>[61:3](nbr03.htm#fr_62) I suspect it will be
found that, while the suffering may be most blessed and glorious for
righteousness', or Christ's sake, it is, nevertheless, always used by
the Lord for the correction of some secret or manifest evil in the
individual or in the Church.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[62:1](nbr03.htm#fr_63) *i.e.*, even referring
the passage to the protracted period.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[62:2](nbr03.htm#fr_64) \[In saint-worship,
which is really demon-worship.\]

<span id="fn_65"></span>[63:1](nbr03.htm#fr_65) \[Satan is cast down
from heaven to earth, where he yet is in great wrath for Daniel's last
half week, and persecutes the Jews owned of God, saved providentially as
a body, whereon the enemy seizes all he can. The woman is, as I have
said, the Jews owned of God, or Jerusalem.\]

<span id="fn_66"></span>[63:2](nbr03.htm#fr_66) I see a great deal to
lead to the conviction that it is Christ as the head of angelic power,
but not certainly, and therefore say no more than I do here. \[Fuller
enquiry would lead me to a different conclusion.\]

<span id="fn_67"></span>[64:1](nbr03.htm#fr_67) *i.e.*, in the plural
number. Superiorities (as principalities, powers, thrones, dominions)
are spoken of, but not directly archangels.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[65:1](nbr03.htm#fr_68) Conflict with Satan, and
trial, though used, perhaps, for chastening judgment, are very different
from judgment in war, where Satan has power according to the fall of the
first Adam, and a will to walk with him.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[65:2](nbr03.htm#fr_69) It is the angelic head
of the Jewish people who was the power that overcame him above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Four](nbr04)
