[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](roli02)  [Next](roli04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# THE RELIGION OF THE LUISEÑO INDIANS OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.

### INTRODUCTION.

In offering the results of several years research work among the Mission
Indians, I have purposely avoided any attempt to give to the material
collected either a technically scientific or a literary form; my object
being to put into the hands of those who may care to use them the
documents of the case, as it were, as nearly at first hand as possible.

The bare statement of a fact or rendering of a myth may be sufficient
where all the premises are known; but the Mission Indians have been long
unknown or misunderstood. Only fragments of the past remain, and in
their elucidation the character of the narrator plays an important part.
The personal form of narrative has therefore often been employed. This
is purely a matter of convenience and should be accepted as such. The
words of the interpreter are used whenever possible in literal form, his
rendering being faithfully given.

The obscurity of the subject has made it difficult to obtain a complete
understanding of matters which in the old days were held too sacred for
communication; the veil of secrecy cast over the Chungichnish worship,
as noted by Boscana, having persisted to the present day. That absolute
correctness has been reached is not to be maintained; but no pains have
been spared in attempting this; and it is hoped that if mistakes exist,
they may be corrected by later investigation.

The two most important tribal remnants among the Mission Indians today
are the Luiseños, whom I have studied chiefly at La Jolla and Potrero in
the mountains, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and the Diegueños, at
Mesa Grande, Campo, and Manzanita.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

Superficial observers, founding their opinion upon Baegert's unfriendly
estimate of the Lower Californian Indians, and also upon the external
conditions of the Mission Indians, the native simplicity and poverty of
their life, have classed them extremely low in the ethnic scale. It has
even been stated that they were the lowest type of humanity on the face
of the earth.

Nothing could be more erroneous than these sweeping generalities based
upon the vaguest premises. Acquaintance with Luiseño mythology reveals a
loftiness of conception, a power of definition and of abstract thought,
which must give these people claim to a place among the dominant minds
of the primitive race. On the other hand the Diegueños show in their
myths a certain consistency in the narrative, a power of sustained
invention, a dramatic instinct, as it were, which makes them supreme as
storytellers. The Cuyahomarr myth is an important survival of this type.

It would be difficult to account for the blending of these two distinct
mythologies into one religious ritual if historical evidence did not
assist in explaining the fact.

Fortunately it is possible to trace the origin and progress of an Indian
propaganda unique in this, that it occurred comparatively late in time,
and was carried on under the very eyes of the Spanish and Mexican
priests by their Christian converts, whose zeal for their ancient
religion may have been increased by the example of missionary effort
shown on their behalf by the white men.

Lucario Cuevish, who will be referred to later on as one of the most
important informants used, was born at San Luis Rey, and was still
living there at the time of the Mexican-American war. He remembers that
when the mountain people went down to the Mission from the Potrero and
La Jolla region, being under the charge and surveillance of its priest,
they were "given toloache," that is, initiated according to ancient
rite, by the Indians there. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) After the
padres left, the mountain Indians stayed at the Mission for some time.
Padre Antonio is the one he remembers as being in charge, and he allowed
the Indians to keep up their religious dances. The padres never objected
to this. The Indians

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

who could not talk Spanish were allowed to pray in Indian in the church;
but they kept up the old dances outside. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

The Chungichnish belief, with its ceremonial and ritual, came originally
from the north, say the Luiseños, and was brought from there to the
islands of Santa Catalina and San Clemente. From these islands,—both to
be seen on a clear day from the mountains of the mainland, it was
brought to San Juan Capistrano; from Capistrano to San Luis Rey; and
from there they brought the ceremonies and "gave toloache" in all the
upland Luiseño places, such as Rincon, Potrero, Yapiche, and La Jolla,
and carried the ritual to the Diegueños of Mesa Grande and Santa
Ysabel. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

The Luiseños say that the Diegueños of Mesa Grande originally had no
songs of their own for certain rituals, but that they sing the Luiseño
songs in such religious ceremonials as the eagle dance and the dance
with the eagle feather skirt. These were taught to them as part of the
Chungichnish ceremonial, together with the new style of dancing which
came to the mountains from the coast. On the other side of the Mission
of San Juan Capistrano there was a large Indian village, and from
[there](errata.htm#0) the Chungichnish worship was brought to San Luis
Rey. San Luis Rey taught Pala; Pala taught Pauma; Pauma taught Potrero;
Potrero gave it to La Jolla with the songs and the present manner of
dancing. This new manner is full of gestures and violent motions, while
the old style of dancing, still to be seen among the Diegueños of
Manzanita, was performed in a quiet and restrained manner, consisting
simply in bending and swaying the body, and moving and stamping the feet
in varied measure according to the rhythm of the songs.

This took place perhaps a hundred and twenty years ago. The grandfather
of the informant Salvador told Salvador's father

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

that when Potrero came to teach these ceremonies and to "give toloache"
to La Jolla, the toloache bowl would hold a quart or more, and all who
drank became crazy and nearly died; and the La Jolla people were
frightened, fearing their sons were going to die, and they nearly had a
fight with the Potrero people. The La Jolla people in turn went later to
Warner's Ranch and taught the Indians there, the so-called
Cupeños, <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) these ceremonies and dances
and gave them toloache; and then went further and taught the Mesa Grande
Indians and those of Santa Ysabel, both Diegueño.

All this, then, represents a genuine missionary movement in a primitive
Indian religion. Its success was due to the fact that the religion of
Chungichnish had every requisite of a conquering faith. It had a
distinct and difficult rule of life requiring obedience, fasting, and
self-sacrifice.

It had the sanction of fear. No alien faith has ever been imposed
without this; but where Christian and Mohammedan invoked hell-fire, the
worshipper of Chungichnish invoked the avengers of the hill, the
stinging weeds, the rattlesnake and the bear, who injure by bodily harm
those disobedient to the faith.

It had an imposing and picturesque ritual. And above all it had the seal
of an inviolable secrecy, so alluring at all times to the human mind.

Boscana says of these Indians: "A veil is cast over all their religious
observances, and the mystery with which they are performed seems to
perpetuate respect for them, and to preserve an ascendancy over the
people." How great were this respect and fear I know well from repeated
experience. A century of allegiance to the Catholic faith barely
suffices to give the old men courage to reveal the sacred mysteries of
the ancient religion. <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

The most important of these Chungichnish rites was the toloache
ceremony, as initiatory to the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[73:1](roli03.htm#fr_0) These places must not be
confounded with La Jolla on the coast, and Potrero near the Mexican
line.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[74:2](roli03.htm#fr_1) See the account of the
Toloache ceremony given below.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[75:3](roli03.htm#fr_2) This tolerance of the
Catholic church makes it preëminent in mission work; at the same time it
is not likely that any of the fathers except Boscana fully realized the
significance of the Indian dances.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[75:4](roli03.htm#fr_3) Venegas's account of the
Indians of Lower California contains much that might have been written
about these Indians. Their religious ceremonials which are constantly
misunderstood by the priests, the mode of living and manner of dress,
the training of boys, the rules of the "hechiceros" (medicine-men), the
sacred objects such as the feather band described below, the reverence
paid to the raven, all this,—especially as relating to the most northern
Indians of the peninsula and those of the southern Santa Barbara
islands,—shows a close connection between Lower California and what is
now Southern California.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[76:5](roli03.htm#fr_4) The people of the village
of Kupa or Gupa, speaking the Agua Caliente dialect, about equally
distinct from Cahuilla and Luiseño.—Ed.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[76:6](roli03.htm#fr_5) One of my story-tellers
was about to sing with great reluctance some songs descended to him from
his father, when an apparition of Chaup or Takwish, the electric
fire-ball or meteor, in broad daylight, so terrified him as an omen that
he refused to reveal anything further.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Toloache Ceremony](roli04)
