[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](roli04)  [Next](roli06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Luiseño Indians of Southern California*, by
Constance Goddard DuBois, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### WANAWUT, THE SACRED NET.

Wanawut, or Wanal Wanawut, <span id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21) one of
the First People born of the Earth-mother ([fig. 1](#img_fig01)), is
made of milkweed twine in the woven meshes of which three round flat
stones, brought from the seashore, are inserted at intervals in a
straight line. This was fastened with stakes in place in the bottom of a
trench, and the men who laid it down must stand facing the north, since
those who laid the dead Ouiot <span id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22) down
did so facing in that direction.

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 1.Wanawut as
sketched by Salvador Cuevas.](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg)  
Fig. 1.—Wanawut as sketched by Salvador Cuevas.  
</span>

Three days after the taking of the toloache the trench was dug and
wanawut placed in it. The trench was about five feet long, fifteen
inches wide, and twenty-eight inches or so in depth. According to
Salvador Cuevas, a cross trench was dug to accommodate the arms of the
figure which would thus be as long as the trench. According to Albañas,
there was only one lengthwise trench, the figure, slightly different in
shape, being small enough to be included within it. The latter is
possibly the more modern form.

When the wanawut is laid down, the chief explains the sacred symbol and
gives instruction to the boys in the things pertaining

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

to the spirit. The boys, crouching with feet placed one on top of the
other, spring from one of the stones to the other, holding and swinging
by the sides of the trench and so out. If they are very small they are
assisted in this by their "sponsors." The mothers stand by anxiously
awaiting the result, for if a boy should slip and fall it would be a
sign that he was not to live long.

Albañas explains more fully the symbolic meaning of this figure:

Wanawut is the symbol of the Milky Way, the Spirit to whom our spirits
go when they die. Since the spirit cannot be seen, some symbol of it is
required for the instruction of the candidates. This figure is shown to
them and explained. Piwish, the Milky Way, was put up where he is as a
sign that we are only going to live here for a little while. Death came
from Ouiot; but when we die our spirit will be sent to Piwish Ahuta.
This rises with Nükülish, Antares. The symbol wanawut was to remind the
boys of the spirit. "This will hurt you if you do not obey—the
ceremonial law." The main wanawut would be in the sky, but we do not see
it. We send our spirits to it in breathing, groaning invocation.

The main idea connected with this object in regard to the spirits of the
dead seems to be the wish to free them from the earth, to keep them from
returning to it; to "tie" them to the four quarters of the sky; to send
them to the Milky Way.

The Milky Way glows brilliantly in the clear atmosphere of Southern
California. It is there a much more imposing spectacle than it ever
appears to the dwellers in the east. The ethereal quality of it, its
vague outline and uncertain luminosity, make it easily an object of
veneration.

Wanal wanawut is a double term, wanal meaning an object of string for
ordinary use, and wanawut the sacred symbol made of string to which the
term for spirit is applied because it symbolizes the spirit. Whether the
idea of "tying" the spirit to the four quarters of the sky, especially
the sacred north, is the reason for this symbol formed of elaborately
woven twine; whether the shape of the wanawut is in some resemblance to
the human form, or to a portion of the Milky Way; whether the placing it
in the trench signifies the depositing of the ashes in the grave; what
the three

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

stones mean; whether the jumping of the boys from stone to stone and out
means the escape of the spirit from the grave;—all these and other
suggestions of the same sort must be left to speculation as I have had
no definite explanation of them.

It is probable that little is remembered of the instruction in the
things of the spirit which was given to the candidate in the toloache
ceremony; but it is certain that in the old days a definite and well
understood system of religious thought existed among those who alone
were entrusted with the complete knowledge of the sacred mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[85:21](roli05.htm#fr_21) Wanawut, object of
twine used at puberty ceremony. Three stones were employed with it, but
wanawut means the twine only. Wanal, a long net for rabbit drives; a
seine for sea-fishing.—S.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[85:22](roli05.htm#fr_22) See the creation myths
given below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sand Painting](roli06)
