[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land21)  [Next](land23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 22

<span class="smallcaps">Explosions</span> over the towns of Barisal,
Bengal, if they were aërial explosions, were continuing. As to some of
these detonations that were heard in May, 1874, a writer in *Nature*,
53-197, says that they did seem to come from overhead. For a report upon
the Barisal Guns, heard between April 28,

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1888, and March 1,
1889, see *Proc. Asiatic Soc. of Bengal*, 1889-199.

Phenomena at Comrie were continuing. The latest date in Roper's *List of
Earthquakes* is April 8, 1886, but this list goes on only a few years
later. See *Knowledge*, n. s., 6-145—shock and a rumbling sound at
Comrie, July 12, 1894—a repetition upon the corresponding date, the next
year. In the *English Mechanic*, 74-155, David Packer says that, upon
Sept. 17, 1901, ribbon-like flashes of lightning, which were not
ordinary lightning, were seen in the sky (I think of Birmingham) one
hour before a shock in Scotland. According to other accounts, this shock
was in Comrie and surrounding regions (London *Times*, Sept. 19, 1901).

*Smithson. Miscell. Cols.*, 37-Appendix, p. 71:

According to L. Tennyson, Quartermaster's Clerk, at Fort Klamath,
Oregon, at daylight, Jan. 8, 1867, the garrison was startled from sleep
by what he supposed to be an earthquake and a sound like thunder. Then
came darkness, and the sky was covered with black smoke or clouds. Then
ashes, of a brownish color, fell—"as fast as I ever saw it snow." Half
an hour later there was another shock, described as "frightful." No one
was injured, but the sutler's store was thrown a distance of ninety
feet, and the vibrations lasted several minutes. Mr. Tennyson thought
that somewhere near Fort Klamath, a volcano had broken loose, because,
in the direction of the Klamath Marsh, a dark column of smoke was seen.
I can find record of no such volcanic eruption. In a list of quakes, in
Oregon, from 1846, to 1916, published in the *Bull. Seis. Soc. Amer.*,
September, 1919, not one is attributed to volcanic eruptions. Mr. W. D.
Smith, compiler of the list, says, as to the occurrence at Fort
Klamath—"If there was an eruption, where was it?" He asks whether
possibly it could have been in Lassen Peak. But Lassen Peak is in
California,, and the explosion upon Jan. 8, 1867, was so close to Fort
Klamath that almost immediately ashes fell from the sky.

The following is of the type of phenomena that might be considered
evidence of signaling from some unknown world nearby:

*La Nature*, 17-126—that, upon June 17, 1881, sounds like cannonading
were heard at Gabes, Tunis, and that quaking of the

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

earth was felt, at intervals of 32 seconds, lasting about 6 minutes.

July 30, 1883—a somewhat startling experience—steamship *Resolute* alone
in the Arctic Ocean—six reports like gunfire—*Nature*, 53-295.

In *Nature*, 30-19, a correspondent writes that, upon the 3rd of
January, 1869, a policeman in Harlton, Cambridgeshire, heard six or
seven reports, as if of heavy guns far away. There is no findable record
of an earthquake in England upon this date. In the London *Times*, Jan.
12, 15, 16, 1869, several correspondents write that upon the 9th of
January a loud report had been heard and a shock felt at places near
Colchester, Essex, about 30 miles from Harlton. One of the
correspondents writes that he had heard the sound but had felt no shock.
In the London *Standard*, January 12, the Rev. J. F. Bateman, of South
Lopham, Norfolk, writes as to the occurrence upon the 9th—"An
extraordinary vibration (described variously by my parishioners as being
\`like a gunpowder explosion,' 'a big thunder clap,' and 'a little
earthquake') was noticed here this morning about 11.20." In the *Morning
Post*, January 14, it is said that at places about twenty miles from
Colchester it was thought that an explosion had occurred, upon the 9th,
but, inasmuch as no explosion had been heard of, the disturbance was
attributed to an earthquake. Night of January 13—an explosion in the
sky, at Brighton (*Rept. B. A.*, 1869-307). In the *Standard*, January
22, a correspondent writes from Swaffham, Norfolk, that, about 8 P.M.,
January 15, something of an unknown nature had frightened flocks of
sheep, which had burst. from their bounds in various places. All these
occurrences were in adjoining counties in southeastern England.
Something was seen in the sky upon the 13th, and, according to the
*Chudleigh Weekly Express*, Jan. 13, 1869, something was seen in the
sky, night of the 10th, at Weston-super-Mare, near Bristol, in
southwestern England. It was seen between 9 and 10 o'clock, and is said
to have been an extraordinary meteor. Five hours later were felt three
shocks said to have been earthquakes.

Upon the night of March 17, 1871, there was a series of events in
France, and a series in England. A "meteor" was seen at Tours,

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

at 8 P.M.—at 10:45, a "meteor" that left a luminous cloud over Saintes
(Charante-Inferieure)—another at Paris, 11:15, leaving a mark in the
sky, of fifteen minutes’ duration—another at Tours, at 11:45 P.M. See
*Les Mondes*, 24-190, and *Comptes Rendus*, 72-789. There were
"earthquakes" this night affecting virtually all England north of the
Mersey and the Trent, and also southern parts of Scotland. As has often
been the case, the phenomena were thought to have been explosions and
were then said to have been earthquakes when no terrestrial explosions
could be heard of (*Symons’ Met. Mag.*, 6-39). There were six shocks
near Manchester, between 6 and 7 P.M., and others about 11 P.M.; and in
Lancashire about 11 P.M., and continuing in places as far apart as
Liverpool and Newcastle, until 11:30 o'clock. The shocks felt about u
o'clock correspond, in time, with the luminous phenomena in the sky of
France, but our way of expressing that these so-called earthquakes in
England may have been concussions from repeating explosions in the sky,
is to record that, according to correspondence in the London *Times*,
there were, upon the 20th, aërial phenomena in the region of Lancashire
that had been affected upon the 17th—"sounds that seemed to come from a
number of guns at a distance" and "pale flashes of lightning in the
sky."

Whether these series of phenomena be relatable to Mars or Martians or
not, we note that in 1871 opposition of Mars was upon March 19; and, in
1869, upon February 13; and in 1867 two days after the explosions at
Fort Klamath. In our records in this book, similar coincidences can be
found up to the year 1879. I have other such records not here published,
and others that will be here investigated.

There is a triangular region in England, three points of which appear so
often in our data that the region should be specially known to us, and I
know it myself as the London Triangle. It is pointed in the north by
Worcester and Hereford, in the south by Reading, Berkshire, and in the
east by Colchester, Essex. The line between Colchester and Reading runs
through London.

Upon Feb. 18, 1884, at West Mersea, near Colchester, a loud report was
heard (*Nature*, 53-4). Upon the 22nd of April, 1884, centering around
Colchester, occurred the severest earthquake in

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> England in the
19th century. For several columns of description, see the London
*Times*, April 23. There is a long list of towns in which there was
great damage: in 24 parishes near Colchester, 1,250 buildings were
damaged. One of the places that suffered most was West Mersea (*Daily
Chronicle*, April 28).

There was something in the sky. According to G. P. Yeats (*Observations
upon the Earthquake of Dec. 17, 1896*, p. 6) there was a red appearance
in the sky over Colchester, at the time of the shock of April 22, 1884.

The next day, according to a writer in *Knowledge*, 5-336, a stone fell
from the sky, breaking glass in his greenhouse, in Essex. It was a
quartz stone, and unlike anything usually known as meteoritic.

The indications, according to my reading of the data, and my impressions
of such repeating occurrences as those at Fort Klamath, are that perhaps
an explosion occurred in the sky, near Colchester, upon Feb. 18, 1884;
that a great explosion did occur over Colchester, upon the 22nd of
April, and that a great volume of débris spread over England, in a
northwesterly direction, passing over Worcestershire and Shropshire, and
continuing on toward Liverpool, nucleating moisture and falling in
blackest of rain. From the Stonyhurst Observatory, near Liverpool, was
reported, occurring at a 11 A.M., April 26, "the most extraordinary
darkness remembered"; forty minutes later fell rain "as black as ink,"
and then black snow and black hail (*Nature*, 30-6). Black hail fell at
Chaigley, several miles from Liverpool (*Stonyhurst Magazine*, 1-267).
Five hours later, black substance fell at Crowle, near Worcester
(*Nature*, 30-32). Upon the 28th, at Church Stretton and Much Wenlock,
Shropshire, fell torrents of liquid like ink and water in equal
proportions (*The Field*, May 3, 1884). In the *Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.*,
11-7, it is said that, upon the 28th, half a mile from Lilleshall,
Shropshire, an unknown pink substance was brought down by a storm. Upon
the 3rd of May, black substance fell again at Crowle (*Nature*, 30-32) .

In *Nature*, 30-216, a correspondent writes that, upon June 22, 1884, at
Fletching, Sussex, southwest of Colchester, there was intense darkness,
and that rain then brought down flakes of soot

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

in such abundance that it seemed to be "snowing black." This was several
months after the shock at Colchester, but my datum for thinking that
another explosion, or disturbance of some kind, had occurred in the same
local sky, is that, as reported by the inmates of one house, a slight
shock was felt, upon the 24th of June, at Colchester, showing that the
phenomena were continuing. See Roper's *List of Earthquakes*.

Was not the loud report heard upon February 18 probably an explosion in
the sky, inasmuch as the sound was great and the quake little? Were not
succeeding phenomena sounds and concussions and the fall of débris from
explosions in the sky, acceptably upon April 22, and perhaps continuing
until the 24th of June? Then what are the circumstances by which one
small part of this earth's surface could continue in relation with
something somewhere else in space?

Comrie, Irkutsk, and Birmingham.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23](land23.md)
