[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land34)  [Next](land36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 35

"<span class="smallcaps">Unknown</span> Aircraft Over Dover."

According to the Dover correspondent to the London *Times* (Jan. 6,
1913) something had been seen, over Dover, heading from the sea.

In the London *Standard*, Jan. 24, 1913, it is said that, upon the
morning of January 4, an unknown airship had been seen, over

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dover, and that,
about the same time, the lights of an airship had been seen over the
Bristol Channel. These places are several hundred miles apart.

London *Times*, January 21—report by Capt. Lindsay, Chief Constable of
Glamorganshire: that, about five o'clock, in the afternoon of January
17, he saw an object in the sky of Cardiff, Wales. He says that he
called the attention of a bystander, who agreed with him that it was a
large object. "It was much larger than the Willows airship, and left in
its trail a dense smoke. It disappeared quickly."

The next day, according to the *Times*, there were other reports: people
in Cardiff saw something that was lighted or that carried lights, moving
rapidly in the sky. In the *Times*, of the 28th, it is said that an
airship that carried a brilliant light had been seen in Liverpool. "It
is stated at the Liverpool Aviation School that none of the airmen had
been out on Saturday night." Dispatches from town after town—a traveling
thing in the sky, carrying a light, and also a searchlight that swept
the ground. It is said that a vessel, of which the outlines had been
clearly seen, had appeared in the sky of Cardiff, Newport, Neath, and
other places in Wales. In the *Standard*, January 31, is published a
list of cities where the object had been seen. Here a writer tries to
conclude that some foreign airship had made half a dozen visits to
England and Wales, or had come once, remaining three weeks; but he gives
up the attempt, thinking that nothing could have reached England and
have sailed away half a dozen times without being seen to cross the
coast; thinking that the idea of anything having made one journey, and
remaining three weeks in the air deserved no consideration.

If the unknown object did carry something like a searchlight, an idea of
its powers is given in an account in the *Cardiff Evening Express*, Jan.
25, 1913—"Last evening brilliant lights were seen, sweeping skyward, and
now, this evening, the lights grow bolder. Streets and houses in the
locality of Totterdown were suddenly illuminated by a brilliant,
piercing light, which, sweeping upward, gave many spectators a fine view
of the hills beyond." In the *Express*, February 6, is a report upon
this light like a searchlight, and the object that flashed it, by the
police of Dulais Valley. Also

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

there is an account, by a police sergeant, of a luminous thing that was
for a while stationary in the sky, and then moved away. Still does the
conventional explanation, or suggestion, survive. It is said that
members of the staff of the Evening Express had gone to the roof of the
newspaper building, but had seen only the planet Venus, which was
brilliant at this time.

Then writes a correspondent, to the *Express*, that the object could not
have been Venus, because he had seen it traveling at a rate of 20 or 30
miles an hour, and had heard sounds from it. Someone else writes that
not possibly could the thing be Venus: he had seen it as "a bright red
light, going very fast." Still someone else says that he had seen the
seeming vessel upon the 5th of February, and that it had suddenly
disappeared.

There is a hiatus. Between the 5th and the 21st of February, nothing
like an airship was seen in the sky of England and Wales. If we can find
that somewhere else something similar was seen in the sky, in this
period, one supposes that it was the same object, exploring or
maneuvering somewhere else. It seems however that there were several of
these objects, because of simultaneous observations at places far apart.
If we can find that, during the absence from England and Wales, similar
objects were seen somewhere else, a great deal of what we try to think
upon the subject will depend upon how far from Great Britain they were
seen. It seems incredible that the planet Venus should deceive thousands
of Britons, up to the 5th of February, and stop her deceptions abruptly
upon that date, and then abruptly resume deceptions upon the 21st, in
places at a distance apart. These circumstances oppose the idea of
collective hallucinations, by which some writers in the newspapers tried
to explain. If they were hallucinations, the hallucinations renewed
collectively, upon the 21st, in towns one hundred miles apart. One
extraordinary association is that all appearances, except the first,
were in the hours of visibility of Venus, then an "evening star."

Upon the night of the 21st, a luminous object was reported from towns in
Yorkshire and from towns in Warwickshire, two regions about one hundred
miles apart; about 10 P.M. All former attempts to explain had been
abandoned, and the general supposition was

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

that [German](errata.htm#1.md) airships were maneuvering over England. But
not a thing had been seen to cross the coast of England, though guards
were patroling the coasts, especially commissioned to watch for foreign
airships. Sailors in the North Sea, and people in Holland and Belgium
had seen nothing that could be thought a German airship sailing to or
from England. A writer in *Flight* takes up as especially mysterious the
appearance far inland, in Warwickshire. Then came reports from
Portsmouth, Ipswich, Hornsea, and Hull, but, one notes, no more, at this
time, from Wales. Also in Ipswich, which is more than a hundred miles
from the towns in Warwickshire, and more than a hundred miles from the
Yorkshire towns, a luminous object was seen upon the night of the 21st.
*Ipswich Evening Star*, February 25—something that carried a searchlight
that had been seen upon the nights of the 21st and 24th, moving in
various directions, and then "dashing off at lightning speed"—that, at
Hunstanton, had been seen three bright lights traveling from the eastern
sky, remaining in sight 30 minutes, stationary, or hovering over the
town, and then disappearing in the northwest. *Portsmouth Evening News*,
February 25—that soon after 8 P.M., evening of the 24th, had been seen a
very bright light, appearing and disappearing, remaining over Portsmouth
about one hour, and then moving away. Portsmouth and Ipswich are about
120 miles apart. In the London newspapers, it is said that, upon the
evening of the 25th, crowds stood in the streets of Hull, watching
something in the sky, "the lights of which were easily distinguishable."
Hull is about 190 miles northeast of Portsmouth. *Hull Daily Mail*,
February 26—that a crowd had watched a light high in the air. It is said
that the light had been stationary for almost half an hour and had then
shot away northward. In the Times, February 28, are published reports
upon "the clear outlines of an airship, which was carrying a dazzling
searchlight," from Portland, Burcleaves, St. Alban's Head, Papplewich,
and the Orkneys. The last account, after a long interval, that I know
of, is another report from Capt. Lindsay: that, about 9 o'clock, evening
of April 8th, he and many other persons had seen, over Cardiff,
something that carried a brilliant light and traveled at a rate of sixty
or seventy miles an hour.

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

Upon April 24, 1913, the planet Venus was at inferior conjunction.

In the *Times*, February 28, it is said that a fire-balloon had been
found in Yorkshire, and it is suggested that someone had been sending up
fire-balloons.

In the *Bull. Soc. Astro. de France*, 1913-178, it is said that the
people of England were as credulous as the people of Cherbourg, and had
permitted themselves to be deceived by the planet Venus.

If German airships were maneuvering over England, without being seen
either approaching or departing, appearing sometimes far inland in
England without being seen to cross the well-guarded coasts, it was
secret maneuvering, inasmuch as the accusation was denied in Germany
(*Times*, February 26 and 27). It was then one of the most brilliantly
proclaimed of secrets, or it was concealment under one of the most
powerful searchlights ever seen. Possibly an airship from Germany could
appear over such a city as Hull, upon the east coast of England, without
being seen to arrive or to depart, but so far from Germany is
Portsmouth, for instance, that one does feel that something else will
have to be thought of. The appearances over Liverpool and over towns in
Wales might be attributed to German airships by someone who has not seen
a map since he left school. There were more observations upon sudden
appearances and disappearances than I have recorded: stationariness
often occurred.

The objects were absent from the sky of Great Britain, from February 5
to February 21.

According to data published by Prof. Chant, in the *Journal of the Royal
Astronomical Society of Canada*, 7-148, the most extraordinary
procession in our records was seen, in the sky of Canada, upon the night
of Feb. 9, 1913. Either groups of meteors, in one straight line, passed
over the city of Toronto, or there was a procession of unknown objects,
carrying lights. According to Prof. Chant, the spectacle was seen from
the Saskatchewan to Bermuda, but if this long route was traversed, data
do not so [indicate](errata.htm#2.md). The supposed route was diagonally
across New York State, from Buffalo, to a point near New York City, but
from New York State are recorded no observations other than might have
been

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

upon ordinary meteors, this night. A succession of luminous objects
passed over Toronto, night of Feb. 9, 1913, occupying from three to five
minutes in passing, according to different estimates. If one will think
that they were meteors, at least one will have to think that no such
meteors had ever been seen before. In the *Journal*, 7-405, W. F.
Denning writes that, though he had been watching the heavens since the
year 1865, he had never seen anything like this. In most of the
observations, the procession is described as a whole—"like an express
train, lighted at night"—"the lights were at different points, one in
front, and a rear light, then a succession of lights in the tail."
Almost all of the observations relate to the sky of Toronto and not far
from Toronto. It is questionable that the same spectacle was seen in
Bermuda, this night. The supposed long flight from the Saskatchewan to
Bermuda might indicate something of a meteoric nature, but the
meteor-explanation must take into consideration that these objects were
so close to this earth that sounds from them were heard, and that,
without succumbing to gravitation, they followed the curvature of this
earth at a relatively low velocity that cannot compare with the velocity
of ordinary meteors.

If now be accepted that again, the next day, objects were seen in the
sky of Toronto, but objects unlighted, in the daytime—I suppose that to
some minds will come the thought that this is extraordinary, and that
almost immediately the whole subject will

t then be forgotten. Prof. Chant says that, according to the *Toronto
Daily Star*, unknown objects, but dark objects this time, were seen at
Toronto, in the afternoon of the next day—"not seen clearly enough to
determine their nature, but they did not seem to be clouds or birds or
smoke, and it was suggested that they were airships cruising over the
city." *Toronto Daily Star*, February 10—"They passed from west to east,
in three groups, and then returned west in more scattered formation,
about seven or eight in all."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 36](land36.md)
