[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land17)  [Next](land19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

### 18

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> a pamphlet entitled Wonderful
Phenomena, by Curtis Eli, is the report of an occurrence, or of an
alleged occurrence, that was investigated by Mr. Addison A. Sawin, a
spiritualist. He interpreted in the only way that I know of, and that is
the psychochemic process of combining new data with preconceptions with
which they seem to have affinity. It is said that, at Warwick, C. W.,
Oct. 3, 1843, somebody named Charles Cooper heard a rumbling sound in
the sky, and saw a cloud, under which were three human forms, "perfectly
white," sailing through the air above him, not higher than the
tree-tops. It is said that the beings were angels. They were male
angels. That is orthodox. The angels wafted through the air, but without
motions of their own, and an interesting observation is that they seemed
to have belts around their bodies—as if they had been let down from a
vessel above, though this poor notion is not suggested in the pamphlet.
They "moaned." Cooper called to some men who were laboring in another
field, and they saw the cloud, but did not see the forms of living
beings under it. It is said that a boy had seen the beings in the air,
"side by side, making a loud and mournful noise." Another person, who
lived six miles away, is quoted: "he saw the clouds and the persons and
heard the sounds." Mr. Sawin quotes others, who had seen "a remarkable
cloud," and had heard the sounds, but had not seen the angels. He ends
up: "Yours is the glorious hope of the resurrection of the soul." The
gloriousness of it is an inverse function of the dolefulness of it:
Sunday Schools will not take kindly to the doctrine—be good and you will
moan forever. One supposes that the glorious hope colored the whole
investigation.

Some day I shall publish data that lead me to suspect that many
appearances upon this earth that were once upon a time interpreted by
theologians and demonologists, but are now supposed to be the
subject-matter of psychic research, were beings and objects that visited
this earth, not from a spiritual existence, but from outer

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

space. That extra-geographic conditions may be spiritual, or of highly
attenuated matter, is not my present notion, though that, too, may be
some day accepted. Of course all these data suffer, in one way, about as
much distortion as they would in other ways, if they had been reported
by astronomers or meteorologists. As to all the material in this
chapter, I take the position that perhaps there were appearances in the
sky, and perhaps they were revelations of, or mirages from, unknown
regions and conditions of outer space, and spectacles of relatively
nearby inhabited lands, and of space-travelers, but that all reports
upon them were products of the assimilating of the unknown with figures
and figments of the nearest familiar similarities. Another position of
mine that will be found well-taken is that, no matter what my own
interpretations or acceptances may be, they will compare favorably, so
far as rationality is concerned, with orthodox explanations. There have
been many assertions that "phantom soldiers" have been seen in the sky.
For the orthodox explanation of the physicists, see Brewster's *Natural
Magic*, p. 125: a review of the phenomenon of June 23, 1744; that,
according to 27 witnesses, some of whom gave sworn testimony before a
magistrate, whether that should be mentioned or not, troops of aërial
soldiers had been seen, in Scotland, on and over a mountain, remaining
visible two hours and then disappearing because of darkness. In Clarke's
*Survey of the Lakes* (fol. 1789) is an account in the words of one of
the witnesses. See *Notes and Queries*, 1-7-304. Brewster says that the
scene must have been a mirage of British troops, who, in anticipation of
the rebellion of 1745, were secretly maneuvering upon the other side of
the mountain. With a talent for clear-seeing, for which we are notable,
except when it comes to some of our own explanations, we almost
instantly recognize that, to keep a secret from persons living upon one
side of a mountain, it is a very sensible idea to go and maneuver upon
the other side of the mountain; but then how to keep the secret, in a
thickly populated country like Scotland, from persons living upon that
other side of the mountain—however, there never has been an explanation
that did not itself have to be explained.

Or the "phantom soldiers" that were seen at Ujest, Silesia, in 1785—see
Parish's *Hallucinations and Illusions*, p. 309. Parish finds that

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

at the time of this spectacle, there were soldiers, of this earth,
marching near Ujest; so he explains that the "phantom soldiers" were
mirages of them. They were marching in the funeral procession of General
von Cosel. But some time later they were seen again, at Ujest—and the
General had been dead and buried several days, and his funeral
procession disbanded—and if a refraction can survive independently of
its primary, so may a shadow, and anybody may take a walk where he went
a week before, and see some of his shadows still wandering around
without him. The great neglect of these explainers is in not accounting
for an astonishing preference for, or specialization in, marching
soldiers, by mirages. But if often there be, in the sky, things or
beings that move in parallel lines, and, if their betrayals be not
mirages, but their shadows cast down upon the haze of this earth, or
Brocken specters, such frequency, or seeming specialization, might be
accounted for.

Sept. 27, 1846—a city in the sky of Liverpool (*Rept. B. A.*, 1847-39) .
The apparition is said to have been a mirage of the city of Edinburgh.
This "identification" seems to have been the product of suggestion: at
the time a panorama of Edinburgh was upon exhibition in Liverpool.

Summer of 1847—see Flammarion's *The Atmosphere*, p. 160—story told by
M. Grellois: that he was traveling between Ghelma and Bône, when he saw,
to the east of Bône, upon a gently sloping hill, "a vast and beautiful
city, adorned with monuments, domes, and steeples." There was no
resemblance to any city known to M. Grellois.

In the *Bull. Soc. Astro. de France*, 21-180, is an account of a
spectacle that, according to 20 witnesses, vas seen for two hours in the
sky of Vienne dans le Dauphiné, May 3, 1848. A city—and an army, in the
sky. One supposes that a Brewster would say that nearby was a
terrestrial city, with troops maneuvering near it. But also vast lions
were seen in the sky—and that is enough to discourage any Brewster. Four
months later, according to the London *Times*, Sept. 13, 1848, a still
more discouraging—or perhaps stimulating—spectacle was, or was not, seen
in Scotland. Afternoon of Sept. 9, 1848—Quigley's Point, Lough Foyle,
Scotland—the sky turned dark. It seemed to open. The opening looked
reddish, and in the reddish

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

area, appeared a regiment of soldiers. Then came appearances that looked
like war vessels under full sail, then "a man and a woman and a swan and
a peahen." The "opening" closed, and that was the last of this shocking
or ridiculous mixture that nobody but myself would record as being worth
thinking about.

"Phantom soldiers" that were seen in the sky, near the Banmouth, Dec.
30, 1850 (*Rept. B. A.*, 1852-30).

"Phantom soldiers" that were seen at Buderich, Jan. 22, 1854 (*Notes and
Queries*, 1-9-267).

"Phantom soldiers" that were seen by Lord Roberts (*Forty-One Years in
India*, p. 219) at Mohan, Feb. 25, 1858. It is either that Lord Roberts
saw indistinctly, and described in terms of the familiar to him, or that
we are set back in our own motions. According to him, the figures wore
Hindoo costumes.

Extra-geography—its vistas and openings and fields—and the Thoreaus that
are upon this earth, but undeveloped, because they cannot find their
ponds. A lonely thing and its pond, afloat in space—they crossed the
moon. In *Cosmos*, n. s., 11-200, it is said that, night of July 7,
1857, two persons of Chambon had seen forms crossing the moon—something
like a human being followed by a pond.

"Phantom soldiers" that were seen, about the year 1860, at Paderborn,
Westphalia (Crowe, *Night-side of Nature*, p. 416).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19](land19)
