[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land30)  [Next](land32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31

<span class="smallcaps">Cold Harbor</span>, Hanover Co., Virginia—two
men in a field—"an apparently clear sky." In the *Monthly Weather
Review*, 28-29, it is said that upon Aug. 7, 1900, two men were struck
by lightning. The Editor says that the weather map gave no indication of
a thunderstorm, nor of rain, in this region at the time.

In July, 1904, a man was killed on the summit of Mt. San Gorgionio, near
the Mojave desert. It is said that he was killed by lightning. Two days
later, upon the summit of Mt. Whitney, 180 miles away, another man was
killed "by lightning" (*Ciel et Terre*, 29-120).

It is said, in *Ciel et Terre*, 17-42, that, in the year 1893, nineteen
soldiers were marching near Bourges, France, when they were struck by an
unknown force. It is said that in known terms there is no explanation.
Some of the men were killed, and others were struck insensible. At the
inquest it was testified that there had been no storm, and that nothing
had been heard.

If there occur upon the surface of this earth pounces from blankness and
seizures by nothings, and "sniping" with bullets of unfindable

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

substance, we nevertheless hesitate to bring witchcraft and demonology
into our fields. Our general subject now is the existence of a great
deal that may be nearby, or temporarily nearby, ordinarily invisible,
but occasionally revealed by special circumstances. A background of
stars is not to be compared, in our data, with the sun for a background,
as a means of revelations. We accept that there are sunspots, but we
gather from general experience and special instances that the word
"sunspot" is another of the standardizing terms like "auroral" and
"meteoric" and "earthquakes." See Webb's *Celestial Objects* for some
observations upon large definite obscurations called "sunspots" but
which were as evanescent against the sun as would be islands and jungles
of space, if intervening only a few moments between this earth and the
swifting moving sun. According to Webb, astronomers have looked at great
obscurations upon the sun, have turned away, and then looked again,
finding no trace of the phenomena. Eclipses are special circumstances,
and rather often have large, unknown bulks been revealed by different
light-effects during eclipses. For instance, upon Jan. 22, 1898, Lieut.
Blackett, R.N., assisting Sir Norman Lockyer, at Viziadrug, India,
during the total eclipse of the sun, saw an unknown body between Venus
and Mars (*Jour. Leeds Astro. Soc.*, 1906-23). We have had other
instances, and I have notes upon still more. The photographic plate is a
special condition, or sensitiveness. In *Knowledge*, 16-234, a
correspondent writes that, in August, 1893, in Switzerland, moonlighted
night, he had exposed a photographic plate for one hour. Upon the
photograph, when developed, were seen irregular, bright markings, but
there had been no lightning to this correspondent's perceptions.

The details of the sheep-panic of Nov. 3, 1888, are extraordinary. The
region affected was much greater than was supposed by the writer whom we
quoted in an earlier chapter. It is said in another account in *Symons’
Meteorological Magazine*, that, in a tract of land twenty-five miles
long and eight miles wide, thousands of sheep had, by a simultaneous
impulse, burst from their bounds; and had been found the next morning,
widely scattered, some of them still panting with terror under hedges,
and many crowded into corners of fields. See London *Times*, Nov. 20,
1888. An idea of the great

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

number of flocks affected is given by one correspondent who says that
malicious mischief was out of the question, because a thousand men could
not have frightened and released all these sheep. Someone else tries to
explain that, given an alarm in one flock, it might spread to the
others. But all the sheep so burst from their folds at about eight
o'clock in the evening, and one supposes that many folds were far from
contiguous, and one thinks of such contagion requiring considerable time
to spread over 200 square miles. Something of an alarming nature and of
a pronounced degree occurred somewhere near Reading, Berkshire, upon
this evening. Also there seems to be something of special localization:
the next year another panic occurred in Berkshire not far from Reading.

I have a datum that looks very much like the revelation of a ghost-moon,
though I think of it myself in physical terms of light-effects. In
*Country Queries and Notes*, 1-138, 417, it is said that, in the sky of
Gosport, Hampshire, night of Sept. 14, 1908, was seen a light that came
as if from an unseen moon. It may be that I can here record that there
was a moon-like object in the sky of the Midlands and the south of
England, this night, and that, though to human eyesight, this world,
island of space, whatever it may have been, was invisible, it was,
nevertheless, revealed. Upon this evening of Sept. 14, 1908, David
Packer, then in Northfield, Worcestershire, saw a luminous appearance
that he supposed was auroral, and photographed it. When the photograph
was developed, it was seen that the "auroral" light came from a large,
moon-like object. A reproduction of the photograph is published in the
*English Mechanic*, 88-211. It shows an object as bright and as
well-defined as the conventionally accepted moon, but only to the camera
had it revealed itself, and Mr. Packer had caught upon a film a
space-island that had been invisible to his eyes. It seems so, anyway.

In *Country Queries and Notes*, 1-328, it is said that, upon Aug. 2,
1908, at Ballyconneely, Connemara coast of Ireland, was seen a phantom
city of different-sized houses, in different styles of architecture;
visible three hours. It is said that no doubt the appearance was a
mirage of some city far away—far away, but upon this earth, of course.
This apparition is not of the type that we consider so especially of our
own data. The so-called mirages that so especially

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

interest us are interesting to us not in themselves, but in that they
belong to the one order of phenomena or evidence that unifies so many
fields of our data: that is, repetitions in a local sky, signifying the
fixed position of something relatively to a small part of this earth's
surface. We cannot think that mirages, terrestrial or extraterrestrial,
could so repeat. But if in a local sky of this earth there be a fixed
region, perhaps not a city, but something of rugged and featureful
outlines, with projections that might look architectural, reflections
from it, shadows, or Brocken specters repeating always in one special
sky are thinkable except by the Chinese-minded who regard all our data
as "foreign devils." The writer in *Country Queries and Notes*
says—"Circumstantial accounts have even been published of the city of
Bristol being distinctly recognized in a mirage seen occasionally in
North America." If we shall accept that anywhere in North America
repeated representations of the same city or city-like scene have
appeared in the same local sky, I prefer, myself, a foreign devil of a
thought, and its significance, whether hellish or not, that this earth
is stationary, to such a domestic vagrant of a thought as the idea that
mirage could so pick out the city of Bristol, or any other city, over
and over, and also invariably pick out for its screen the same local
sky, thousands of miles, or five miles, away.

In the *English Mechanic*, Sept. 10, 1897, a correspondent to the
*Weekly Times and Echo* is quoted. He had just returned from the Yukon.
Early in June, 1897, he had seen a city pictured in the sky of Alaska.
"Not one of us could form the remotest idea in what part of the world
this settlement could be. Some guessed Toronto, others Montreal, and one
of us even suggested Pekin. But whether this city exists in some unknown
world on the other side of the North Pole, or not, it is a fact that
this wonderful mirage occurs from time to time yearly, and we were not
the only ones who witnessed the spectacle. Therefore it is evident that
it must be the reflection of some place built by the hand of man."
According to this correspondent, the "mirage" did not look like one of
the cities named, but like "some immense city of the past."

In the *New York Tribune*, Feb. 17, 1901, it is said that Indians of
Alaska had told of an occasional appearance, as if of a city, suspended

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

in the sky, and that a prospector, named Willoughby, having heard the
stories, had investigated, in the year 1887, and had seen the spectacle.
It is said that, having several times attempted to photograph the scene,
Willoughby did finally at least show an alleged photograph of an aërial
city. In *Alaska*, p. 140, Miner Bruce says that Willoughby, one of the
early pioneers in Alaska, after whom Willoughby Island is named, had
told him of the phenomenon, and that, early in 1899, he had accompanied
Willoughby to the place over which the mirage was said to repeat. It
seems that he saw nothing himself, but he quotes a member of the Duc
d’Abruzzi's expedition to Mt. St. Elias, summer of 1897, Mr. C. W.
Thornton, of Seattle, who saw the spectacle, and wrote—"It required no
effort of the imagination to liken it to a city, but was so distinct
that it required, instead, faith to believe that it was not in reality a
city." Bruce publishes a reproduction of Willoughby's photograph, and
says that the city was identified as Bristol, England. So definite, or
so un-mirage-like, is this reproduction, trees and many buildings shown
in detail, that one supposes that the original was a photograph of a
good-sized terrestrial city, perhaps Bristol, England.

In Chapter 10, of his book, *Wonders of Alaska*, Alexander Badlam tries
to explain. He publishes a reproduction of Willoughby's photograph: it
is the same as Bruce's, except that all buildings are transposed, or are
negative in positions. Badlam does not like to accuse Willoughby of
fraud: his idea is that some unknown humorist had sold Willoughby a dry
plate, picturing part of the city of Bristol. My own idea is that
something of this kind did occur, and that this photograph, greatly
involved in accounts of the repeating mirages, had nothing to do with
the mirages. Badlam then tells of another photograph. He tells that two
men, near the Muir Glacier, had, by means of a pan of quicksilver, seen
a reflection of an unknown city somewhere, and that their idea was that
it was at the bottom of the sea near the glacier, reflecting in the sky,
and reflecting back to and from the quicksilver. That's complicated. A
photographer named Taber then announced that he had photographed this
scene, as reflected in a pan of quicksilver. Badlam publishes a
reproduction of Taber's photograph, or alleged photograph. This time,
for anybody

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

who prefers to think that there is, somewhere in the sky of Alaska, a
great, unknown city, we have a most agreeable photograph: exotic-looking
city; a structure like a coliseum, and another prominent building like a
mosque, and many indefinite, mirage-like buildings. I'd like to think
this photograph genuine, myself, but I do conceive that Taber could have
taken it by photographing a panorama that he had painted. Badlam's
explanation is that mirages of glaciers are common, in Alaska, and that
they look architectural. Some years ago, I read five or six hundred
pounds of literature upon the Arctic, and I should say that
far-projected mirages are not common in the Arctic: mere looming is
common. Badlam publishes a photograph of a mirage of Muir Glacier. The
looming points of ice do look Gothic, but they are obviously only
loomings, extending only short distances from primaries, with no
detachment from primaries, and not reflecting in the sky.

For the first identification of the Willoughby photograph as a
photograph of part of the city of Bristol, see the *New York Times*,
Oct. 20, 1889. That this photograph was somebody's hoax seems to be
acceptable. But it was not similar to the frequently reported scene in
the sky of Alaska, according to descriptions. In the *New York Times*,
Oct. 31, 1889, is an account, by Mr. L. B. French, of Chicago, of the
spectral representation, as he saw it, near Mt. Fairweather. "We could
see plainly houses, well-defined streets, and trees. Here and there rose
tall spires over huge buildings, which appeared to be ancient mosques or
cathedrals.… It did not look like a modern city—more like an ancient
European City."

*Jour. Roy. Met. Soc.*, 27-158:

That every year, between June 21 and July 10, a "phantom city" appears
in the sky, over a glacier in Alaska; that features of it had been
recognized as buildings in the city of Bristol, England, so that the
"mirage" was supposed to be a mirage of Bristol. It is said that for
generations these repeating representations had been known to the
Alaskan Indians, and that, in May, 1901, a scientific expedition from
San Francisco would investigate. It is said that, except for slight
changes, from year to year, the scene was always the same.

*La Nature*, 1901-1-303:

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

That a number of scientists had set out from Victoria, B. C., to Mt.
Fairweather, Alaska, to study a repeating mirage of a city in the sky,
which had been reported by the Duc d’Abruzzi, who had seen it and had
sketched it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 32](land32)
