[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land06)  [Next](land08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> three abstrusities: The aberration of
light, the annual parallax of the stars, the regular, annual shift of
the lines of the stellar spectra. By the aberration of light is meant a
displacement of all stars, during a year's observation, by which stars
near the pole of the ecliptic describe circles, stars nearer the
ecliptic describe ellipses, and the stars of the ecliptic, only little
straight lines. It is supposed that light has velocity, and that these
forms represent the ratio between the velocity of light and the supposed
velocity of this earth in its orbit. In the year 1725, Bradley conceived
of the present orthodox explanation of the aberration-forms of the
stars: that they reflect or represent the path that this earth traverses
around the sun, as it would look from the stars, appearing virtually
circular from stars in the pole of the ecliptic, for instance. In
Bradley's day there were no definite delusions as to the traversing by
this earth of another path in space, as part of a whole moving system,
so Bradley felt simple and satisfied. About a century later by some of
the most amusing reasoning that one could be entertained with,
astronomers decided that the whole supposed solar system is moving, at a
rate of about 13 miles a second from the region of Sirius to a point
near Vega, all this occurring in northern skies, because southern
astronomers had not very much to say at that time. Now, then, if at one
time in the year, and in one part of its orbit, this earth is moving in
the direction in which the whole solar system is moving, there we have
this earth traversing a distance that is the sum of its own motion and
the general motion; then when the earth rounds about and retraces, there
we have its own velocity minus the general velocity. The first
abstrusity, then, is knocked flat on its technicalities, because

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

the aberration-forms, then, do not reflect the annual motion of this
earth: if, in conventional terms, though the path of this earth is
circular or elliptic relatively to the sun, when compounding with solar
motion it is not so formed relatively to stars; and there will have to
be another explanation for the aberration-forms.

The second supposed proof that this earth moves around the sun is in the
parallax of the stars. In conventional terms, it is said that opposite
points in this earth's orbit are 185,000,000 miles apart. It is said
that stars, so differently viewed, are minutely displaced against their
backgrounds. Again solar-motion—if, in conventional terms, this earth
has been traveling, as part of the solar system, from Sirius, toward
Vega, in 2,000 years this earth has traveled 819,936,000,000 miles. This
distance is 4,500 times the distance that is the base line for orbital
parallax. Then displacement of the stars by solar-motion parallax in
2,000 years, should be 4,500 times the displacement by orbital parallax,
in one year. Give to orbital parallax as minute a quantity as is
consistent with the claims made for it, and 4,500 times that would dent
the Great Dipper and nick the Sickle of Leo, and perhaps make the Dragon
look like a dragon. But not a star in the heavens has changed more than
doubtfully since the stars were catalogued by Hipparchus, 2,000 years
ago. If, then, there be minute displacements of stars that are
attributed to orbital parallax, they will have to be explained in some
other way, if evidently the sun does not move from Sirius toward Vega,
and if then, quite as reasonably, this earth may not move.

Prof. Young's third "proof" is spectroscopic.

To what degree can spectroscopy in astronomy be relied upon? Bryant, *A
History of Astronomy*, p. 206:

That, according to Bélopolsky, Venus rotates in about 24 hours, as
determined by the spectroscope; that, according to Dr. Slipher, Venus
rotates in about 224 days, as determined by the spectroscope.

According to observations too numerous to make it necessary to cite any,
the seeming motions of stars, occulted by the moon, show that the moon
has atmosphere. According to the spectroscope, there is no atmosphere
upon the moon (*Pubs. Astro. Soc. Pacific*, vol. 6, no. 37)

The ring of light around Venus, during the transits of 1874 and

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1882, indicated
that Venus has atmosphere. Most astronomers say that Venus has an
atmosphere of extreme density, obscuring the features of the planet.
According to spectrum analysis, by Sir William Huggins, Venus has no
atmosphere (*Eng. Mec.*, 4-22).

In the *English Mechanic*, 89-439, are published results of
spectroscopic examinations of Mars, by Director Campbell, of the Lick
Observatory: that there is no oxygen, and that there is no water vapor
on Mars. In *Monthly Notices, R.A.S.*, 27-178, are published results of
spectroscopic examinations of Mars by Huggins: abundance of oxygen; same
vapors as the vapors of this earth.

These are the amusements of our Pilgrim's Progress, which has new San
Salvadors for its goals, or new Plymouth Rocks for its expectations—but
the experiences of pilgrims have variety—

In 1895, at the Allegheny Observatory, Prof. Keeler undertook to
determine the rotation-period of Saturn's rings, by spectroscopy. It is
gravitational gospel that particles upon the outside of the rings move
at the rate of 10.69 miles a second; particles upon the inner edge,
13.01 miles a second. Prof. Keeler's determinations were what Sir Robert
Ball calls "brilliant confirmation of the mathematical deduction." Prof.
Keeler announced that according to the spectroscope, the outside
particles of the rings of Saturn move at the rate of 10.1 miles a
second, and that the inner particles move at the rate of 12.4 miles a
second—"as they ought to," says Prof. Young, in his gospel, *Elements of
Astronomy*.

One reads of a miracle like this, the carrying out into decimals of
different speeds of different particles in parts of a point of light,
the parts of which cannot be seen at all without a telescope, whereby
they seem to constitute a solid motionless structure, and one admires,
or one worships, according to one's inexperience

Or there comes upon one a sense of imposture and imposition that is not
very bearable. Imposition or imposture or captivation—and it's as if
we've been trapped and have been put into a revolving cage, some of the
bars revolving at unthinkable speed, and other bars of it going around
still faster, even though not conceivable. Disbelieve as we will, deride
and accuse, and think of all the other false demonstrations that we have
encountered, as we will—there's the buzz of the bars that encircle us.
The concoction that has caged us is one

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

the most brilliant harlots in modern prostitution: we're imprisoned at
the pleasure of a favorite in the harem of the God of Gravitation.
That's some relief: language always is—but how are we to determine" that
the rings of Saturn do not move as they "ought" to, and thereby add more
to the discrediting of spectroscopy in astronomy?

A gleam on a planet that's like shine on a sword to deliver us—

The White Spot of Saturn—

A bright and shining deliverer.

There's a gleam that will shatter concoctions and stop velocities.
There's a shining thing on the planet Saturn, and the blow that it
shines is lightning. Thus far has gone a revolution of 10.1 miles a
second, but it stops by magic against magic; no farther buzzes a
revolution of 12.4 miles a second—that the rings of Saturn may not move
as, to flatter one little god, they "ought" to, because, by the
handiwork of Universality, they may be motionless.

Often has a white spot been seen upon the rings of Saturn: by Schmidt,
Bond, Secchi, Schroeter, Harding, Schwabe, De Vico—a host of other
astronomers.

It is stationary.

In the *English Mechanic*, 49-195, Thomas Gwyn Elger publishes a sketch
of it as he saw it upon the nights of April 18 and 20, 1889. It occupied
a position partly upon one ring and partly upon the other, showing no
distortion. Let Prof. Keeler straddle two concentric merry-go-rounds,
whirling at different velocities: there will be distortion. See vol. 49,
*English Mechanic*, for observation after observation by astronomers
upon this appearance, when seen for several months in the year 1889, the
observers agreeing that, no matter what are the demands of theory, this
fixed spot did indicate that the rings of Saturn do not move.

The White Spot on Saturn has blasted minor magic. He has little, black
retainers who now function in the cause of completeness—the little,
black spots of Saturn—

*Nature*, 53.109:

That, in July and August, 1895, Prof. Mascari, of the Catania
Observatory, had seen dark spots upon the crepe ring of Saturn. The
writer in *Nature* says that such duration is not easy to explain,

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

if the rings of Saturn be formations of moving particles, because
different parts of the discolored areas would have different velocities,
so that soon would they distort and diffuse.

Certainly enough, relatively to my purpose, which is to find out for
myself, and to find out with anybody else who may be equally impressed
with a necessity, a brilliant, criminal thing has been slain by a gleam
of higher intensity. Certainly enough, then, with the execution of one
of its foremost exponents, the whole subject of spectroscopy in
astronomy has been cast into rout and disgrace, of course only to
ourselves, and not in the view of manufacturers of spectroscopes, for
instance; but a phantom thing dies a phantom death, and must be slain
over and over again.

I should say that just what is called the spectrum of a star is not
commonly understood. It is one of the greatest uncertainties in science.
The spectrum of a star is a ghost in the first place, but this ghost has
to be further attenuated by a secondary process, and the whole
appearance trembles so with the twinkling of a star that the stories
told by spectra are gasps of palsied phantoms. So it is that, in one of
the greatest indefinitenesses in science, an astronomer reads in a
bewilderment that can be made to correspond with any desideratum. So it
is our acceptance that when any faint, tremulous story told by a
spectrum becomes standardized, the conventional astronomer is told, by
the spectroscope, what he should be told, but that when anything new
appears, for which there is no convention, the bewilderment of the
astronomers is made apparent, and the worthlessness of spectroscopy in
astronomy is shown to all except those who do not want to be shown. Upon
the first of February, 1892, Dr. Thomas D. Anderson, of Edinburgh,
discovered a new star that became known as Nova Aurigae. Here was
something as to which there was no dogmatic "determination." Each
astronomer had to see, not what he should, but what he could. We shall
see that the astronomers might as well have gone, for information, to
some of Mrs. Piper's "controls" as to think of depending upon their own
ghosts.

In *Monthly Notices*, February, 1893, it is said that probably for seven
weeks, up to the time of calculation, one part of this new star had been
receding at a rate of 230 miles a second, and another part

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

approaching at a rate of 320 miles a second, giving to these components
a distance apart of 550 miles × 60 × 60 × 24 × 49, whatever that may be.

But there was another séance. This time Dr. Vogel was the medium. The
ghosts told Dr. Vogel that the new star had three parts, one approaching
this earth at the rate of about 420 miles a second, another approaching
at a rate of 22 miles a second, a third part receding at a rate of 300
miles a second. See *Jour. B. A. A.*, 2-258.

After that, the "controls" became hysterical. They flickered that there
were six parts of this new star, according to Dr. Lowell's *Evolution of
Worlds*, p. 9. The faithful will be sorry to read that Lowell revolted.
He says: "There is not room for so many on the stage of the cosmic
drama." For other reasons for repudiating spectroscopy, or spiritualism,
in astronomy, read what else Lowell says upon this subject.

Nova Aurigae became fainter. Accordingly, Prof. Klinkerfues "found" that
two bodies had passed, and had inflamed, each other, and that the light
of their mutual disturbances would soon disappear (*Jour. B. A. A.*,
2-365).

Nova Aurigae became brighter. Accordingly, Dr. Campbell "determined"
that it was approaching this earth at a rate of 128 miles a second
(*Jour. B. A. A.*, 2-504).

Then Dr. Espin went into a trance. It was revealed to him that the
object was a nebula (*Eng. Mec.*, 56-61). Communication from Dr. and
Mrs. Huggins, to the Royal Society—not a nebula, but a star (*Eng.
Mec.*, 57-397) . See *Nature*, 47-352, 425—that, according to M. Eugen
Gothard, the spectrum of N. A. agreed "perfectly" with the spectrum of a
nebula: that, according to Dr. Huggins, no contrast could be more
striking than the difference between the spectrum of N. A., and the
spectrum of a nebula.

For an account of the revelations at Stonyhurst Observatory, see *Mems.
R. A. S.*, 51-129—that there never had been a composition of bodies
moving at the rates that were so definitely announced, because N. A. was
a single star.

Though I have read some of the communications from "Rector" and "Dr.
Phinuit" to Mrs. Piper, I cannot think that they ever mouthed sillier
babble than was flickered by the star-ghosts to the

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

astronomers in the year 1892. We noted Prof. Klinkerfues' "finding" that
two stars had passed each other, and that the illumination from their
mutual perturbations would soon subside. There was no such
disappearance. For observations upon N. A., ten years later, see
*Monthly Notices*, 62-65. For Prof. Barnard's observations twenty years
later, see *Sci. Amer. Sup.*, 76-154.

The spectroscope is useful in a laboratory. Spoons are useful in a
kitchen. If any other pilgrim should come upon a group of engineers
trying to dig a canal with spoons, his experience and his temptation to
linger would be like ours as to the astronomers and their attempted
application of the spectroscope. I don't know what of remotest
acceptability may survive in the third supposed proof that this earth
moves around the sun, though we have not found it necessary to go into
the technicalities of the supposed proof. I think we have killed the
phantom thing, but I hope we have not quite succeeded, because we are
moved more by the æsthetics of slaughter than by plain murderousness: we
shall find unity in disposing of the third "proof" by the means by which
the two others were disposed of—

Regular Annual Shift of Spectral Lines versus Solar Motion—

That, if this earth moves around the sun, the shift might be found by
scientific Mrs. Pipers so to indicate—

But that if part of the time this earth, as a part of one traveling
system, moves at a rate of 19 plus 13 miles a second and then part of
the time at a rate of 19 minus 13 miles a second, compounding with great
complexities at transverse times, that is the end of the regular annual
shift that is supposed to apply to orbital motion.

We need not have admitted in the first place that the three abstrusities
are resistances: however, we have a liking for revelations ourselves.
Aberration and Parallax and Spectral Lines do not indicate only that
this earth moves relatively to the stars: quite as convincingly they
indicate that the stars in one composition gyrate relatively to a
central and stationary earth, all of them in one concavity around this
earth, some of them showing faintest of parallax, if this earth be not
quite central to the revolving whole.

Something that I did not mention before, though I referred to Lowell's
statements, is that astronomers now admit, or state, that

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

the shift of spectral lines, which they say indicates that this earth
moves around the sun, also indicates any one of three other
circumstances, or sets of circumstances. Some persons will ask why I
didn't say so at first, and quit the meaningless subject. Maybe it was a
weakness of mine—something of a sporting instinct, I fear me, I have at
times. I lingered, perhaps slightly intoxicated, with the deliciousness
of Prof. Keeler and his decimals—like someone at a race track,
determining that a horse is running at a rate of 2,653 feet and 4 inches
a minute, by a method that means that no more than it means that the
horse is brown, is making clattering sounds, or has a refreshing odor.
For a study of a state of mind like that of many clergymen who try to
believe in Moses, and in Darwin, too, see the works of Prof. Young, for
instance. This astronomer teaches the conventional spectroscopic
doctrine, and also mentions the other circumstances that make the
doctrine meaningless. Such inconsistencies are phenomena of all
transitions from the old to the new.

Three giants have appeared against us. Their hearts are bubbles. Their
bones wilt. They are the limp caryatides that uphold the phantom
structure of Palaeo-astronomy. By what miracle, we asked, could
foundation be built subsequently under a baseless thing. But three
ghosts can fit in anywhere.

Sometimes astronomers cite the Foucault pendulum-experiment as "proof"
of the motions of this earth. The circumstances of this demonstration
are not easily mode clear: consequently one of normal suspiciousness is
likely to let it impose upon him. But my practical and commonplace
treatment is to disregard what the experiment and its complexities are,
and to enquire whether it works out or not. It does not. See *Amer.
Jour. Sci.*, 2-12-402; *Eng. Mec.*, 93-293, 306; *Astro. Reg.*, 2-265.
Also we are told that experiments upon falling bodies have proved this
earth's rotation. I get so tired of demonstrating that there never has
been any Evolution mentally, except as to ourselves, that, if I could,
I'd be glad to say that these experiments work out beautifully. Maybe
they do. See Proctor's *Old and New Astronomy*, p. 229.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8](land08.md)
