[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](land23)  [Next](land25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P8882/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*New Lands*, by Charles Fort, \[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 24

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> through lenses rimmed with horizons,
inhabitants of this earth have seen revelations of other worlds—that
atmospheric strata of different densities are lenses—but that the faults
of the wide glasses in the observatories are so intensified in
atmospheric revelations that all our data are distortions. Our
acceptance is that every mirage has a primary; that in human mind all
poetry is based upon observation, and that imagery in the sky is
similarly uncreative. If a mirage cannot be traced to the known upon
this earth, one supposes that it is either a derivation from the unknown
upon this earth, or from the unknown somewhere else. We shall have data
of a series of mirages in Sweden, or upon the shores of the Baltic, from
October, 1881, to December, 1888. I take most of the data from *Nature*,
*Knowledge*, *Cosmos*, and *L’Astronomie*, published in this period. I
have no data of such appearances in this region either before or after
this period: the suggestion in my own mind is that they were not mirages
from terrestrial primaries, or they would not be so confined to one
period, but were shadows or mirages from something that was in temporary
suspension over the Baltic and Sweden, all details distorted and
reported in terms of familiar terrestrial appearances.

Oct. 10, 1881—that at Rugenwalde, Pomerania, the mirage of a village had
been seen: snow-covered roofs from which hung icicles; human forms
distinctly visible. It was believed that the mirage was a representation
of the town of Nexo, on the island of Bornholm. Rugenwalde is on the
Baltic, and Nexo is about 100 miles northwest, in the Baltic.

The first definite account of the mirages of Sweden, findable by me, is
published in *Nature*, June 29, 1882, where it is said that preceding
instances had attracted attention—that, in May, 1882, over Lake Orsa,
Sweden, representations of steamships had been seen, and then "islands
covered with vegetation." Night of May 19,

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1883—beams of
light at Lake Ludyika, Sweden—they looked like a representation of a
lake in moonshine, with shores covered with trees, showing faint
outlines of farms (*Monthly Weather Review*, May, 1883). May 28, 1883—at
Finsbo, Sweden—changing scenes, at short intervals: mountains, lakes,
and farms. Oct. 16, 1884—Lindsberg—a large town, with four-storied
houses, a castle and a lake. May 22, 1885—Gothland—a town surrounded by
high mountains, a large vessel in front of the town. June 15, 1885—near
Oxelosund—two wooded islands, a construction upon one of them, and two
warships. It is said that at the time two Swedish warships were at sea,
but were at considerable distance north of Oxelosund. Sept. 12,
1885—Valla—a representation that is said to have been a "remarkable
mirage" but that is described as if the appearances were
cloud-forms—several monitors, one changing into a spouting whale, and
the other into a crocodile—then forests—dancers—a wooded island with
buildings and a park. Sept. 29, 1885—again at Valla—between 8 and 9
o'clock, P.M.; a lurid glare upon the northwestern horizon; a cloud
bank—animals, groups of dancers, a forest, and then a park with paths.
July 15, 1888—Hudikwall—a tempestuous sea, and a vessel upon it; a small
boat leaving the vessel. Upon Oct. 8, 1888, at Merexull, on the Baltic,
but in Russia, was seen a mirage of a city that lasted an hour. It is
said that some buildings were recognized, and that the representation
was identified with St. Petersburg, which is about 200 miles from the
Baltic.

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

That a large, substantial mass, presumably of land, can be in at least
temporary suspension over a point upon this earth's surface, and not
fall, and be, in ordinary circumstances, invisible—

In *L’Astronomie*, 1887-426, MM. Codde and Payan, both of them
astronomers, well-known for their conventional observations and
writings, publish accounts of an unknown body that appeared upon the
sun's limb, for twenty or thirty seconds, after the eclipse of Aug. 19,
1887. They saw a round body, apparent diameter about one tenth of the
apparent diameter of the sun, according to the sketch that is published.
In *L’Astronomie*, these two observers write separately, and, in the
city of Marseilles, their observations

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

were made at a distance apart. But the unknown body was seen by both
upon the same part of the sun's limb. So it is supposed that it could
not have been a balloon, nor a circular cloud, nor anything else very
near this earth. But many astronomers in other parts of Europe were
watching this eclipse, and it seems acceptable that others, besides two
in Marseilles, continued to look, immediately after the eclipse; but
from nowhere else came a report upon this object, so that all
indications are that it was far from the sun and near Marseilles, but
farther than clouds or balloons in this local sky. I can draw no diagram
that can satisfy all these circumstances, except by supposing the sun to
be only a few thousand miles away.

<div align="center">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

If little black stones fall four times, in eleven years, to one part of
this earth's surface, and fall nowhere else, we are, in conceiving of a
fixed origin somewhere above a stationary earth, at least conceiving in
terms of data, and, whether we are fanatics or not, we are not of the
type of other upholders of stationariness of this earth, who care more
for Moses than they do for data. I'd not like to have it thought that we
are not great admirers of Moses, sometimes.

The rock that hung in the sky of Servia—

Upon Oct. 13, 1872, a stone fell from the sky, to this earth, near the
town of Soko-Banja, Servia. If it were not a peculiar stone, there is no
force to this datum. It is said that it was unknown stone. A name was
invented for it. The stone was called *banjite*, after the town near
which it fell.

Seventeen years later (Dec. 1, 1889) another rock of *banjite* fell in
Servia, near Jelica.

For Meunier's account of these stones, see *L’Astronomie*, 1890272, and
*Comptes Rendus*, 92-331. Also, see *La Nature*, 1881-1-192. According
to Meunier these stones did fall from the sky; indigenous to this earth
there are no such stones; nowhere else have such stones fallen from the
sky; they are identical in material; they fell seventeen years apart.

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

At times when we think favorably of this work of ours, we see in it a
pointing-out of an evil of modern specialization. A seismologist studies
earthquakes, and an astronomer studies meteors;. neither studies both
earthquakes and meteors, and consequently each, ignorant of the data
collected by the other, sees no relation between the two phenomena. The
treatment of the event in Servia, Dec. 1, 1889, is an instance of
conventional scientific attempts to understand something by separately,
or specially, focusing upon different aspects, and not combining into an
inclusive concept. Meunier writes only upon the stones that fell from
the sky, and does not mention an earthquake at the time. Milne, in his
*Catalogue of Destructive Earthquakes*, lists the occurrence as an
earthquake, and does not mention stones that fell from the sky. All
combinations greatly affect the character of components: in our
combination of the two aspects, we see that the phenomenon was not an
earthquake, as earthquakes are commonly understood, though it may have
been meteoric; but was not meteoric, in ordinary terms of meteors,
because of the unlikelihood that meteors, identical in material, should,
seventeen years apart, fall upon the same part of this earth's surface,
and nowhere else.

This occurrence was of course an explosion in the sky, and its
vibrations were communicated to the earth below, with all the effects of
any other kind of earthquakes. Back in our earliest confusion of the
data of a century's first quarter, we had awareness of this combination
and its conventional misinterpretation: that many concussions that have
been communicated from explosions in the sky have been catalogued in
lists of subterranean earthquakes. We are farther along now, in our data
of the 19th century, and now we come across awareness, in other minds,
of this distinguishment. At 8:20 A.M., Nov. 20, 1887, was heard and felt
something that was reported from many places in the region that is known
to us as the London Triangle, as an earthquake, though in some towns it
was thought that a great explosion, perhaps in London, had occurred. It
was reported from Reading, and from four towns near Reading, and Reading
is said to be one of the places where the concussion was greatest. There
were several accounts of slight alarm among sheep, which are sensitive
to meteors

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

and earthquakes. But, in *Symons’ Met. Mag.*, Mr. H. G. Fordham wrote
that the occurrence was not an earthquake; that a meteor had exploded.
He had very little to base this opinion upon: out of scores of
descriptions, he had record of only two assertions that something had
been seen in the sky. Nevertheless, because the sound was so much
greater than the concussion, Mr. Fordham came to his conclusion.

In *Symons’ Met. Mag.*, 23-154, Dr. R. H. Wake writes that, upon the
evening of Nov. 3, 1888, in a region about four miles wide and ten or
fifteen miles long, in the Thames Valley (near Reading) flocks of sheep
had rushed from their folds in a common alarm. About a year later, in
the Chiltern Hills, which extend in a northeasterly direction from the
Thames Valley, near Reading, there was another such occurrence. In the
London *Standard*, Nov. 7, 1889, the Rev. J. Ross Barker, of Chesham, a
town about 25 miles northeast of Reading, writes that, upon Oct. 25,
1889, many flocks of sheep, in a region of 30 square miles, had, by
common impulse, broken from their folds. Mr. Barker asks whether anyone
knew of a meteor or of an earthquake at the time. In vol. 24, *Symons’
Met. Mag.*, Mr. Symons accepts that all three of these occurrences were
effects of meteoric explosions in the sky. The phenomena are
insignificant relatively to some that we have considered: the
significance is in this definite recognition in orthodoxy, itself, that
some supposed earthquakes, or effects of supposed earthquakes, are
reactions to explosions in the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25](land25)
