[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric/Occult](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp04)  [Next](twp06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### CHAPTER III

In the first chapter of this book I have spoken of the science of the
occult as standing on the tripod of the psychic, intellectual and
physical and I might have said much more on all three, as India has done
in her great teachings. But in such matters it is wise to be extremely
practical and to begin at the beginning and with something entirely in
one's own control; and this can scarcely be said either of the psychic
or of the intellectual, for both are more or less conditioned by the
stage of evolution reached in their development, whereas with common
sense and intelligent suggestion one can begin at any moment to improve
the powers of the third person of that strange trinity which is
man--namely, the body--and thereby begin to clear the channel through
which force flows to the other two. I do not deny that people of frail
or crippled physique have had strong psychic and intellectual
perception, but it is in spite of the physical disability, not because
of it; and had

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

their bodies been in the same efficient working order as (say) the
reflectors of an astronomical instrument they would have had clearer and
more coherent results, less disturbed with the storms and vibrations
which interrupt connection. It is a fact proved by age-long experience
that the body embruted and degraded by intemperate living and misuse of
the sensual pleasures completely blocks the way to the evolution of
intellectual and psychic growth:

The Lord let the house of a brute to the soul of a man,  
And the man said, "Am I your debtor?"  
And the Lord--"Not yet; but make it as clean as you can,  
And then I will let you a better."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In other words, to
work without the co-operation of the body is to be perpetually standing
on tip-toe in an unnatural attitude which deflects attention to itself.
Also, happy people are much more likely to do the best work in psychic
science. Misery has a driving force which sometimes wrings fine
intellectual and artistic work out of men as an escape-valve from its
pressure, and because ill-health is misery a man like Lombroso can point
to certain brain and body cripples who have had what he calls genius.
But for the highest forms of art, serene and sunny consciousness of

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

peace and power is the atmosphere for the most enduring work, and this
applies a thousandfold to psychic wisdom, where, historically, are seen
immortal results attained by those who have made the body a clear window
through which the inward light can shine.

Therefore health of the body, which includes that transmitter the brain,
is of immense importance for people who wish to attain high results in
the study of the psychic, commonly called the occult, and it is plain
wisdom to neglect no means of attainment, especially the fundamental one
of a body trained to co-operation instead of hindrance.

To those who have experienced this advantage it is really like watching
a dance of lunatics to see how people apparently otherwise competent to
pursue the business of life treat their bodies. Women who consider the
possession of physical beauty the chief business of life as means to the
only end they are capable of understanding destroy it as it were
wilfully, withering its brief blossom by every means in their power.
They eat foods fatal to the circulation and mechanism of the body,
coarsening their skins till all the raddling and rouging in the world
only accentuates

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the mischief, dulling the luster of their eyes and hair, driving their
bodies into the rebellion of excessive fat or leanness at ages when they
should still be beautiful as figures on a Greek frieze. Men to whom
pellucid clearness of brain is wealth or power, vital to all their hopes
and interests, cloud it with nicotine and alcohol, darken it with gross
and mistaken feeding. Since the brain is part of the body and the
nervous system is the first to cry out against such usage one may safely
say that men and women suffering from the results of such folly are very
ill qualified to run the world's business. When Carlyle wrote that every
sick man was a scoundrel he was with characteristic violence overstating
a case which does not need strengthening, and there is something to be
said for the point of view in Butler's brilliant "Erewhon" where people
suffering from physical disability are brought before a jury to be
judged and condemned accordingly. The Roman who spoke of "a healthy mind
in a healthy body" knew what he was talking of. And with Carlyle I
marvel at what men suffer, not at what they lose.

In the study of the Occult a healthy body and clear brain are even more
necessary than in the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

affairs of daily life, because in that strange world we are explorers.
It is ours, yet unknown to us, forgotten, uncharted, in some ways
dangerous. Though the world is really our own we are as little at home
in it at first as the long-lost heir when he returns to his kingdom and
finds the scepter strange and alarming in hands used to the spade. And
it is largely because they have often lacked this physical calm and
poise that we are apt to call those men mad who have penetrated behind
the deceptive Looking Glass of our senses and with half-dazed eyes
brought back word of the strange conditions beyond. They are very
strange because in the world of reality the values are not ours, our
great things are small, our small things great and all our logic
baffled. But the pioneer need not necessarily be unbalanced. Take an
historical example of what is probably the greatest pioneering fact in
the history of psychics; the one which has shaped the lives and
destinies of more uncounted millions than any other. No one has called
the Buddha either nerve-broken or insane, though after that tremendous
psychic experience which gained him the name of the Enlightened One he
returned from the world of true perception with teachings

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

perfectly staggering to the opinions concerning life and death held by
the world at large. And the foremost reason of his triumph in enabling
men to discern what really matters from what does not matter a cent was
his perfect sanity and cool clarity of brain backing the highest psychic
perception and all based upon a disciplined body. That was a thing all
men could understand and honor. He had tried luxury and had renounced
its poisons. He had tried a cruel asceticism and had cast aside its
follies, and so experienced he taught a wise temperance that the body
attaining perfect poise may not thrust its revolt in the face of the
spirit. According to his doctrine the psychic powers are sooner or later
within the reach of every man who follows a certain plainly defined
path. They come as inevitably and normally as breathing, but like all
other powers are to be used with caution and wisdom and by no means as a
show-off or an end in themselves. This wisdom he had learned from the
ancient Indian teaching and his own great experience. It is the art of
seeing life steadily and whole both within and outside the perception of
our physical senses and it cannot be completely mastered until the
subjugation and co-operation of the body

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

are made part of the coherent scheme of things. Real life cannot be
treated as a thing of little colored patches. It must be seen in its
entirety.

I know that to acquire a perfectly working circulation of the blood and
mastered appetites may seem a lowly beginning for a great quest but
there is an Indian parable which illustrates the value of the infinitely
little. A prisoner in a great tower directs his wife to bring to its
foot a beetle, a silk thread and a little honey. She is to attach the
silk to the beetle, to smear his horns with honey and set him free to
climb the tower, following the scent of the honey. He does it. A twine
is attached to the silk thread, a rope to the twine and the prisoner is
freed. The infinitely little has conquered.

So the ancient wisdom of India perceived long ago, what we are dimly
beginning to guess, that if a man desires to storm the strange world of
psychic attainment safely he must lay his foundations on the earth as he
sees it and make the body his co-operator and not his trampled or
pampered slave. For, as says one of the greatest of the ancient books:
"He who fasts and he who eats too much, he who does not sleep and he who
sleeps too much, he who works too much and he

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

who does not work,--none of these can be adepts." In other words one
cannot acquire discrimination, insight and instinct without making a
scientific study of the means to that end.

I gained the beginning of this knowledge by experience years before I
knew anything of the way charted out in Asia. Fortunately for myself I
suffered in youth from violent headaches which obliged me to consider
whether there was no means of escape from facing life with such a
miserable handicap. Doctors failed in finding their cause or cure and at
last I resolved I would give up one food after another in hope of
tracking down the offender. I did this and have never had a trace of
headache from that day to this, though with as many opportunities for it
as most people can boast of.

I was groping blindly for escape from bodily suffering and had not the
faintest notion that this change would influence my life psychically and
intellectually. It would be handsomer if I could say I had done it from
the most exalted motives, but it is perhaps more impressive as showing
the colorless and impassive action of law in these matters that such a
very ordinary impulse should lead one into such unforeseen paths. For
when

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I came in touch
later with the wisdom of the Orient I knew that by a very little hole I
had crept in through the thorny hedge that guards the ancient wisdom. It
was a tiny beginning, but a beginning.

I do not say for a moment that the world of true wonders lies open
before one who has so entered. Life is not like that in any of its
spheres. . . . Physically, intellectually and psychically it is always a
case of evolution, and in evolution you cannot jump any of the links. I
will try to tell as simply and truly as I can exactly what the process
seemed to me to be as it worked itself out.

First there was the relief from a crippling disability. That is always
joy. Indeed it has been said there is no joy in the world so great as
the relief from suffering, which though it may be an exaggerated
statement represents a common experience. I knew at once that a problem
was solved and had left me free to grapple with others, and realizing
that the body is like a boat obedient to the rudder I had a passionate
desire to see how much could be done with it by wise steering. It was
more difficult then than now because within the last few years the
doctors have

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

begun to pay some attention to the preventive aspects of disease and one
can have advice. For me it was a case of pioneering, but I did not turn
back for a moment.

Here I may be asked what I did. I gave up in one gesture, so to speak,
meat of every kind, including poultry and fish. I also surrendered tea,
coffee, and cocoa. Alcoholic drinks I had never used. I was ignorant
that this sudden change of habit was a risk and it did not hurt me, but
I should always advise against any but a very gradual change. For a time
I lived on cooked vegetables, much cereal, and an abundance of milk, a
mistaken diet though infinitely better than the one I had left. But
gradually the mysterious wisdom of the body asserted itself and I
evolved a diet of raw fruit, salads, nuts, a little cheese, eggs not
abundantly used, and for drinks water and sometimes milk. Everyone
cannot take milk so I may mention that with lemon juice dropped into it
and stirred while dropping (in the proportion of about half a lemon to a
tumbler of milk) it is a very refreshing and digestible drink. I took
very little cereal, and gave up cakes, puddings, pastries and all
sugared foods, and I have lived ever since in this

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

way, eating only two or three times a day and never between meals. I
tried twice in view of going to a country where it is dangerous to eat
salads to substitute a little fish but it was such a failure from every
point of view that I gave it up. I may say I have no use for the
so-called "simple feeding" which demands all sorts of meatless dishes,
elaborately cooked, and continues the drugs of tea and coffee. It is
better to get down to bed-rock if you really want to make a success, and
one gets to like these simple foods so much as to think it strange that
everyone is not content with them.

And now I will say what these did for me. I had rather an inclination to
overweight. That disappeared and I touched the normal weight for my
height and have kept to it. With this carne activity and energy of mind
and body which have never left me. I had been a little inclined to
drowsy and lethargic reverie. *Doing* now became more interesting, but
it was doing with a clear purpose ahead for I realized that I was
gaining weapons and sharpening them for the adventure of life. My
circulation was clear. I no longer suffered from cold hands and feet,
and instead of pallor, developed a healthy color. I

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

noticed that even my hair gathered luster, as one may see a sick dog's
roughened staring coat smooth itself and shine, with wise treatment. I
could walk distances almost incredible when I remembered how the least
fatigue had ended formerly in sick headache. The next result was that I
began to realize in natural sequence that though cutting out certain
food-poisons is the foundation stone of the palace of health the
building asks for such tools as right exercise, right breathing, right
use of hot and cold water for drinking and baths, pure air and sunshine,
and all these things I studied and practiced patiently and for a while
believed this bodily health was all that mattered for life. That was
natural, for I saw clearly the instant advantage it gave over people who
had not sufficiently grasped its value to make sacrifices for
it--sacrifices which one can afford to laugh at in view of the gain.

Then came one of the penalties of ignorance. I lost strength and
discovered I had been living on capital instead of income. In other
words I had not been eating the necessary ration of the tissue-forming
foods. This may sometimes be an excellent beginning for it runs off the
poisons accumulated by wrong feeding, but it is always

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

risky and should be closely watched. So it became necessary to take the
thing as a serious study that I might understand food values and their
relation to sedentary and active occupations. All this can be done for
one now, but I have never regretted that I had to work through it
myself. The knowledge was driven in and has been most useful. I
recovered strength in a few weeks and then had the luck of meeting a
famous doctor, now dead, who blazed a trail for many through the jungle
of ignorance in such matters. With his help I cleared up the only
remaining difficulty, that of suiting generalities to my own especial
needs--a question always important in every diet. I achieved that and
had no further difficulties. I fear all this sounds very egotistical,
but I have been asked to give details in case they should be useful to
others.

Having now a fixed center to work from I had leisure to notice what a
surprising change was taking place in my intellectual equipment. I could
measure that growth almost daily also. First, in my memory. That had
always been good, but now it became unusual, and I noticed it was
growing by a process which I called inward sight. That is to say, I saw
things rather

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

than remembered them in the ordinary way, and just as when one knows a
place the picture is hung once and for all for reference in one's
brain,. so with anything that interested me. I had not to call anything
to mind. It was as it were flashed upon me the instant I needed it--like
a vision. I memorized nothing but it was always there when I wanted it;
and to this day this is so true that I write a whole historical story
without doing much more than verify my references and seldom find them
mistaken. Perhaps this may be a more common case than I think, but it is
a very useful thing and from another aspect provides me with what I call
a traveling library of prose and poetry, which I have not memorized but
which is always there for use or pleasure. I see a book as a
picture--see the printed page and the very paragraphs and can then
repeat almost anything I have liked whether for use or for pleasure,
things practical as well as things beautiful, if there is a distinction.
And this includes the spoken word.

This was the first thing that made the question of clairvoyance clear to
me. Memory. I said to myself: If what we call the past can be instantly
present to one by inward sight whether

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

intellectually or in the perfect vision of memory calling up and
transporting one to a place trodden no more by one's earthly feet, why
may not this strange faculty of presentment stretch forward also into
what we call the future and present it as clearly to those who have
developed along that line? To memory time and distance offer no
barriers. Why may it not work forward as well as backward? The contra
argument will be: "Because you have not yet seen the things which are to
happen. The impression is not yet made on the brain." But what of
foretelling dreams and prophecies, with which I might fill this article?
I did not then know anything of the Oriental teaching of the static
quality of time which science now appears to be endorsing--what is
called in India the Eternal Now in which past, present and future are
One,--but great possibilities loomed dimly upon me like mountains seen
for an instant through mist and resumed into it.

I found also a very much increased clearness in following argument, in
perception all round, I fear at this time I was ready to make myself a
nuisance, for I was young enough to believe that things clearly
advantageous should be thrust

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

down everybody's throat and that virtue demands a persistent bumping of
all one's friends into the paths of peace. I know few things which
develop a more maddening fanaticism than this kind of brilliant success.
However, I soon outgrew that pugnacious stage and realized that people
can only accept things in their own vibration or stage of development
and are better left without argument which is meaningless to them. Their
time will come as one's own does when the soil is there to provide for
the root of the flower.

But I saw from day to day what a wonderful thing I had hit on. It had
cured my physical disability, had doubled every intellectual power I
possessed, and had given me the confident expectation that this was only
the beginning of what it could accomplish. I was right there. Gradually
another aspect of the question dawned upon me. This way of living was
the most excellent moral (I hate the word) gymnastic that could be
devised. It is no easy thing to live on a plan of one's own in
contradiction to that of the world about one, to be laughed at, chaffed,
however kindly, to be told one is a faddist and so forth. That would not
be the case now. It was the case then. And there was also the question
of giving

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

up foods one had enjoyed for those which at first seemed insipid, and of
reducing them to the simplest, most unobtrusive form, that it might not
inconvenience others.

But after a while it became strangely delightful to find that I did not
mind a bit what people said or thought. I got to know a lot about the
subject and began to make it interesting to them when it happened to
come up, and there was a pride in being what they called "a mighty good
advertisement" for my opinions.

But there is much more to it than that. Chaff rightly directed is the
best tonic in the world for the anemic disease of taking oneself
seriously, a complaint to which the young and clever are dreadfully
prone and from which even the adult and stupid are not wholly exempt. As
a remarkable Bishop of London once said: "After having slain the ape and
the tiger in oneself there still remains the donkey, who is the most
intractable animal of the three." Chaff and good-humored scorn are an
excellent diet for starving out the donkey, and so I found it. But there
was more. I do not think anyone knows or realizes the full flavor of
life until he has learned to say no to himself with rather more than the
same ease

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

with which he can say no to other people's enjoyments. I had learned the
great lesson--it still seems stupendous to me though it may be a truism
to some--that with a real end in view any sacrifice becomes a pleasure
and in that spirit the very best good is attainable on whatever plane
you may choose to seek it. I may add that in Asia this way of living
opens many a close-shut door to those who practice it. It is regarded as
a virtue there.

And after that and with the early experiences I have described in my
first chapter it was not a long step to the question of why all the
great faiths have taught abstinence, temperance, fasting, as a very
sword and shield in the fight against the dominance of the body. They
did not do it to be tiresome and contradictions as had once seemed
possible, but because they were all students of psychology; their
business was with the Occult, and world-wide, age-long experience had
taught them in differing degrees that the real world behind the Looking
Glass is not to be entered by those whom the body binds to its caprices.
It is the religions that insist on this fact which still keep their hold
on their peoples, and the religions that walk in purple and fine

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

linen and fare sumptuously every day which have lost it; because the
reduction of the Occult to a law which every man can perceive and follow
daily is the business of all faiths, and in his own heart every man
knows this cannot be achieved nor the circle squared unless the body
also has sworn allegiance to the quest. It is impossible to know one's
real self and its powers until this is gained, and when it is achieved
the rest is not difficult.

And now things rapidly cleared up in my mind. As my force increased I
was able to speak easily in public, an effort of which I had always
thought with terror hitherto. Not only so, but I can truly say I did not
even need preparation nor do I think I could speak if I prepared. I can
only note any quotation that occurs to me on the subject (and the
subjects are many) and leave the rest to the moment, knowing that the
impulse and fulfilment are independent of the brain.

Thus I gradually realized that what is called the Occult is only an
extension and wider perception of the powers we know, and that
everything is attainable if we leave off talking and get down to
business. Do not let your mind spread

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and splash over. Concentrate on one resolve and exclude others. Take
time to be solitary daily. Avoid people who disturb you. Have the body
in such training that it no more dares to interpose than a highly
trained dog. Cultivate will and perseverance as you can never do with an
undisciplined body. The world has had examples of what concentration can
do but has not realized the source. It is by such thoughts and practices
that man is put in touch with the force of the universe; and he becomes
a channel of the sort of power on which he has chosen to
concentrate--bad or good.

So I learned that the trained mind becomes a form of reason, and reason
blends into the psychic, and delimitations are destroyed so that it
becomes difficult to say where each dominion in the trinity of body,
mind, and spirit which is man begins and ends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](twp06)
