[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric/Occult](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp02)  [Next](twp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# The Way of Power

##### Studies in the Occult

### CHAPTER I

### "The Occult of Today Is the Science of Tomorrow."

I have chosen this motto for my book relating to the occult, for it is
an attempt to describe the (at first) very small experiences and
knowledge which led me to see the reality of the true occult world lying
like an almost uncharted country behind the thick jungle of fraud and
charlatanry, and which have led me also to state in comparative detail
what I found on my journey and the conclusions it compelled. I use the
illustration of "going through the Looking Glass" for two excellent
reasons. Firstly, everyone knows that remarkable story of Alice, dear to
two or three generations, and how she passed through the Looking Glass
to the queer upside-down sort of country behind it. Secondly, few people
realize that the book is a wonderful parable of how you can get through
the mere reflections of things into the reality behind them if

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

only you know the way. Carroll, who was a great mathematician, knew of
the undiscovered country from that point of view. I found a very
different road and as a matter of fact there are almost as many roads as
there are people. The country behind the Looking Glass, generally called
the Occult world, is reality, and the daily world we live in is
Shadow-land though the reflections look so hard and bright and real that
they take most of us in.

The world is a great mirror. A man sees himself in it as the foremost
figure and around him the persons and things which make his
surroundings. The Japanese have called it the Mirror of the Passing
Show--an uncommonly good name. Seeing it with our eyes we take this
reflection for reality and are quite content to believe our senses and
go comfortably or uncomfortably on our way. Very few people know what
blind feelers the five senses are--feeble, faulty, mistaken, and yet
(until we know better) our only means of approach to anything outside
the prison of ourselves. We pity a blind, deaf, dumb man, but are much
in the same case ourselves. It is only a question of degree, and the
microscope, telephone, and so forth carry us a few steps farther

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

into the dark. They are simply extensions. That is what makes the occult
world so amazingly interesting.

We see, no longer blinded by our eyes,  
And hear, no longer deafened by our ears

which is distinctly good business in such a fascinating universe.

Like others I lived in perfect satisfaction with the gay ordinary
reflections in the Looking Glass World until the first doubt overtook me
in childhood. My mother, who had trained me to be perfectly fearless in
matters of the imagination, told me a strange experience which had
befallen her and her sisters and it set me thinking.

Her father owned many ships. A little dance was to be given, and she and
her sister were practicing some dance music two evenings before, with a
third sister to turn the leaves--three happy girls. The drawing-room was
a very large one with dividing folding doors thrown back. As they
played, the standing sister suddenly caught my mother's hands and the
tune crashed in discord. Leaning round the folding door was a man
roughly dressed in a thick short coat. He called out authoritatively
"Stop the music," and,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

as they thought, drew back behind the folding doors and was gone. I
should explain that only two of the three saw. One saw nothing, which is
curious but not unusual in such cases. Two saw and heard. My mother said
that no thought of what is called the supernatural struck them, but they
were frightened because a strange sudden man in the house when it is
shut up for the night is not altogether a pleasant visitation. Still, it
might have been someone to see their father on business. The three
rushed into the dining room with their tale and behold their father was
dozing in his armchair at the head of the empty table after dinner, his
glass of punch beside him. When the house was searched and nothing found
they could not explain the man though they could not dismiss him from
their minds; and the dance arrangements went on until next evening.
Then, as again they were rattling off their music, came interruption. My
grandfather put his head round the folding doors exactly as the stranger
had done. . . . "Stop the music," he said. "One of the ships has gone
down with all hands. There can be no dance tomorrow." The man they had
seen sounded, he thought, very like the captain of the lost ship. They
could get no

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

nearer to a clue but the thing was as certain to the two from whom I
heard it as the sight of each other.

Now when one hears a personal experience like this from people one knows
do not lie, it is either dismissed as hallucination, or makes an
impression coloring all opinion. I turned it over and over in a very
young mind and accepted it as what people called "a ghost," but that did
not last. A ghost is only a symptom. Why did ghosts come to some people
and not to others? And, if they came at all, from where and for what
purpose? Was their country far or near? I had no fear, but deep
curiosity, and from that moment knew that the shining surface of the
mirror of the world may be jarred by quite other reflections than those
one reckons on. But the question in my mind was, *Where do they come
from?* Is there another world beside this which is their domain? Even
then, I did not think this covered all the ground.

My next experience, a personal one, was startling. My grandmother was
strongly clairvoyant. Though I did not even know the word then, I knew
that when she dreamed a thing it had an odd way of coming true; and
always in

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the disagreeable things no one likes to face. In particular, she had an
ominous recurrent dream which was followed by the Unpleasant as surely
as a dog follows his master. I hated that dream, but set it down to some
crank in grandmothers from which young people had nothing to fear. It
coincided more or less. That was all, but it had a kind of interest
difficult to escape.

I was very young and in the rather conceitedly skeptical stage of that
youth of whom the great Master of Trinity, Cambridge, remarked, "We are
none of us infallible; not even the youngest of us." However, one
morning she came down to breakfast with a very grave face and began at
once.

"A very curious thing happened last night. No, not a dream. I was awake,
and I saw in my room a tall man in a turban and a sort of robe. He
knocked three times on the wall. I saw him do it, and somehow I knew it
meant the three-syllabled name of a place and that some terrible
misfortune had happened there. Mark my words, we shall hear something
from Bermuda."

A very near relation was holding a high position there at the time and
for a moment I was startled, but youth is always a little over-clever

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

and I said arrogantly, "As nobody in Bermuda wears a turban that doesn't
seem likely!" and went my way in peace.

She said no more; and letters came from Bermuda and all was well and I
triumphed. But we had not done with the gods. At the earliest possible
moment news came that her nephew, a young officer in the army, loved by
her as a son, had been stabbed to death in the bazaar at Kandahar by an
Indian lunatic. The man, who had apparently never seen him before, came
up behind and drove a knife deep down between his shoulders and so an
end.

Then indeed I began to think, for I had known my cousin well; he was a
real person to me and here was a thing done before my eyes. How had this
strange message fled overseas from India (for the time matched)? Why had
it not come to his mother? Why had my grandmother misread it? Why, when
my cousin had been promoted and we all were glad, had that news come in
a slow letter? Why had the murderer, for it seemed it must be he,
announced it to a woman he had never heard of? Then there must be some
natural affinity with misfortune in this mysterious kind of
intelligence! And had God

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

or the Devil anything to do with it? And what good did it do?

Youth can think when it chooses, and no answer given by the elders to
the questions I propounded met the facts to my satisfaction. They didn't
know. They retired on "coincidence," but I reflected that a world where
such coincidences happen would really be such a miracle in itself that
it only brought the difficulty a step nearer. And again when, not long
after, another case happened which I could verify--the mother of a
sailor hearing his voice crying for help, and finding that that night
his boat had been overturned on the way to his ship and his life all but
lost--it was clear to me that behind the well-polished mirror into which
we all look for our impressions of the world was a dark hinterland where
very strange forces played or worked on lines of their own, having no
relation at all to anything we know and yet with a queer wireless which
they used with people whose aerials were ready to tune in. How and why?
But I called it the private telegraph wire, for wireless had not yet
been reflected on the Mirror of the Passing Show--the world we lived in.

So then I began to read hungrily, untiringly,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

and for years such books as those of Podmore, Myers, Flammarion, and
many more--the adventures and experiments of Sir William Crookes and the
leading men of the Society for Psychical Research in England deserving
special mention because they were so flawlessly honest and possessed by
the desire for truth. They led me gradually into divergent paths, the
magic of the ancient world and of the medieval times, and still I got no
light. The more I studied the subject, the more impossible seemed any
theory that the spirits of the dead should return to communicate with
the living for the purpose of uttering the platitudes attributed to
them. For one thing, these books admitted that the phantasms of the
living could be seen also, and as a girl my own eyes had seen the
appearance of a relation then at a distance pass through a room when I
was alone. Nothing happened as a result, but I had seen and realized
that my first belief that these things were always connected with death
and misfortune was.. mistaken. And as to any instruction from departed
spirits worth the paper it is written on, from that day to this I have
never heard of or read any remark from a supposed departed

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

spirit which is not platitude pure and simple. Even the spirits of the
mightiest are not exempt from this unlucky law of platitude and become
as tedious and obvious as the rest. But I came to the conclusion that
when a very large amount of fraud is excluded there remains certain
evidence of some strange forces at work in some of these dubious
manifestations and materializations. But what? And where could any sort
of evidence be got hold of which would lead to a clue?

Meanwhile I had some interesting personal experiences as the years went
by. I touch briefly on a few of these. I was staying with the mother and
sisters of a very near relation who was on a voyage. One night I dreamed
I saw him limping along the deck in great pain; I told them at breakfast
and met with the usual laughter. But I wrote, and--yes--he had fallen
down a hatchway, had not meant to tell us, and how had I known? I
developed too a curious faculty of sensing some people's thoughts if I
held their hands. A tingle seemed to run up my arm from theirs and then
I knew to a large extent what was in their minds, and this applied also
to things they had held for a while. This did not come off

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

with everyone. There had to be some underlying connecting force, and one
might find that in a stranger and miss it in people of one's own blood.
It was interesting but I gave it up very soon, for physically it was
wearying and I dislike playing about with forces I do not understand. At
the entreaty of a friend now dead I attended one séance, saw what was
considered an extremely fine program of materializations, voices and so
forth, heard the usual explanations, recognized glimpses of the unknown
force. But that approach I considered neither scientific nor spiritual.
A good deal of it seemed grotesque. I never went to another. There were
things I could not explain, but it carried no conviction whatever and
the semi-religious flavor was unpleasant.

But still, behind all these changing scenes lay the belief in power,
uncharted, misunderstood, played with, but--power! And such experiences
brushed me here and there with passing wings as if on their own errands
and left me startled but ignorant.

Then on a day very memorable for myself I stumbled on books relating to
the thought of Asia, but especially India. But does one ever

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

stumble? Is not everything that befalls a man the direct, inevitable
result of his own deeds and thoughts? I read in astonishment, realizing
that here was a nation which had made what we call "the other world" its
chief and engrossing study. In other words, the wise and great among the
Indian people moved with ease in the mysterious World behind the Looking
Glass and found it so much more interesting than the Mirror of the
Passing Show that they really concerned themselves very little with the
latter and gave its prizes the go-by. They had for three thousand years
and more devoted themselves to the study of the soul and its powers as,
let us say, the Western nations have devoted themselves to the
literature of love, and they had done this to the exclusion of the
dreams and delights which tempt us in the West and engross us in that
polished surface reflecting us and our doings in home and mart as the
be-all and end-all, until we never dream that anything lies behind the
Looking Glass which can interest or concern us. And that belief is the
state of mind called by wise men Materialism, and when it possesses a
nation it points straight down the road to national and individual ruin.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Then for the first time I began to see glimpses of light on the horizon,
for I saw that these Indian people spoke of a law which could be tested
and followed and that the "occult" like all the rest of the universe may
have its being within the limits of law. Their books said:

"Yes, there are mighty forces at work all round us, and by obeying
certain rules some of us know how to bend them and make them obedient.
When you understand how to make the wheels go round, then these things
are no more wonderful than telegraphy. As a matter of fact there is
nothing supernatural. There are only things which don't happen commonly
because the rules are not known."

Here was an astonishing thought to meet at large! I resolved to begin at
the beginning and study some of their doings before I probed their
reason. Fate threw in my way a connection by marriage, a naval man, who
on board his ship at Bombay had had a visit from a wandering Hindu who
offered to show a sight the sahibs could never have seen before. He
agreed, and standing a great brass vessel of water on the deck the man
stood off at a great distance and in the sight of many people beckoned,
and the water

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

rose snake-like in the jar and crept over the edge and slipped down the
side a bright snake of water, and so along the deck until he halted it
with a sign, released it with a beckon, and so on until it crept to his
feet and there dissolved into a pool of common water, leaving the jar
empty.

I asked, "How did you explain it?" and the captain answered, "I
couldn't. It couldn't have happened, but all the same he made a lot of
us see it."

"But that kind of mass-hypnotism could be almost as wonderful as the
reality," I suggested. "A really terrible power for good or ill! And
besides you saw the empty jar. What about that?"

He laughed and gave it up. But I pondered. What was the law?

My own turn came to go to India, not credulous at all in the ordinary
sense of the word--quite prepared to meet with fraud and the
sleight-of-hand man, but still confident that behind the Looking Glass
lies the world where things happen not at all according to our logic but
on a very different logic of its own. You can see that in the brilliant
"Through the Looking Glass." First comes the punishment, then

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the crime. The White Queen begins to scream and cuts her finger
afterwards, and the part may be greater than the whole. I saw that our
little maxims end with the Looking Glass and have no currency behind it;
that it has its laws.

There was at one of the most sacred towns a man who was said to perform
the mango trick extremely well, and we invited him to sit on the veranda
of the little hotel and there, under my very eyes, to show his skill. He
sat at my feet, he planted the mango stone in a pot at my feet, then
sitting far off he returned and raised the covering at intervals,
holding it at arm's length and touching neither pot nor plant, that I
might see the growth.

Finally, when the plant had grown to a height of over two feet I picked
two leaves from it and sent one to a friend at home. And the curious
thing is that though I know I sent this and a friend standing beside me
saw the whole incident, the man to whom I sent the leaf declares to this
day he never received it. He returned all my letters in case I should
wish to use them as a travel record and among them is the one in which I
speak of the leaf, but he never saw it. Could it have dropped out and
how? A mango leaf is

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

not a small one. I do not know. I have seen that same performance
several times since and done on obvious lines of juggling. The
difference can be seen and felt very easily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](twp04)
