[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric/Occult](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](twp09)  [Next](twp11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

(*In the four following chapters I quote largely from studies of their
faith written by great Indians ancient and modern*.)

It is taught in India that there are four roads, by each of which Yoga
may be attained: perfect Yoga being understood to signify the
concentration on or union with the universal Self which produces
Realization, release from ignorance, liberation of the soul, and the
powers. They are the Way of Action, the Way of the Intellect, the Way of
Love and Devotion, and the Royal Yoga, which leads directly to the
possession of the supernormal powers. A little should be said of each of
the first three before passing on to the last, for it is not everyone
who can, even if he would, devote himself to the hard discipline there
prescribed, and there is a way for all--even for the very simple or the
highly intellectual--to approach the knowledge of the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

powers latent within himself. I have thought that the well-known parable
of the Christ referring to the men who possessed the talents alludes to
this very thing, for all have this mine within themselves if they care
to dig for the silver, gold or diamonds it contains, each in their
relative value. One man is condemned by the Christ because he hid his
talent in a napkin and did not trouble himself further; the others made
varying uses of theirs, and the moral drawn is the necessity of
diligence in the pursuit of the real Wisdom.

There is a beautiful Indian parable illustrating the truth that each of
these Yogas or disciplines leads straight to possession of the
supernormal powers of body, mind, and spirit:--

 

A king in India used to demand of every great ascetic who possessed all
the occult powers, "Which is the greater man--he who gives up the world
to attain them or he who lives in the world and performs his duties as a
householder?" Some said, "He who gives up the world." But when he
demanded proof they could not prove this and he compelled them to marry
and become house-holders. There came one day an ascetic with a

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

face of wisdom, and on the king's questioning him he replied:

"The householder and he who forsakes the world are equally great: each
in his own way. Come with me and I will prove it."

And the king agreed.

So they went on a long journey to the chief city of another kingdom and
there was all the rejoicing tumult of a high festival, for the beautiful
princess, daughter of the king, was to choose her husband according to
the ancient custom of India. Amid the assembled court and in view of the
people she would throw a garland about the neck of her choice and none
would question her will. And the king and the ascetic stood to see what
she would do. Near them stood a young ascetic of such amazing beauty
that the eyes of all followed him, and when the princess was borne in,
radiant in loveliness, she too saw him, and cast her garland about his
neck, thus choosing him for her husband. And the crowd rejoiced, for his
was a heart-winning and spiritual beauty. He took the garland from his
neck and gave it to her, saying with calm:

"My heart is fixed on other things. To me this is nothing." And he left
the assembly, making

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

his way to the great forest, leaving behind him love, beauty, wealth and
a kingdom, as if all were dross.

The princess sprang from her jeweled throne and followed him on foot,
drawn by Love, the great Seducer, but he neither turned nor looked at
her and so going steadfastly onward was lost in the forest; and there
the king and his teacher, when they followed, found her sobbing and
alone. And it was late in the evening.

So, taking pity, they said to her:

"Here is a great tree. We will all rest under it and tomorrow we will
restore you to your father."

A bird's nest was in the tree where he lived with his wife and three
nestlings. And looking down he saw and said:

"Wife, what must we do? Here are guests and it is winter and they have
no fire to warm them." So he flew away and finding a small burning stick
dropped it before them, and they lighted a fire.

Still watching, he said:

"Wife, they have no food. On us lies the duty as householders and hosts
of providing it. I must do my part, I will give them my body."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

And he flew down into the flame and was killed, and the bird-wife seeing
this, said:

"Here are three persons and only one little bird for them to eat,--it is
not enough. Also it is my duty to second my husband's endeavor."

So she too flew down into the fire, and the little ones accepting it as
their duty also followed the example their parents had set them and
fulfilled the guest-right, going cheerfully to death.

The princess, the king and the ascetic could neither eat nor sleep in
beholding the action of the creatures who showed such high nobility. And
next morning the two men restored her to her father. Then said the
sannyasin (ascetic) to the traveling king:

"You have now seen that each is equally great in his own place. If you
live in the world, hold yourself ready like these birds at all times to
sacrifice yourself for the love of others. If you renounce the world
resemble that young man whom neither love nor beauty nor wealth could
tempt from the straight way of the spirit. But remember this always: The
duty of the one is never the duty of the other."

And the king went home, comprehending. So ends the parable.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Now this first means of approach to the true occult is so simple as to
be within reach of all who have the faintest glimpse of desire for
progress and power in the only world that is real--the world of the
Hidden, the Beautiful, the True--the universe of Power. It is called the
Yoga of Action. And the first instruction is: Consider your ideal,--the
self which you would be if you could choose. Consider it even from the
point of view of the so-called palpable world about you, and having
considered proceed to realize it in yourself. It may be very far from a
perfect ideal but at the moment it is your best and therefore it clearly
indicates the path along which you must travel to the Land behind the
Looking Glass. No two ideals can be, or indeed ought to be, the same,
and this was recognized in India in the four great divisions of caste to
which I must not diverge at present.

The first definite rule is that a man must labor steadfastly at the
duties he has chosen or that have chosen him, and that, doing this
faithfully, the *results* must not trouble him. They are not his
concern. Example. Benefit others in so far as it is possible, but do not
let the question of their gratitude or ingratitude trouble you.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Accomplish to the
limit of your powers, but if they attract the world's notice set no
value on the fame they bring. That is not your concern, and the reason
why it is not is obvious. The desire for fame is one of those things on
which the sense of personality, selfhood, egoism, feeds and fattens.
Therefore it stands as a lion in the way of achievement in a system
which demands oblivion of self and realization of union.

It is unnecessary to recite the moralities common to all humanity (it
may almost be said) of duties to parents, husband, wife, children,
friends, the poor, and as a citizen. But there are instructions in this
Indian system of Yoga as a means to an end which differ from the
Christian ideal and are certainly worth consideration.

The householder is to work as an ordinary man at his profession and the
things which concern him and his family. The profession must not be one
which in itself implies wrong-doing. He must do his best to succeed in
his profession and the acquisition of wealth by fair means is in no way
forbidden. He is to be a center in life and in social matters and the
distribution of his wealth along right lines will advantage all. The
house-holder who acquires wealth by good means and

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

for good purposes is walking the Way (though it is another Way) to the
same end as surely as the ascetic. In him we see a different aspect of
the selfsame virtues of self-surrender and self-oblivion. He must not
gamble, however; he must not move in the companionship of the wicked; he
must speak the truth always. He must speak gently. He must not be the
cause of trouble to others. The householder by aiding great social aims
goes toward the same goal as the greatest yogin beyond the bondage of
the three spheres. If the householder dies in battle fighting for his
country and faith he comes to the same goal as the yogin does by
meditation.

But now comes the difficult part. The freedom of the soul is the goal of
all Yoga however reached. By action men may attain the same goal which
the Christ gained as a Bhakti (the path of utter love and devotion) or
the Buddha as a Jnana (that of high intellect and philosophy). But how
is he who lives and works in the ordinary concerns of the world "to free
his soul"?

He is to work like a master, not a slave; his work is never to bind or
attach his soul. It is all to be done through freedom and love, for all

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

selfish work is slave's work. When a man can love his wife, children,
countrymen, mankind, the world and the universe, and when his actions
spring from that root, he is a true yogin of work, and his spirit is
unattached and winged.

Do you ask a return from your children for what you have done for them?
Do so no more. Work for them and let the matter end there. In what you
do for persons, cities, or the State, expect nothing in return. If you
hold the position where all you give is given without the least thought
of return and as a free offering to the world, then your work will never
bind you. Attachment follows only when return is expected.

So in the sacrifice made by the householder-birds in the parable quoted
above, no fetters held them to life and they were free as the immortal
gods. Surely the Yoga of action, of the man who lives in the world, is
at least as difficult as that of the ascetic, and it is no wonder that
It should lead him straight into the hidden heart of Reality and Power.

And here I will use another Indian parable which illustrates this Yoga
of action.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

A young sannyasin (ascetic) had given himself to the strictest Raja Yoga
discipline. Meditating in the forest one day some leaves fell about him
and looking up he saw a crow and crane fighting. Fury possessed him at
the insult to his quiet, and a flash of fire shot from his head and
destroyed the birds. He rejoiced to recognize power and to feel himself
a yogin of full attainment. He went into the town to beg his bread as
usual and, at the entrance of a house, called: "Mother \[the usual
Indian address\], give me food.''

"Wait a little, my son," said a voice from within.

Pride at once assailed him and in his heart he thought:

"Wretched woman--how dare you keep me waiting!"

Instantly the voice answered:

"You are thinking too much of yourself. Here is no case of the crow and
the crane."

Dumb with astonishment at this, he waited until the woman came with her
alms and then he fell at her feet.

"Mother, how could you know?"

She answered:

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

"My son, I know no Yoga practices. I am an ordinary woman, but all my
life have struggled to do my best. My husband was ill. I could not leave
him and so you had to wait. And such duties, as daughter and wife, are
all the Yoga I have ever practiced. But since I know so little, go on
and you will find a butcher from whom you may learn much."

And he was horrified and startled because in India the butchers belong
to the class of the "untouchables." There are none so low. But he could
do nothing but go on until he saw before him the butcher at his
revolting work. And looking at the young sannyasin the man said:

"The woman sent you to me. Be seated, please, until I am ready."

He waited, and the butcher finished his day by serving his parents and
then turned to the sannyasin.

The young man questioned him on the high subjects of Yoga and in answer
the butcher spoke like one inspired, delivering a discourse that
contained the highest flights and concentrated essence of the Vedanta
philosophy. And when he had finished his great teaching the young
ascetic asked:

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

"Sir, why, with your knowledge, do I find you thus?" And the man
answered;

"No duty is ugly; none is impure. To this I was born, to this devoted.
But I have done my best, and I serve my parents and fulfil my duty as a
householder. I know no Yoga, nor have I ever left the world. But
illumination has found me because I have worked with a spirit free and
unattached."

 

This parable perfectly illustrates the point that the feeble may confute
the wise. These two, the woman and the butcher, had received the great
Illumination. So much for the Yoga of Action.

Next follows the Yoga of Intellect, and here I own I always picture the
mathematicians leading with their pure and austere knowledge, though of
course it is not necessarily so. This is the Yoga that walks fearlessly
along the mountain-peaks of the highest intellect, which from its own
altitudes sees through and over the lies of the senses and knows that
the world is far other than it appears. Here I must use the word
"maya"--so often used in the Western world to signify "illusion" in the
belief that such is its

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sanskrit
signification. But its real meaning may more truly be described as
"phenomena," and as representing the world of appearances which the
untrustworthy senses report to us. They are not illusions, though an
Indian sect at one time argued that point of view, but they are things
wrongly perceived through a medium which presents them to us as they are
not, so that we take them as it were by the wrong handle and cannot use
them as we should and could if we knew them as they are.

There is a passage from one of the ancient Indian books which sums up
the meaning of "maya" very finely.

"Because we talk in vain and are satisfied with the things of the
senses, and because we are running after desires, therefore we cover the
reality as it were with a mist."

And again in one of the ancient books:

"Know nature to be *Maya*, and the Mind, the ruler of this *Maya*, to be
the Lord himself."

Now, in a very deep sense, the highest, most piercing, most searching
form of intellect may most truly become the Lord of *Maya*, in the sense
that it may by sheer luminance of insight so light up the misleading
forms which the senses

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

offer us as to make them transparent and see through them to the truth
behind. Of this form of Yoga the Buddha is the highest known example.

He had practiced the ascetic discipline of the Raja Yoga to which I
devote the whole chapter following this, but certainly also he cast it
aside, perceiving another path upon which his super-normal intellect
could lead him. There is nothing more interesting to those who care for
such things than to study the deep reasoning contemplation to which he
gave himself under the Tree and to read the stages by which it soared
through all the clouds and mists of the senses until it reached the (to
others) almost unbearable illumination of pure truth--naked but radiant.
Naturally the powers followed such strength like tamed hounds, and from
his height he surveyed them and found them comparatively meaningless
because he beheld things so far above and beyond them.

There is no intellect, probably, that could tread the path of the
Buddha, but such insight into causes clears the way for other minds
belonging in their lesser degree to the same order, and this is the road
that the great philosophers,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

mathematicians, scientists, and others like them may tread to the Land
behind the Looking Glass. They will search into the question of man's
boasted "individuality," and will find that it does not exist. The body
is a flux of constantly changing particles, the mind an ever-changing
whirl-pool passing from the imbecility of the infant to the imbecility
of unmemoried old age, and through all this *Maya* they will pierce and
find their way to the One and Unchanging of which we are all a part.
They will realize at last, by their sheer power of destroying
interposing veils by reasoning, that the "individuality" of man is a
distortion of the truth; that only infinite Spirit is individual, that
nothing infinite can ever be divided or changed, and that every man is
in himself the infinite, the unchanging, though the phenomena of life,
while they are believed to be real, make him appear to change, like
colored lights playing upon white surfaces.

And when a man has realized this he knows that the universe is his and
he, and the secret places of the universe are as open to him as the
street in which he lives--and more so--and the occult is the happy
alphabet of the new language the psyche in him has learned to speak. Of

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

course he cannot tell all he knows, for, as has been said, it takes two
to tell the truth--the one to hear and the other to speak,--and there
are not many yet capable of hearing the truths that the yogin who has
trodden the road of reasoning can tell. "There are a few whose eyes are
not darkened with dust. They will hear. None others."

It would not be suitable or possible to open here all the high teachings
on this head. They need a volume of their own. Their watchword is
realization of the great truth, "Thou art That." By pure intellect and
reason a man may gain the truth that the universe is one and he one with
it, and having gained this eternal foothold he knows the central truth
of the central thought of ancient India.

"He that seeth about him the manifold goes from death to death."

He who sees the One has beheld the Vision and holds power in the hollow
of his hand. So much for the intellect and reason.

The third Yoga is known as Bhakti Yoga, and this way is open to all who
possess passionate love and devotion to the occult, the Hidden Treasure.
There is no Yoga that is not based on renunciation, for the reason that
the individual self must

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

be forgotten or it obscures all the rest of the universe. But this third
Yoga dreams on self-renunciation, adores it, is absorbed in it. It sends
rays of love to all that lives and moves and has its being, and in a
sense this is the easiest Yoga of all because no renunciation is
difficult where there is love. If a man loves the marvelous animal life
which lives beside us and which, as Cardinal Newman said, man as a whole
understands less than he does the archangels, is it difficult to him to
refrain from killing, wounding, maltreating those whom science knows to
be our brothers, or slaying them for food? No, indeed. And it may be
added that their lover secures for himself joys wholesome, clean,
uplifting to the true Yoga and understanding, which the man with a gun
or knife can never know. If the heart is given to another all service
for him is pure and exquisite joy, and so, in reading the lives of the
saints, Eastern or Western, one sees that actual pain became pleasure
when the call of the Divine was heard. The martyrs swept the flames
about them like water, the tortures of the dungeons were assuaged with
secret passionate incomprehensible joys. And, as the Swami Vivekananda
has said, the path of love is the easiest advance to

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

the higher consciousness because the lover does not lament the loss of
what he has left behind. I myself should add that nothing is ever left
behind,--all is included and carried on. (I condense.)

"A man loves his own city, then his country, and the intense love for
his little city subsides smoothly, naturally. He learns to love the
whole world and his fanatical patriotism for his own country drops off
without pain. An uncultured man loves the pleasures of the senses, then,
as he becomes cultured, he begins to love intellectual pleasures, and
sense-enjoyments mean less and less to him. So, when he gets into a
plane higher than the intellect or that of inspiration he finds a state
of bliss in which all pleasures of the senses and even the intellect
become as nothing. When the moon shines the stars dim.

"And when this love and adoration reach supreme devotion the man is
free. He resembles the ship in the fable which coming near the magnetic
rock lost all its iron bars and bolts, and his fetters drop. The adorer,
the lover of the highest, need not suppress his emotions \[as in the
other Yogas\] but needs only to intensify and direct them to the
highest."

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

When this point is attained the yogin sits smiling, enthroned above pain
or change. I suppose in our own Scriptures that St. John may be taken as
the type of the Bhakti-yogin, the man who has attained through utter
love and devotion; and it is very clear that he was regarded by the
early Christians as a mighty master of the powers, as much as, if not
more than, St. Paul, who may rather be regarded as a yogin of pure
intellect. This is not to say that the yogin of intellect does not love
and that the yogin of love is incapable of reason, but each has trodden
a different road to the occult. Both have lost the impeding ego, though
by different inspirations.

I might give many illustrations of the three great paths of Yoga which
have been trodden in the West, though perhaps with a less definite
consciousness of the goal ahead than in the East, but I have said enough
to indicate their significance and to urge some readers to study these
ways in a deeper degree for themselves. It cannot be denied that in
these three there is a way for every one to the occult and the powers,
from the simplest to the greatest and most highly developed soul.

In the following chapters I treat of a Yoga far

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

less known and practiced in the West than in the East, though in many a
lonely monastery and cloister in Europe the road was unconsciously and
therefore ignorantly followed which guides the eagle flight of the
psyche to union and the powers. Yet let it not be thought that Raja
Yoga--the royal Yoga--is greater in any way than the other three. It may
perhaps in some respects be a straighter if a harder road, though even
that is open to question. What may be said to anyone whom the
irresistible music of the unseen draws is this: Take the road in which
you can move most simply, steadfastly and easily to attainment. Each has
his own Yoga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](twp11)
