[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE EIGHTEEN SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM

### (by Vasumitra)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.RAS., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. IX.--1880

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

## THE EIGHTEEN SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM

BY REV. S. BEAL, B.A.

   One of the most interesting but intricate questions that can occupy
the attention of the Buddhist student is the history of the eighteen
sects into which the Buddhist Church was at an early date separated. A
clear account of the causes that led to the schisms and the several
tenets held by the separatists was, in the opinion of the late Mr.
Spence Hardy, one of the great *desiderata* in the history of this
religion. The Chinese and Tibetan books contain much valuable
information on these points. Among other works in the northern copy of
the *Tripi.taka*, common in the monasteries of China and Japan, is one
which contains three translations from Sanskrit of the treatise, written
by Vasumitra, on the eighteen schools. This Vasumitra<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> was one of the Buddhist patriarchs who
lived probably about the time of Kanishka, that is, as far as we know at
present with any certainty, about 42 B.C.<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> His aim was evidently to reconcile the
differences that existed in traditions, customs, and acknowledged
scriptures; and it was probably under his auspices, or by his influence
that the Great Council was held that rearranged and revised the Buddhist
Canon as it is known in the North. There are three translations of this
treatise into Chinese; the first is anonymous, and is most obscure. The
second is by Chin-ti, of the Tsin dynasty. The third is by Hiwen Thsang,
of the Tang dynasty. It would be rash to attempt a translation of these
tracts into English without aid or direction--nor would the present
writer have undertaken such a task--but, unfortunately, there is a
parallel translation from the Tibetan in Vassilief's *History of
Buddhism* (Second Supplement, p. 222). This translation by the learned
writer named above was prepared after careful comparison of the Tibetan
text with the three Chinese versions. The result is no doubt an
accurate, though most obscure, reproduction of the work by Vasumitra. It
may perhaps be useful to attempt an independent version of the three
Chinese translations. Not that we can hope to render all plain, but with
the purpose of inducing scholars in China to look into this matter, and
endeavour to throw some light on the subject by comparing these
translations and working independently in the production of others. The
matter may appear of little consequence to some, and needless labour to
others, but in the presence of facts, which are daily coming to our
knowledge, it becomes almost the duty of those who are interested in the
religious development of the Eastern mind, not only in India, but in
other conntries more or less affected by Indian speculations, to search
out the causes and the character of that development, and so connect it
with the religions movements which occurred elsewhere about the same
time. We proceed to give part of the translation by the anonymous
Chinese writer, and which stands first in the Buddhist Canon.<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. *Ind. Ant.* vol. IV, p. 363.

2\. By some he is placed rather later.--ED. *I. A.*

3\. This translation is denoted as *C* by Vassilief.\]

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

 

*An Account of the Eighteen Principal Schools of Buddhism, from the
original Treatise of Vasumitra, translated into Chinese by three
separate authors.*

   1. A treatise on the eighteen schools (translator's name unknown).

   In the 15th section of the latter volume of the work known as the
Queries of Manjušrî (*Manjušriparip.richchhâ*), the subject being "The
division into schools." \[It is thus written:\]

   At this time Manjušrî questioned Buddha thus: "World-honoured!
Explain, I pray you, what will be the different schools into which your
followers will be separated in the future after your *Nirvâ.na*, and
from what original division these schools will be formed?"

   Buddha answered Manjušrî thus: "There will be twelve schools among my
followers hereafter, in which (the separate interpretation of) my law
will be preserved in the world. These schools will be the repositories
of the diversified fruits of my Scriptures (*pi.takas*) without priority
or inferiority--just as the taste of sea-water is everywhere the
same--or as the twelve sons of one man all honest and true, so will be
the exposition of my doctrine advocated by these schools. Manjušrî! the
two original germs of these separate schools will be found in the
rendering of my doctrine by the Mahâyâna and the Prajñâpâramitâ systems.
The Šrâvakas, Pratyeka Buddhas, and different Buddhas (*i.e.*, the
doctrine which teaches these three degrees of religious advancement)
will come from the Prajñâpâramitâ, Manjušrî! as earth, water, fire, wind
and space compose the material and visible universe, so the Mahâyâna and
the Prajñâpâramitâ compose the material of the system in which these
different degrees of Šrâvakas, Pratyeka-Buddhas, and Buddhas are
entertained."

   Manjušrî asked Buddha this question: "World-honoured! and by what
names will these scbools be known?"

   Buddha replied: "The two schools first formed will be 'the
Mahâsâ"mghikas<sup><span class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> and the
Pi-li'<sup><span class="small">\[5\]</span></sup> (Sthaviras). Within a
hundred years after my *Nirvâ.na* a school will be formed called
'Yeb-wu-in'<sup><span class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> \[Ekabhyohârikhâs
(Burnouf, tom. I, p. 357), or Ekavyavahârikâs (according to Vassilief's
*Buddhism*, p. 227, n.)\]. Again, within a hundred years from the
formation of this school, another will be formed called
'Ko-kiu-li'<sup><span class="small">\[7\]</span></sup> \[Kukkulikâs\].
Within a hundred years from this another school will arise called
To-man<sup><span class="small">\[8\]</span></sup> (Bâhušrutiyas). Within
a hundred years from this there will be another school formed, called
'Che-tai-ho'<sup><span class="small">\[9\]</span></sup>
\[Chaitiyavâdâs\]. Within another hundred years a school will arise
called 'Eastern Mountain'<sup><span class="small">\[10\]</span></sup>
\[Pûrvašailâs\]. Within a hundred years another school will arise from
this called 'Northern Mountain'<sup><span
class="small">\[11\]</span></sup> \[Uttarašailâs\]. These seven schools
come from the Mahâsâ"mghikâs, and including the original Sa"mgha, or
congregation, they are classified as eight schools.

   "From the Sthaviras were formed eleven schools. Within a hundred
years from the origin of the above school, there arose another, called
'Yeh-tsai-wu-in'<sup><span class="small">\[12\]</span></sup>
(Sarvâstivâdas). Within a hundred years from this school proceeded
another, called 'Yun-shan'<sup><span class="small">\[13\]</span></sup>
(Haimavatâs). Within a hundred years from this school another will
arise, called 'Vâtsiputriyas'<sup><span
class="small">\[14\]</span></sup> (sons of the calf). Within a hundred
years after this another school called 'Dharmottarîyas.'<sup><span
class="small">\[15\]</span></sup> Within a hundred years from this
another called 'Bhadrâyanîyas.'<sup><span
class="small">\[16\]</span></sup> Within a hundred years from this
school will come another called 'Yih-tsai-sho-kwei'<sup><span
class="small">\[17\]</span></sup> (Sammatîyas). Within a hundred years
another school will arise from this, called 'Jing-shan'<sup><span
class="small">\[18\]</span></sup> (Jungle-hill, *i.e.*, Shâ.n.nagarika).
Within a hundred years after this arose another school called
'Tai-puh-ho-ki'<sup><span class="small">\[19\]</span></sup>

<span class="small"></span>

\[4. This word means the great congregation, composed of young and old
alike, the same as the school of "various and miscellaneous Moral
Rules."--\[Ch. Ed.\]

5\. This word means the congregation of old men only, it is the same as
that which acknowledges the authority of tbe (*original*) *Vinaya* only.

6\. So called because they agreed in the main with the
Mahâsanghikas.--\[Ch. Ed.\]

7\. From the name of the master who formed it.--\[Ch. Ed.\]

8\. So called from the "*famous* wisdom" of its founder.--\[Ch. Ed.\]

9\. So called from the locality in which the founder lived.

10\. So called from the locality in which the founder lived.

11\. Likewise from the abode of the founder.

12\. So called because the founder of the school held the positive
existence of all things in the three worlds.--\[Ch. Ed.\]

13\. So called from the abode of the founder.

14\. From the name of the founder.

15\. From the name of the founder.

16\. From the name of the founder.

17\. So called from the great esteem in which the master was held among
men.

18\. So called from the character of the place where the founder lived.
The name in Sanskrit however means "of six towns," and so in Tibetan;
see Vassilief, p. 231.--J.B.

19\. So called because the founder of this school was, when a child,
cast into a well by his mother, and when his father sent to recover his
body he was found uninjured.\]

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span> (Mahîšâsakas). Within a hundred years
from this arose the school called 'Fau'<sup><span
class="small">\[20\]</span></sup> (Dharmaguptâs). Within a hundred years
another school arose called 'Ka-hi-pi'<sup><span
class="small">\[21\]</span></sup> (Kâšyapîyas). Within a hundred years
from this another school arose named 'Sieon-to-lo-ku'<sup><span
class="small">\[22\]</span></sup> (Samkantikâs or Sautrântikâs). The
above are the eleven schools derived from the Sthaviras, and including
their mother-school, comprise twelve distinct branches."

   Buddha spoke the following *gâthas*:--

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"The school of the Mahâsâ"mghikas<br />
Will divide into seven parts,<br />
The Sthavirâs into eleven,<br />
This is what we term the twelve schools,<sup><span class="small">[23]</span></sup><br />
The eighteen including the two original,<br />
All these will arise from the Mahâyâna,<br />
Which admits of neither affirmation or contradiction.<br />
Now I say that in future time will appear,<br />
The miscellaneous writings of the Master Kumârajiva<br />
After the cessation (<em>nirvâ.na</em>) of the true Law,<br />
Just one hundred years;<br />
And by these various productions<br />
The true Law will be gradually destroyed,<br />
Everyone forming his own views,<br />
Founding their opinions on heterodox sects,<br />
Despising that which ought to be honoured.<br />
A rebellious and discontented tone will arise<br />
But now the <em>Sûtras</em> alone are the ground<br />
On which to build the doctrine of Buddha,<br />
Relying on the former truths.<br />
Seeking a foundation on this solid basis,<br />
Is like in the multitude of sand particles<br />
Seeking for the true gold.<br />
Thus have I heard former sages,<br />
Who appear like suns among men."<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   "One hundred and sixteen years after the *Nirvâ.na* of Buddha (*in
a*) city called 'I-ta-fuh,' (*I* for *Pa*, therefore equivalent to
Pa-ta-fuh, *i.e.*, Pâtaliputra) there shall be a king called 'A-yu'
(Ašoka) who shall gather (as in a square) the whole of Jambudwipa as his
empire. In his time the division of the great congregation into schools
shall begin. There shall arise a Bhikshu called 'Neng' (able), and
another called 'Yin-un' (Nidâna), and another called 'To-man'
(Bâhušrutiya ?)--these shall assert the necessity of teaching five
propositions as a basis for religious instruction. The five Points are
these:--

> Profit and increase from others.  
> Ignorance.  
> Doubt.  
> Words according to the religious formula.  
> To obtain reason.  

   "It was from a consideration of these questions that the first two
schools arose, to wit, the Mahâsâ"mghikâs and the Sthavîras.<sup><span
class="small">\[24\]</span></sup>

   "In the middle of the century (*following*) the Mahâsâ"mghikâs other
schools arose as follows:--(1) 'Yih-shwo' \[Ekavyavahârikâs\], (2)
'Chu-shai-kan-shwo' \[Lokottaravâdins\], (3) 'Kiu-ku' \[Gokulikas or
Kukku.tikâs\]. Again, in the middle of a century or so after the
Mahâsâ"mghikas will originate other schools, called
'Shi-chi-lun.'<sup><span class="small">\[25\]</span></sup>

   "Again, in the middle of the two hundred years, the heretical
followers of the Mahâdêva, taking on themselves the vows of religious
ascetics, fixed their abode in Mount Chaitiya. Again, from the
Mahâsâ"mghikas arose three other schools, viz. Che-tika, 'Huh-pi-lo'
(Apara), and Uttarašaila. Thus, from the Mahâsâ"mghika arose nine
schools, viz. (1) Mahâsâ"mghikas, (2) Ekavyavahârika, (3)
Lokottaravâdin, (4) Gokulika, (5) Bâhušrutîya, (6) Shi-chi, (7) Yan-ka,
(8) Ho-lo, (9) Uttarašaila.

   "In the middle of the three hundred years from the Sthavira school,
arose from Controversies connected with the Canon of the *Abhidharma*,
different schools, as follows: (1) Sarvâstivâdin, also called Hetuvâda,
(2) Haimavatas. In the middle of the three hundred years again there
arose another school called Vâtsiputrîyâs, from this school sprang
another, called Dharmagupta (or Dharmottarîyas), another called
Bhadrâyanîyas, and again, another called Mi-lî (where *li* is evidently
a mistake for *ti*), otherwise named San-mi-ti (Sammatîyas), another
school called the school of the six cities (Shannagarikas). Again, in
the three hundredth year, the Sarvâstivâdins produced another school,
viz., Mahîšâsakas, from which sprang the Dharmaguptas (so called from
the Master of the school, whose name

<span class="small"></span>

\[20. The founder's name.

21\. The founder's name.

22\. The founder rested his deductions on the Sûtras.

23\. That is the twelve schools that sprung from the Mahâsthavirâs.

24\. In Chinese, "high-seat."

25\. I cannot explain this title at present.--S. B.\]

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span> was In-chi-lin).<sup><span
class="small">\[26\]</span></sup> Again, in this three hundredth year,
another school sprang from the Sarvâstivâdins, called Yan-li-sha
(Varsha), likewise named Kâšyapiyas. In the four hundredth year from the
Sarvâstavâdins sprang another school called Seng-kai-lin-to
(Sa"mkrânti), so called from the name of its founder Yeou-to-lo
(Uttara), this school was also known as Sautrântika.

   "Thus, from the school of the Mahâsthaviras branched off twelve
schools, viz. (1) Mahâsthaviras, (2) Haimavatas, (3) Sarvâstivâdins,(4)
Vâtsiputrîyâs, (5) Dharmottarîyas,(6) Bhadrâyanîyas, (7) Sammatîyas, (8)
The school of six Cities, (9) Mahîšâsikas, (10) Dharmaguptas, (11)
Kâšyapîyas; (12) Sautrântikas."

   We will now proceed to speak of the distinguishing tents {*sic*} of
these various schools, both to their radical differences and also those
held<sup><span class="small">\[27\]</span></sup> in common.

   The following schools, Mahasâ"mghikas, Ekavyavâhârikas, Lokottaras,
Kukkutikas, hold the views we are about to mention. They all say that
the traditions respecting the Buddhas having been born into the world
(*as men*) are incorrect--that the law is Tathâgata, and the only one in
the world. They all say that the (*system of religion known as*)
'turning the Wheel of the Law' is at an end. They say that "things
exist," "relationships exist," "truth exists." They say that Tathâgata
is infintely extended, immeasurably glorious, eternal in duration, that
to his power of recollection (*nim, smriti*), his power of faith
(*srâddhabala*), his experience of joy, and his life, there is no end;
he sleeps not, he speaks, asks, reflects not; they say that his
existence is ever one and uniform (*one heart*), that all things born
may obtain deliverance by having his instruction, that in his essential
existence (one heart, *ekachitta*) Tathâgata comprehends all subjects
(*laws*) in a moment by his own wisdom.

<span class="small"></span>

\[26. *Vide* Vassilief, p. 232 n. 5.

27\. So I would translate "Chung-kan."\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
