[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# The Sûtra of the Dhârani of the Illustrious Diadem of Buddha's Surmounting Head

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

# INDIAN ANTIQUARY,

### A JOURNAL OF ORIENTAL RESEARCH

##### IN

##### ARCHÆOLOGY, HISTORY, LITERATURE, LANGUAGES, PHILOSOPHY, RELIGION, FOLKLORE, &c., &c., &c.

 

##### EDITED BY

#### JAS. BURGESS, M.R.A.S., F.R.G.S.

 

#### VOL. IX.--1880

###### \[Bombay, Education Society's Press\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

## THE BUDDHIST INSCRIPTION AT KEU-YUNG-KWAN.

BY REV. S. BEAL, B.A.

   <span id="art"></span>Attention has elsewhere been drawn to the
ancient Buddhist inscription at<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> Keu-yung-kwan, a small village about
five miles to the north of the Nankow Pass. This inscription is engraved
in the characters of six different nations, viz., Mongol or Bâshpah,
Uîghûr, Nyuchih, Chinese, Devanâgari, and Tibetan. On examination it is
found to contain certain Buddhist *dhârani* or incantations, which in
the paper alluded to (*Jour. R. A.. Soc.*, vol. V. pp. 14ff.)<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> have been translated by Mr. Wylie and
Dr. Haas for the benefit of the English reader. These *dhâranis* are
found in various Buddhist works, and are supposed to represent the
highest and most potent charms which words proceeding from the top of
the illustrious diadem (*chû.da*) of Buddha's head are able to convey.
This "honoured diadem of Buddha's head" refers to the well known conceit
of the Buddhists that from the top of the cranium of their master
proceeded an elongated excrescence (*ush.nîsh*),<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> the top of which reached to the highest
heaven. In all probability this imaginary formation is pictured in the
Amarâvati sculptures as the "pillar of glory surmounted by Om"
proceeding from the throne supposed to be occupied by Bhagavat (see
particularly [pl. lxxi, figs. 1 and 2](bikyk-a), *Tree and Serpent
Worship*). These pillars of light are also referred to by Spence Hardy
(*Manual of Buddhism*, 1st ed. pp. 180, 207), and perhaps originated in
the idea of the Li"nga and its worship. Be this as it may, it is curious
to trace as far back as we can the origin of such a peculiar idea; and
for this purpose we have appended the translation of a *Sûtra*
attributed to the Shaman Buddhavara (Fo-to-po-li) of the Yang dynasty.

 

*The Sûtra of the Dhârani of the Illustrious Diadem of Buddha's
Surmounting Head.*

   "Thus have I heard. At one time Bhagavat was residing at Šrâvastî, in
the garden of Jeta, the friend of the orphans, together with 1250 great
Bhikshus, his disciples, and with upwards of 12,000 great Bôdhisattwas
and priests. At this time there was amongst the Dêvas of the
Trayastri"nšas Heavens, one in the Assembly of the Saddharma Hall,
called Shen-chu. This Dêva, whilst wandering to and fro in the celestial
gardens, with the company of Dêvas who attended him, had heard a voice
proceeding from space, and warning him that in a few days hence he
should be called to give up his heavenly estate and be born in hell,
after which he should receive a succession of births all more or less
miserable and painful. On this, the Dêva hastened to Šâkrarâja, and with
doleful voice and many tears laid the case before him, asking and
beseeching for advice and escape. Then Šâkrarâja, having heard the words
of Shen-chu, at once entered into a state of profound abstraction, and,
perceiving that the case was to be with Shen-chu even as the voice had
declared, he resolved at once to repair to the place where Buddha was
residing, even to the garden of Jeta, and there having presented him
with suitable gifts, to seek his counsel and advice on the point.
Accordingly having done so, and having saluted the foot of Bhagavat and
seven times circumambulated him, he stated the circumstances of
Shen-chu's destiny, and humbly asked the advice of the World-honoured
one."

   Then Buddha caused to proceed from the top of his head every kind of
glorious light, which spread itself from world to world through all
space. Then this light again returned to the presence of Buddha, and
having revolved around him three times entered through his mouth. Then
the World-honoured gave a gentle smile, and addressed Šâkrarâja as
follows:--"Heavenly king, there are certain *dhârani* called the
'honoured diadem of Buddha's head,' which are able to deliver from every
kind of evil birth, and to destroy every possible sorrow. If a man once
hears these, and if they once pass through his ears, then all the evil
deeds he has ever done shall be cancelled and their punishment remitted;
if he writes them on a wall, or reads them, so written, to others, then
shall the same consequences follow and full deliverance be obtained."

   On this Šâkrarâja entreats Buddha to repeat these charmed words, on
which he did so.

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. It belongs to the Mongol age, cir. 1345 A.D.

2\. See also Yule's *Marco Polo*. vol. I, pp. 29, 444.--ED.

3\. The word *ush.nîsha* usually means a 'turban,' but is used by the
Buddhists as a technical term for the top-knot on Buddha's head, by
which all figures of him are distinguished; he is never represented in
Indian sculpture with any sort of covering on his head.--ED.\]

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

   The *dhârani* are much shorter than those on the Keu-yung gate, but
contain the same leading words; we do not repeat them, our object being
merely to show the purpose of their being placed on this barrier gate,
through which Mongols and Thibetans must enter the empire, and doubtless
were glad to be so easily assured of deliverance by the repetition of
the words.

   "Šâkrarâja, having heard these words, thankfully received them; and
having saluted the World-honoured one, forthwith departed."<sup><span
class="small">\[4\]</span></sup>

<span class="small"></span>

\[4. The Oriental, Oct. 9, 1875.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
