[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim22)  [Next](siim24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

(400 <span id="fr_760"></span>[400](#fn_758)) That one (the slanderer)
helps the spirit, guiding it to its region for the sake of a
contemplation which takes place in a spiritual mould;

\(401\) And this one (the railer) helps the soul, driving it to its
companions for the sake of an existence which occurs in a material form.

(402 <span id="fr_761"></span>[402](#fn_759)) Whoever knows, as I do,
(the real nature of) those figures, his doctrine in removing the
perplexity of doubt (as to the Divine Unity) is unmixed with polytheism.

(403 <span id="fr_762"></span>[403](#fn_760)) My essence endowed with
delights the whole sum of my worlds (of being) both in particular and in
general, in order to replenish them with its all-embracing unity.

\(404\) And it bounteously poured forth its overflow when there was as
yet no capacity for acquisition (of being), and it was capable (of
overflow) before there was any preparation for receiving (the overflow).

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

(405 <span id="fr_763"></span>[405](#fn_761)) The forms of existence
were made happy by the Soul, and the spirits of (the plane of)
contemplation were refreshed by the Spirit.

The inward oneness of the Essence with its attributes or emanations is
now further illustrated by reference to what takes place in audition
(*samá‘*), when the mystic falling into ecstasy at the sound of music
finds God, only to lose Him again as soon as the momentary transport has
ebbed away.

(406 <span id="fr_764"></span>[406](#fn_762)) My twofold contemplation
of a slanderer hastening to his region and a railer bestowing good
advice on his companions

\(407\) Bears witness to my state in the *samá‘*, a state caused by two
things which draw me (to and fro), namely, the law of my abiding home
and the law of the place where my sentence is passed.

(408 <span id="fr_765"></span>[408](#fn_763)) And my denial of being
perplexed (with doubts touching *ittiḥád*) by the five external senses
is established to be true by the agreement of the two images.

(409 <span id="fr_766"></span>[409](#fn_764)) Now, before (I come to) my
purpose, let me tell thee the mystery of that which my soul received
secretly from them (the external senses) and communicated (to the inward
senses).

(410 <span id="fr_767"></span>[410](#fn_765)) Whenever the idea of
beauty appears in any form, and

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

whenever one afflicted by sorrow raises a mournful cry in (reciting) the
verses of a chapter of the Koran,

\(411\) My thought beholds Her with the eye of my phantasy, and my
memory hears Her with the ear of my intelligence,

\(412\) And my mind brings Her in imagination before my soul, so that my
understanding deems Her sensibly at my side,

(413 <span id="fr_768"></span>[413](#fn_766)) And I wonder at my
drunkenness without wine, and am thrilled in the depths of my being by a
joy that comes from myself,

\(414\) And my heart dances, and the trembling of my limbs doth clap its
hands like a chanter, and my spirit is my musician.

(415 <span id="fr_769"></span>[415](#fn_767)) My soul never ceased to be
fed with (spiritual) desires and to efface the (sensual) faculties by
weakening them, until at last it waxed strong.

\(416\) Here I found all existing things allied to aid me—though the aid
(really) came from myself—

\(417\) In order that every organ of sense might unite me with Her, and
that my union might include every root of my hair,

(418 <span id="fr_770"></span>[418](#fn_768)) And that the veil of
estrangement between us might be cast off, albeit I found it no other
than friendship.

\(419\) Mark now—and do not hope to learn this by study—how the sense
conveys to the soul by immediate revelation what She brings to light.

(420 <span id="fr_771"></span>[420](#fn_769)) When a north wind
travelling by night from Her blows at dawn, its coolness recalls the
thought of Her to my spirit,

(421 <span id="fr_772"></span>[421](#fn_770)) And mine ear is pleased
when in the forenoon grey doves warbling and singing on the branches
arouse it,

\(422\) And mine eye is gladdened if at eve flashes of lightning
transmit and give it from Her to the pupil of mine eye,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

\(423\) And it is bestowed on my taste and touch by the wine-cups when
they are passed round to me at night,

(424 <span id="fr_773"></span>[424](#fn_771)) And my heart conveys it as
an inward thing to the mental faculties through the medium of the
outward thing that was delivered by the bodily messengers (the senses).

(425 <span id="fr_774"></span>[425](#fn_772)) He that chants Her name in
the assembly (of listeners) makes me present with Her, so that as I
listen I behold Her with my whole being.

(426 <span id="fr_775"></span>[426](#fn_773)) My spirit soars towards
the heaven whence it was breathed (into me), while my theatre of
manifestation (my soul), which was fashioned by the spirit, stoops to
its earthly peers.

\(427\) Part of me is pulled towards Her and part of me pulls towards
itself, and in every pull there is a tug like giving up the ghost.

\(428\) The cause of this is my soul's recollecting its real nature from
Her when She inspired it,

\(429\) So that it longed in the limbo of earth to hear the Divine call
alone (uncontaminated by the call of the lower self), since both (the
spiritual and the sensual natures) take hold of my bridle-reins.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

\(430\) Concerning my state in audition a babe, even though he grow up
to be dull, will inform thee by throwing it upon thy mind like (a flash
of) inspiration or insight.

\(431\) When he moans because of the tight swaddling-clothes and
restlessly yearns to be relieved from exceeding distress,

\(432\) He is soothed with lullabies, so that he lays aside all the
weariness which came over him and listens to his soother like one
attending silently,

\(433\) And the sweet words make him forget his bitter grief and
remember the speech that passed in times of old,

\(434\) And by his state he explains the state of *samá‘* (audition) and
confirms the absence of imperfection from the mystic dance:

\(435\) When through the one that is hushing him he becomes distraught
with longing and would fain fly to his first home,

\(436\) He is quieted by being rocked in his cradle as the hands of his
nurse move it to and fro.

\(437\) I have felt, when She is called to mind by the beautiful tones
of a reciter (of the Koran) or the piercing notes of a singer,

\(438\) As the sufferer feels in his agony when the angels of Death take
to themselves his all.

\(439\) For one who feels pain in being driven to part (from his body)
is like one who is pained by feeling (rapture) in his yearning after his
(spiritual) companions:

\(440\) As the soul of the former had pity for that (body) in which it
appeared, so my spirit soared to its high origins.

Having exhibited the phenomena of the *samá‘* in their due relation to
the doctrine of *ittiḥád*, Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ returns to the region of the
self-contained Unity which is sole actor on the universal stage.

\(441\) My spirit passed the gate which barred my going

\(433\) "The speech that passed in times (or 'covenants') of old"—see
the notes on *vv*. 69 and 156.

(434-6) Many Ṣúfís looked with disfavour on the ecstatic dance, which is
a well-known feature of the *samá‘*. Cf. the saying, *al-raqṣ naqṣ*,
"dancing is a fault." Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ justifies it on the ground that it
is an anodyne to the fever of the soul: its violent movements calm the
agitating reminiscences awakened by music and rock the soul to rest.

\(440\) Cf. *vv*. 426-7. As death causes the lower soul (*nafs*) to
grieve for the loss of its earthly home, so music causes the spirit
(*rúḥ*) to grieve for the loss of its heavenly home.

\(441\) Elsewhere (*Díwán*, p. 217, 1. so) Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ says: "If
others are <span id="page_238">p. 238</span> content with His image seen
in dreams, I am not content even with being united to Him." In this
verse (441) and also in the verse quoted he uses the word *wiṣál*,
properly "conjunction." *Wiṣál*, *waṣl* and *ittiṣál* contain the idea
of duality and are therefore inferior to *jam‘* or complete union and
*ittiḥád* or ἕνωσις. Cf. Nallino, *op. cit.* p. 60, note 1.}

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

beyond union (with the Beloved) and soared to where no barrier of union
remained.

\(442\) He that like me makes it (this gate) his chosen quest, let him
follow me and ride for it with firm resolution!

(443 <span id="fr_776"></span>[443](#fn_774)) Before entering it, I have
plunged into how many a deep! wherefrom none that craved (spiritual)
wealth was ever blest with a draught.

\(444\) I will show it to thee, if thou art resolved, in the mirror of
my poesy, therefore turn the ear of insight to what I let fall.

(445 <span id="fr_777"></span>[445](#fn_775)) I cast aside from my
speech the word "self-regard," and from my actions self-interest in any
act;

\(446\) And my looking for fair recompense for my works, and my care to
preserve my mystical states from the shame of suspicion,

\(447\) And my preaching—all these things I put away with firm
resolution as one who is entirely disinterested; and my casting aside
regard for my casting aside applies to each division.

(448 <span id="fr_778"></span>[448](#fn_776)) So my heart is a temple in
which I dwell: in front of it (hindering approach) is the appearance
from it of the attributes belonging to my veiledness.

(449 <span id="fr_779"></span>[449](#fn_777)) Amongst them my right hand
is a pillar (corner-stone) that is kissed in myself, and because of the
law in my mouth my

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

kiss (*qubla*) comes from my *qibla* (the object to which I turn in
worship).

(450 <span id="fr_780"></span>[450](#fn_778)) My circumambulation in the
spirit is really round myself, and my running from my Ṣafá to my Marwa
is for the sake of my own face (reality).

(451 <span id="fr_781"></span>[451](#fn_779)) Within a sanctuary of my
inward my outward is safe, while my neighbours around it are in danger
of being snatched away.

(452 <span id="fr_782"></span>[452](#fn_780)) My soul was purified by my
solitary fasting from other than myself, and gave as alms the overflow
of my grace;

(453 <span id="fr_783"></span>[453](#fn_781)) And the doubling of my
existence during my contemplation became single in my oneness
(*ittiḥád*) when I awoke from my slumber;

(454 <span id="fr_784"></span>[454](#fn_782)) And my inmost self's
night-journey to myself from the special privilege of the Truth is like
my voyage in the general obligation of the Law;

(455 <span id="fr_785"></span>[455](#fn_783)) And my divinity did not
make me neglectful of the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

requirement of my theatre of manifestation, nor did my humanity cause me
to forget the theatre in which my wisdom is manifested.

(456 <span id="fr_786"></span>[456](#fn_784)) From me the covenants
derived their binding power upon the soul, and by me the laws of
religion were instituted to restrain the senses,

(457 <span id="fr_787"></span>[457](#fn_785)) Inasmuch as there had come
to me from myself an Apostle to whom my sinning was grievous, one taking
jealous care of me from compassion,

\(458\) And I executed my command (given) from my soul unto herself, and
when she took charge of her own affair she did not turn back;

\(459\) And from the time of my covenant, before the era of my elements,
before the (prophetic) warning was sent to (the world) where men shall
be raised from the dead,

\(460\) I was an apostle sent from myself to myself, and my essence was
led to me by the evidence of my own signs.

(461 <span id="fr_788"></span>[461](#fn_786)) And when I conveyed my
soul, by purchase, from the possession of her own land to the kingdom of
Paradise

\(462\) For she had fought a good fight and had died a martyr in her
cause and had gotten joy of her contract when she paid the price

(463 <span id="fr_789"></span>[463](#fn_787)) She soared with me, in
consequence of my union, beyond

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

everlasting life in her heaven (Paradise), since I did not consent to
incline towards the earth of my vicegerent;

(464 <span id="fr_790"></span>[464](#fn_788)) And how should I come
under (the dominion of) that over which I am lord, like the friends of
my kingdom and my followers and my party and my adherents?

(465 <span id="fr_791"></span>[465](#fn_789)) There is no celestial
sphere but therein, from the light of my inward being, is an angel who
gives guidance by my will,

\(466\) And there is no region but thereon, from the overflow of my
outward being, falleth a drop that is the source of the clouds’
downpouring.

\(467\) Beside my countenance the far-spreading light (of the sun) is
like a gleam, and beside my watering-place the all-encompassing sea is
like a drop.

(468 <span id="fr_792"></span>[468](#fn_790)) Therefore the whole of me
is seeking the whole of me and is directing itself towards it, and part
of me is drawing part of me with reins.

(469 <span id="fr_793"></span>[469](#fn_791)) Every direction tends to
the all-guiding face of him who is above (the relation of) "below" and
below whom is (the relation of) "above."

(470 <span id="fr_794"></span>[470](#fn_792)) Thus (in my experience)
the "below-ness" of the earth is the "above-ness" of the aether, because
of the closing of that

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

which I clave asunder; and the cleavage of that which was closed is only
the outward aspect of my way (*sunna*).

\(471\) And there is no doubt, since union is the essence of certainty,
and no direction, since place is a (relation of) difference arising from
my separation;

(472 <span id="fr_795"></span>[472](#fn_793)) And there is no number,
since numeration cuts like the edge of a sword, and no time, since
limitation is the dualism of one who fixes a definite term;

(473 <span id="fr_796"></span>[473](#fn_794)) And I have in the two
worlds no rival who should doom to destruction what I built or whose
command should cause the decree of my authority to be enforced;

(474 <span id="fr_797"></span>[474](#fn_795)) Nor have I in either world
any opposite, for thou wilt not see amongst created beings any
incongruity in their mode of creation, but all are alike (in
perfection).

(475 <span id="fr_798"></span>[475](#fn_796)) And from me appeared that
which I made a disguise to myself, and by means of me the phenomena were
caused to return from me to myself;

(476 <span id="fr_799"></span>[476](#fn_797)) And in myself I beheld
those who bowed in worship to my theatre of manifestation, and I knew
for sure that I was the Adam to whom I bowed;

(477 <span id="fr_800"></span>[477](#fn_798)) And I discerned that the
spiritual rulers of the earths

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

amongst the angels of the highest sphere are equal in relation to my
rank.

(478 <span id="fr_801"></span>[478](#fn_799)) Although my comrades
craved right guidance from my horizon that is near (to them), the union
of my unity was shown forth from my second separation,

(479 <span id="fr_802"></span>[479](#fn_800)) And in the swoon that
crushed my senses my soul fell prostrate before me in order that she
might recover ere repenting as Moses repented.

(480 <span id="fr_803"></span>[480](#fn_801)) For there is no "where"
after (vision of) Reality, since I have recovered from intoxication, and
the cloud that veiled the Essence has been cleared away by sobriety.

(481 <span id="fr_804"></span>[481](#fn_802)) The end of a
self-effacement that preceded my (individual self's) conclusion is like
the beginning of a sobriety (self-consciousness), because both are
circumscribed by a period.

\(482\) I weighed in a scale him who is rapt by an obliterating
effacement in death (to self) with him who is cut off by the sobriety of
sense (self-consciousness) in separation (from God).}

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

(483 <span id="fr_805"></span>[483](#fn_803)) Therefore the dot of the
"i" of "film" was effaced from my sobriety, and the wakefulness of the
eye of the Essence annulled my self-effacement.

(484 <span id="fr_806"></span>[484](#fn_804)) One who loses (God) in
sobriety and finds (God) in self-effacement is incapable, owing to his
alternation, of the fixity of nearness (to God).

(485 <span id="fr_807"></span>[485](#fn_805)) The drunken and the sober
are alike inasmuch as they are qualified by the mark of "presence" or by
the brand of "enclosure."

(486 <span id="fr_808"></span>[486](#fn_806)) No followers of mine are
they in whom the attributes of "disguise" or the vestiges of any remnant
(of these attributes) succeed each other.

\(487\) He that does not inherit perfection from me is faulty, a
backslider into chastisement.

\(488\) In me is naught that would lead to the "disguise" resulting from
a remnant (of self-existence), nor any shadow (of phenomenal being) that
would condemn me to return (to an inferior degree).

(489 <span id="fr_809"></span>[489](#fn_807)) How little may a heart
communicate in the form of thought or a tongue utter in the mould of
speech!

(490 <span id="fr_810"></span>[490](#fn_808)) All sides (of Being)
joined in me and the carpet of otherness was rolled up in virtue of the
equality (of all),

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

\(491\) And my existence, in the passing-away of the duality of
existence, became a contemplation in the abidingness of unity.

(492 <span id="fr_811"></span>[492](#fn_809)) That which is above the
range of intellect—the First Emanation—is even as that which is below
the Sinai of tradition—the last handful.

(493 <span id="fr_812"></span>[493](#fn_810)) Therefore the best of
God's creatures forbade us to prefer him to the Man of the Fish,
although he is worthy of preference.

\(494\) I have indicated (the truth concerning phenomenal relations) by
the means which language yields, and that which is obscure I have made
clear by a subtle allegory.

(495 <span id="fr_813"></span>[495](#fn_811)) The "Am not I" of
yesterday is not other (than what shall be manifested) to him who enters
on to-morrow, since my darkness hath become my dawn and my day my night.

\(496\) The secret of "Yea"—to God belongs the mirror of its revelation,
and to affirm the reality of union (*jam‘*) is to deny "beside-ness."

(497 <span id="fr_814"></span>[497](#fn_812)) No darkness covers me nor
is there any harm to be feared, since the mercy of my light hath
quenched the fire of my vengeance.

(498 <span id="fr_815"></span>[498](#fn_813)) And no time is, save where
is no time that reckons the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

existence of that existence of mine which is computed by the reckoning
of the new moons;

\(499\) But one imprisoned in the bounds of Time does not see what lies
beyond his dungeon, in the Paradise everlasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_758"></span>[233:400](siim23.htm#fr_760) (400) From the
standpoint of "separation" (*farq*), the slanderer and the railer are
types (cf. note on *v*. 51) of two influences which work upon the heart.
The slanderer—literally, the spy whose affection for the Beloved impels
him to prevent any rival from approaching her—is the spirit (*rúḥ*); the
railer is the soul (*nafs*): in the language of theology the former is
described as the Angel who inspires the heart with good thoughts; the
latter as the Devil who tempts it with evil suggestions (see D. B.
Macdonald, *The religious altitude and life in Islam*, p. 274 foll.).
But in the sphere of union (*jam‘*) there can be no duality: lover,
beloved, railer and slanderer are so many aspects of the One Being.
Here, then, the slanderer or the spirit (*rúḥ*) represents Universal
Spirit, the first emanation from the Absolute; and the railer or the
soul (*nafs*) stands for Universal Soul. \[Cf. the introduction to K.'s
commentary, p. 20 foll., where the First Intelligence, "the slanderer,"
is said to be the luminosity of Universal Spirit, and the Second
Intelligence, "the railer," is said to be the luminosity of Universal
Soul.\] The human spirit is guided by Universal Spirit to its "region,"
*i.e.* the Divine Essence, while the human soul belongs to Universal
Soul, which as the animating principle of the sensible world brings the
soul into contact with its "companions," *i.e.* bodies.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[233:402](siim23.htm#fr_761) (402) "Those
figures," *i.e.* the Beloved, the lover, the railer, and the slanderer.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[233:403](siim23.htm#fr_762) (403-4) In *v*.
403 I read *imdád*. The reading *amdád* gives the same sense, if taken
(as it should be) as the plural, not of *madd*, but of *madad*. Cf. my
*Selected Poems from the Díváni Shamsi Tabríz*, pp. 216 and 334. The
process of emanation (*fayḍ*) by which Absolute Being diffuses itself
does not depend on the existence of capacities for receiving that which
is rayed forth. Plurality is the self-manifestation of the One, the
irradiation whereby the One becomes visible to itself.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[234:405](siim23.htm#fr_763) (405) "Made
happy," *i.e.* endued with existence.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[234:406](siim23.htm#fr_764) (406-7) "To his
region"—cf. verse 400. The poet means to say that his contemplation of
the Essence under the aspect of its two attributes symbolically
described as the slanderer and the railer is analogous to his perception
of oneness in the *samá‘*: in each case the appearance of duality is
illusory. His "state in the *samá‘*," *i.e.* the state of agitation and
suspense between "finding God" (*wujúd*) and "losing" Him (*faqd*), is
the result of two diverse aspects which are inherent in the nature of
the Essence itself. One of those aspects is "union" (*jam‘*), *i.e.* the
oneness in which plurality is non-existent or only potentially existent;
the other aspect is "separation" (*tafriqa*) in which the Essence passes
forth from its oneness in order that it may become conscious of itself.
The former is the mystic's "abiding home." "The place where my sentence
is passed," *i.e.* the phenomenal world, which the mystic, on coming
forth from the state of "union" (*jam‘*), judges to be the abode of
"separation" (*tafriqa*).

<span id="fn_763"></span>[234:408](siim23.htm#fr_765) (408) The unity of
Being is affirmed by the correspondence existing between sense and
spirit. The mystic finds God in every object perceived by the senses, so
that the image of every object in his perception is identical with the
image of God in his heart.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[234:409](siim23.htm#fr_766) (409) "My
purpose," *i.e.* to explain what is experienced in the *samá‘*.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[234:410](siim23.htm#fr_767) (410-12) These
verses illustrate "the correspondence of the two images." Thought is
inward sight and memory is inward hearing.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[235:413](siim23.htm#fr_768) (413-4) The
ecstasy of vision and audition is not produced by an external cause,
such as wine, dancing, and music, but is itself the mystic's dance and
song.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[235:415](siim23.htm#fr_769) (415 foll.)
Perfect union with God depends on the strength of the soul, *i.e.* on
its purification from sensuous impressions. But when the soul has been
purified, it uses as a means of becoming united with God the same
faculties which formerly hindered it from attaining its end. The poet
says that this aid really comes from himself, because the senses cannot
render it out of their own nature: the self must first be spiritualised,
in order that through its organs all things may be perceived as
essentially one, according to the doctrine of *ittiḥád*.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[235:418](siim23.htm#fr_770) (418) "No other
than friendship": cf. note on *v*. 82.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[235:420](siim23.htm#fr_771) (420) There is
only an allusion in this verse to the sense of smell, while the other
four senses are mentioned explicitly in the verses which follow.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[235:421](siim23.htm#fr_772) (421-4) "It" in
these verses is "the thought of Her" (*dhikruhá*).

<span id="fn_771"></span>[236:424](siim23.htm#fr_773) (424) In Moslem
psychology the heart (*qalb*) "suggests the inmost, most secret and
genuine thoughts, the very basis of man's intellectual nature" (see D.
B. Macdonald, *The religious attitude and life in Islam*, p. 221 foll.).
It receives from the outer senses the outward idea of God, *viz*. the
forms of sense-objects, and transmits the corresponding universal idea,
*viz*. the essence and attributes of God, to the inner senses, *i.e.* to
the cogitative, memorative, estimative, and apprehensive faculties.
These two ideas are identical in so far as they are correlative aspects
of Being. The mystic contemplates as pure reality that which he
perceives objectively in the forms of phenomena. According to the
commentator, the preposition which I have translated by "through the
medium of" should have the meaning of "simultaneously with," *i.e.* the
delivery of the sense-datum to the heart synchronises with its
transmission by the heart to the intellectual faculties.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[236:425](siim23.htm#fr_774) (425) Here the
poet begins his promised explanation (which is based upon the foregoing
theory) of his "state in the *samá‘*." He says that, whilst listening to
the music, he nevertheless contemplates God with his whole spiritual and
sensuous self.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[236:426](siim23.htm#fr_775) (426-9) These
verses answer the question, Why does music agitate and transport those
who hear it? Because, the poet replies, the higher and lower elements in
man draw and are drawn in opposite directions. Man is led sometimes by
the spirit (*rúḥ*), sometimes by the flesh (*nafs*); but music, in which
God reveals Himself, brings back to him the recollection of what he was
before he had a bodily existence: then he falls into ecstasy and his
soul (*nafs*) struggles like a captive bird to escape from its cage.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[238:443](siim23.htm#fr_776) (443) The way to
this gate is through the deeps of *faná*. Those who seek not God alone
but spiritual wealth, *i.e.* good works and godly dispositions, desire
the continuance of their phenomenal self-existence.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[238:445](siim23.htm#fr_777) (445-7) These
lines describe the poet's *ikhláṣ*, a term denoting freedom from every
form of self-regard. Inasmuch as no one who is purely disinterested can
attribute disinterestedness to himself, Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ says that in every
instance—words, deeds, works, and states—"he has cast aside regard for
his casting aside," *i.e.* he is not disinterested (*mukhliṣ*) but
unconscious of being disinterested (*mukhlaṣ*). See R. Hartmann,
*Al-Ḳuschairîs Darstellung des Ṣûfîtums*, p. 17, and *Kitáb al-Luma‘*,
p. 218, l. 6 foll.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[238:448](siim23.htm#fr_778) (448) The heart
(*qalb*), in which the essence of man resides, is veiled by the
attributes limiting that essence, just as the temple of a deity is
shrouded by curtains.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[238:449](siim23.htm#fr_779) (449) According to
an Apostolic Tradition, God (the essence of man) is contained in the
believer's heart, which is therefore likened to the Ka‘ba, while by the
same analogy ritual acts of worship performed in the pilgrimage are acts
of the Essence, *i.e.* Divine acts. One of these rites is the <span
id="page_239">p. 239</span> kissing of the Black Stone, "the right hand
of God" (*yamín Allah*). Since the religious law is the Word of God, the
kiss which it prescribes and which is included in it, comes, as it were,
from the mouth of God, who as the essence of the creature (*al-khalq*)
adores Himself as the Creator (*al-Ḥaqq*).

<span id="fn_778"></span>[239:450](siim23.htm#fr_780) (450) Ṣafá and
Marwa are two hills near Mecca. The commentator thinks that Ṣafá
signifies the present life and Marwa the life hereafter.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[239:451](siim23.htm#fr_781) (451) When the
phenomenal self and its faculties are within the sanctuary of the heart,
*i.e.* absorbed in God, they are safe from the assault of "otherness,"
to which they are exposed outside it (cf. Koran, 29, 67).

<span id="fn_780"></span>[239:452](siim23.htm#fr_782) (452) The mystic's
fast consists in abstaining from whatsoever is not real and Divine and
in being alone with his essence; his alms-giving is the communication to
others of the Divine grace which flows from his essence.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[239:453](siim23.htm#fr_783) (453) The
reference to prayers in this verse is indicated by the words *shaf‘*
(double) and *witr* (single), which may also be rendered "two
genuflexions" and "a single genuflexion" in the canonical prayer
(*ṣalát*). In *ittiḥád* the worshipper is made one with the object of
worship and realises that his individual existence was a dream.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[239:454](siim23.htm#fr_784) (454) The term
"night-journey" is used in the Koran, 17, 1, of the ascension (*mi‘ráj*)
of the Prophet. Since an ascension from the Truth or the Essence implies
that there is something higher than that, the poet answers this
objection by pointing out that the journey of the Perfect Man from the
Truth is like his journey in the Law, *i.e.* both journeys are really
movements of his essence in and to and from itself. Here the
"night-journey" denotes the third stage of Oneness (see note on *vv*.
326-7) in which the mystic returns from "the intoxication of union" to
"the sobriety of union."

<span id="fn_783"></span>[239:455](siim23.htm#fr_785) (455) Divinity
(*láhút*) and humanity (*násút*) are correlative attributes or aspects
of the One Reality. Man, created in the image of God, must nevertheless
fulfil the law imposed on his corporeal nature, yet while recognising
<span id="page_240">p. 240</span> and obeying it he must remember that
as a spirit he is the oracle of Divine Wisdom.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[240:456](siim23.htm#fr_786) (456) "The
covenants," *i.e.* the acknowledgment by human souls in their state of
pre-existence that they should love and worship God. Cf. note on verse
69.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[240:457](siim23.htm#fr_787) (457-60) The
Apostle is Universal Spirit, which emanates from the Essence regarded as
Pure Oneness to the Essence regarded as Universal Soul. This emanation
is, relatively at least, an eternal process. Mohammed (identified with
Universal Spirit) said, "I was a prophet when Adam was water and clay,"
*i.e.* before the Creation. The "signs" or evidential miracles given to
the Soul by the Apostle of Universal Spirit are the attributes of the
Essence, which thereby reveals itself to itself.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[240:461](siim23.htm#fr_788) (461-2) These
lines are best explained by a passage in the Koran (9, 112): "Lo, Allah
hath purchased of the true believers their souls and their substance,
promising them Paradise in return, on condition that they shall fight in
the cause of Allah and slay and be slain—a promise binding on Him in the
Torah and the Gospel and the Koran; and who fulfilleth his pledge more
faithfully than Allah? Rejoice therefore in the contract which ye have
made."

<span id="fn_787"></span>[240:463](siim23.htm#fr_789) (463) In the
following verses (463-477) the poet describes himself in the state of
union (*jam‘*), *i.e.* on the plane of Absolute Being, emancipated from
the relations to which he is subject in the phenomenal world. "The earth
of <span id="page_241">p. 241</span> my vicegerent," *i.e.* the body.
The human soul governs the body as the vicegerent (*khalífa*) of God.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[241:464](siim23.htm#fr_790) (464) The "united"
mystic (*ṣáḥibu ’l-jam‘*) is lord over all relations, *i.e.* he
transcends them and is not conditioned by any of them. "The friends of
my kingdom, etc." *i.e.* those who follow me but have not attained to
Oneness, so that they still belong to the realm of phenomenal existence.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[241:465](siim23.htm#fr_791) (465-6) He means
to say that, in respect of his mystical identification with the
Absolute, he is the ultimate source of all that exists in the visible
world as well as in the universe of the Unseen: the former is the
external aspect of Reality, while the latter is its hidden ground.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[241:468](siim23.htm#fr_792) (468) "Every part
of me—spirit, heart, soul and body—is seeking my Essence, *i.e.* the
Universal in which all particulars are comprised." When the spirit
contemplates God alone, it draws to itself the heart, so that the heart
desires God alone; and the heart then draws to itself the soul, so that
the soul worships God alone and draws to itself the body, which God then
causes to be employed entirely in good works.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[241:469](siim23.htm#fr_793) (469) Absolute
Being is the centre to which all particular objects converge.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[241:470](siim23.htm#fr_794) (470) The phrase,
"because of the closing, etc." is borrowed from Kor. 21,31: "Did not the
unbelievers discern that the heavens and the earth were closed until We
clave them asunder and made every living thing of the water (that gushed
forth)?" Whatever meaning the Prophet may have attached to these
metaphors, Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ evidently signifies by "the closing" that <span
id="page_242">p. 242</span> state which he elsewhere calls "union"
(*jam‘*), *i.e.* Being viewed synthetically as the inner unity in which
all distinctions are reconciled, and by "the cleavage of that which was
closed" the state of "separation" (*tafriqa*), *i.e.* Being viewed
analytically in its external and phenomenal aspect.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[242:472](siim23.htm#fr_795) (472) Number and
Time involve division and limitation, which are inconsistent with real
unity.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[242:473](siim23.htm#fr_796) (473) "No rival,"
*i.e.* no partner in the attributes of deity; cf. Kor. 21, 22: "If there
were any gods besides Allah in heaven or earth, verily both (heaven and
earth) would be ruined."

<span id="fn_795"></span>[242:474](siim23.htm#fr_797) (474) Kor. 67, 3:
"Thou dost not see any incongruity (imperfection) in the creation of the
Merciful (God)." Were there two opposed creators, like Ormuzd and
Ahriman, their difference would manifest itself in the objects created
by them.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[242:475](siim23.htm#fr_798) (475) The illusion
of phenomena does not impair the real unity which creates from itself,
reveals to itself, and again withdraws from its manifested into its
occult self.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[242:476](siim23.htm#fr_799) (476) In reality
the worshipper and the object of worship are one. The angels who
worshipped Adam (Kor. 15, 28 foll.) symbolise the relation of a Divine
attribute to its Essence.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[242:477](siim23.htm#fr_800) (477) The Divine
attributes as manifested in Man may be distinguished from each other, so
that we speak of higher and lower natures, faculties, and powers, but
they are fundamentally one and identical in respect of the Essence of
which they are modes. For this symbolic use of "angels" cf. [p.
115](siim11.htm#page_115) foll.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[243:478](siim23.htm#fr_801) (478) The Essence
appears from two horizons, *i.e.* in two aspects: (1) without attributes
or actions; (2) qualified by the whole of its attributes and actions. "
My horizon that is near" refers to the former epiphany, which produces
in the mystic the state of union (*jam‘*) without separation
(*tafriqa*), a state necessarily accompanied by ecstatic
unconsciousness. In the latter and more exalted epiphany, the Essence
reveals itself together with its attributes as the unity of the One and
the Many, the synthesis of union and separation. This aspect of reality
is associated with "the second separation," *i.e.* the return from
ecstasy to a higher plane of consciousness than any that was experienced
before the ecstasy began (cf. notes on 233-5, 326-7).

<span id="fn_800"></span>[243:479](siim23.htm#fr_802) (479) See note on
*v*. 11 and *vv*. 288-9. "Ere repenting, etc." *i.e.* before coming back
to the world of sense. Moses asked to see God with his phenomenal nature
and was punished by being thrown into the state of "intoxication," in
which it is not possible to have perfect clairvoyance; therefore his
repentance and recovery involved a return to normal consciousness,
whereas Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ's recovery endowed him with the abnormal
consciousness which is characteristic of the unitive life.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[243:480](siim23.htm#fr_803) (480) "No 'where'
(*ayn*) after Reality (*‘ayn*)," which is free from all limitation. The
meaning of the remainder of the verse has been sufficiently explained
above.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[243:481](siim23.htm#fr_804) (481-2) The higher
mystical life, before it reaches the perfect oneness which is its goal,
swings to and fro between states of ecstasy and consciousness:
self-effacement (*maḥw*) and self-restoration (*ithbát*), intoxication
(*sukr*) and sobriety (*ṣaḥw*), etc. This ever-changing succession
(*talwín*) of complementary states only ceases with the conclusion of
self-existence, *i.e.* when the mystic's individuality has entirely
passed away, so that he is permanently one with the timeless and
infinite being of God. Such permanent conscious oneness with God is
described symbolically as "the second separation" <span id="page_244">p.
244</span> (*al-farqu ’l-thání*) or "the second sobriety" (*as-saḥwu
’l-thání*). Viewed from that summit, negative or positive states, like
*maḥw* and .*saḥw*, are equally imperfect; hence the poet says, "I
weighed, etc," *i.e.* "I found both of them wanting." *Maḥq*
(misinterpreted by K.) is nearly equivalent to *maḥw*. See *Kitáb
al-Luma‘*, 355, 17.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[244:483](siim23.htm#fr_805) (483) "The dot of
the 'i' of 'film'": literally, "the dot of the (letter) *ghayn* of (the
word) *ghayn* (film or cloud)," *i.e.* in the first place my individual
existence was effaced from my consciousness; then self-effacement was
superseded by "the wakefulness of the eye of the Essence," *i.e.* by the
divine or cosmic consciousness, which is technically named "the second
sobriety." *Ghayn* (film) becomes *‘ayn* (eye or essence) when the dot
of its initial letter is removed.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[244:484](siim23.htm#fr_806) (484) Alternation
(*talwín*), fixity (*tamkín*): cf. note on *vv*. 481-2 and *Kashf
al-Maḥjúb*, p. 370 foll.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[244:485](siim23.htm#fr_807) (485) Cf. verse
482. Perfect Oneness is the unity which combines two main aspects of
Being as it is revealed to mystics (cf. note on *v*. 478). "Presence"
(*ḥuḍúr*) is here equivalent to "union" (*jam‘*), and "enclosure"
(*ḥaẓíra*) to "separation" (*tafriqa*).

<span id="fn_806"></span>[244:486](siim23.htm#fr_808) (486) Cf. note on
*vv*. 481-2. "The attributes of 'disguise'" refer to the state of
sobriety (*ṣaḥw*) and denote the normal consciousness which follows
ecstasy and "veils" the mystic from God. "The vestiges of any remnant"
refer to the state of self-effacement(*maḥw*) in which these attributes
disappear.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[244:489](siim23.htm#fr_809) (489) In this
verse *waḥy* refers to the heart, *ṣígha* to the tongue.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[244:490](siim23.htm#fr_810) (490) "All sides,"
*i.e.* contrary predications, such as eternity and time, above and
below, first and last, etc.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[245:492](siim23.htm#fr_811) (492) According to
the monistic doctrine there is no real distinction in the universe of
created things—from their metaphysical source in Universal Spirit to the
Resurrection foretold by prophetic tradition, when "the whole earth
shall be His handful and the heavens shall be rolled together in His
right hand" (Kor. 39, 67).

<span id="fn_810"></span>[245:493](siim23.htm#fr_812) (493) Mohammed is
reported to have said, "Do not think I am better than Yúnus ibn Mattá.
(Jonah)."

<span id="fn_811"></span>[245:495](siim23.htm#fr_813) (495-6) See note
on *v*. 69. "Yesterday" means the Primal Covenant by which the souls,
before their bodies were created, bound themselves to love God;
"to-morrow" signifies the Resurrection. Time disappears in the oneness
of the Essence: day is identical with night, and night with day. "The
secret of 'Yea'" alludes to Kor. 7, 171: (When God said to the children
of Adam) "Am not I your Lord?" and they answered, "Yea." Those who
affirm the oneness of Being and deny "beside-ness," *i.e.* deny that
anything exists beside God, know that "Yea" is the eternal Word of God,
revealed and spoken by Himself to Himself.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[245:497](siim23.htm#fr_814) (497) The
commentator quotes two sayings ascribed to Mohammed: (*a*) that God
said, "My mercy was before My wrath"; (*b*) that Hell will say to every
true believer who approaches it, "Pass, O true believer, for lo, thy
light hath quenched my fire."

<span id="fn_813"></span>[245:498](siim23.htm#fr_815) (498) Time is not
a reality except in the spiritual world where it is eternal and
infinite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: vv. 500-599](siim24)
