[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim11)  [Next](siim13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### V. THE MACROCOSM.

As Man is created in the image of God, so the universe is created in the
image of Man <span id="fr_376"></span>[5](#fn_374), who is its spirit
and life <span id="fr_377"></span>[6](#fn_375). In describing its
creation Jílí combines mystical ideas with an old cosmological myth, in
the following manner <span id="fr_378"></span>[7](#fn_376):

<span class="small">Before the creation God was in Himself, and the
objects of existence were absorbed (*mustahlik*) in Him so that He was
not manifested in any thing. This is the state of "being a hidden
treasure <span id="fr_379"></span>[8](#fn_377)" or, as the Prophet
expressed it, "the dark mist above which is a void and below which is a
void <span id="fr_380"></span>[9](#fn_378)," because the Idea</span>

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="small">of Ideas <span id="fr_381"></span>[1](#fn_379) is
beyond all relations. The Idea of Ideas is called in another Tradition
"the White Chrysolite <span id="fr_382"></span>[2](#fn_380), in which
God was before He created the creatures." When God willed to bring the
world into existence, He looked on the Idea of Ideas (or the White
Chrysolite) with the look of Perfection, whereupon it dissolved and
became a water; for nothing in existence, not even the Idea of Ideas,
which is the source of all existence, can bear the perfect manifestation
of God. Then God looked on it with the look of Grandeur, and it surged
in waves, like a sea tossed by the winds, and its grosser elements were
spread out in layers like foam, and from that mass God created the seven
earths with their inhabitants. The subtle elements of the water
ascended, like vapour from the sea, and from them God created the seven
heavens with the angels of each heaven. Then God made of the water seven
seas which encompass the world. This is how the whole of existence
originated.</span>

Jílí surveys the celestial, terrestrial and aqueous universe at
considerable length <span id="fr_383"></span>[3](#fn_381), but I will
not attempt to give more than an outline of his map. He takes first the
seven heavens, which rise in concentric and gradually widening circles
above the spheres of earth, water, air, and fire. Mystics, he remarks,.
have seen them and can interpret them to sublunary men.

#### 1. The Heaven of the Moon.

<span class="small">This is not the earth-born vapour which we call the
sky, but is invisible on account of its farness and subtlety. God
created it from the nature of the Spirit (*al-Rúḥ*) <span
id="fr_384"></span>[4](#fn_382), that it might have the same relation to
the earth as the spirit has to the body; and He made it the
dwelling-place of Adam <span id="fr_385"></span>[5](#fn_383). Its colour
is whiter than silver.</span>

#### 2. The Heaven of Mercury.

<span class="small">God created it from the nature of reflection
(*fikr*) and placed in it all the angels who help craftsmen. Its colour
is grey.</span>

#### 3. The Heaven of Venus.

<span class="small">It is created from the nature of phantasy (*khayál*)
and is the locality of the World of Similitudes (*‘álamu ’l-mithrál*).
Its colour</span>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="small">is yellow. Jílí describes the various tasks assigned
to the angels whom he saw in this heaven, where he also met the Prophet
Joseph <span id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_384).</span>

#### 4. The Heaven of the Sun.

<span class="small">It is created from the light of the heart (*qalb*).
The Sun in his heaven is like the heart in man—a mirror of Deity: while
the heart displays the sublime degrees of existence connoted by the name
Allah, the Sun is the source and principle of the elemental world.
Idrís, Jesus, Solomon, David, and most of the prophets dwell in the
heaven of the Sun; its ruling angel is Isráfíl.</span>

#### 5. The Heaven of Mars.

<span class="small">Azrael, the Angel of Death, presides over this
blood-red heaven, which is created from the light of judgment
(*wahm*).</span>

#### 6. The Heaven of Jupiter.

<span class="small">Its colour is blue. God created it from the light of
meditation (*himma*). The angels of the Sixth Heaven, of whom Michael is
the chief, are angels of mercy and blessing. Some have the shapes of
animals and birds and men; others appear as substances and accidents
which bring health to the sick or as solids and liquids which supply
created beings with food and drink; others are formed half of fire and
half of ice.</span>

Here Jílí beheld Moses, "drunken with the wine of the revelation of
Lordship," who explained to him the meaning of "Thou shalt not see Me"
(Kor. 7, 139).

#### 7. The Heaven of Saturn.

<span class="small">The Seventh Heaven was the first to be created. It
was created from the light of the First Intelligence, and its colour is
black. Between it and the Starless Heaven (*al falaku ’l-aṭlas*) there
are three heavens which have only a logical, not an actual, existence:
the Heaven of Matter (falaku ’l-*hayúlá*), which is the highest of the
three; the Heaven of Atoms (*falaku ’l-habá*) <span
id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_385); and the Heaven of the Elements (*falaku
’l-‘anáṣir*); some philosophers add a fourth, *viz*., the Heaven of
Natural Properties (*falaku ’l-tabá’i‘*).</span>

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

The author proceeds to describe the seven limbos of the Earth <span
id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_386).

#### 1. The Earth of Souls (*arḍu ’l-nufús*).

<span class="small">God created it whiter than milk and sweeter than
musk, but when Adam walked on it after the Fall it became dust-coloured,
except one region in the North, never reached by any sinner, which is
ruled by al-Khaḍir and inhabited by the Men of the Unseen World (*rijálu
’l-ghayb*) <span id="fr_389"></span>[2](#fn_387).</span>

#### 2. The Earth of Devotions (*arḍu ’l-‘ibádát*).

<span class="small">In colour it resembles an emerald. Its inhabitants
are those of the Jinn (genies) who believe in God: their night is our
day, and their day our night. After the sun sets in our earth, they
appear on it and fall in love with the children of men. Most of these
spirits envy the disciples of the Mystic Way, and taking them unawares
bring them to ruin. Jílí affirms that he had seen some Ṣúfís who were in
bondage to them and were made so deaf and blind that they could neither
hear nor understand the Word of God, unless the reciter were one of the
Jinn.</span>

#### 3. The Earth of Nature (*arḍu ’l-ṭab‘*).

<span class="small">Its colour is saffron-yellow. The unbelieving Jinn
who inhabit it appear in human shape amongst mankind and cause them to
neglect the worship of God.</span>

#### 4. The Earth of Lust (*arḍu ’l-shahwa*).

<span class="small">Its colour is blood-red. It is inhabited by
different sorts of devils who are the offspring of the soul of
Iblís.</span>

#### 5. The Earth of Exorbitance (*arḍu ’l-ṭughyán*).

<span class="small">Its colour is indigo blue. ‘Afríts and potent demons
dwell in it, who busy themselves with seducing men to commit great
sins.</span>

#### 6. The Earth of Impiety (*arḍu ’l-ilḥád*).

<span class="small">Its colour is black as night. It is the abode of the
*márids* (the most evil and rebellious of the Jinn) <span
id="fr_390"></span>[3](#fn_388).</span>

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

#### 7. The Earth of Misery (*arḍu ’l-shaqáwa*).

<span class="small">It is the floor of Gehenna (*Jahannum*) and is
inhabited by enormous snakes and scorpions, which God placed there in
order that it might be a pattern of the torments of Hell to the people
of this world <span id="fr_391"></span>[1](#fn_389).</span>

Concerning the Seven Seas, which were originally two—one of salt and the
other of fresh water—Jílí has much to say <span
id="fr_392"></span>[2](#fn_390), but his description of them is somewhat
confused and we must now pass on to matters of greater interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[121:5](siim12.htm#fr_376) Mohammed, as the
Logos, is the spiritual essence of Adam and of all things.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[121:6](siim12.htm#fr_377) Cf. K II. 79, 6
foll. "God caused Adam to dwell in the heaven of this world, because
Adam is the world-spirit (*rúḥu ’l-‘álam*): through him God beheld the
existent things and had mercy on them and made them live by the life of
Adam in them. The world will not cease to be living so long as humankind
continues there. When humankind departs, the world will perish and
collapse, as the body of an animal perishes when the spirit leaves it."

<span id="fn_376"></span>[121:7](siim12.htm#fr_378) K II. 77, 10 foll.
Cf. Nyberg, *Kleinere Schriften des Ibn al-‘Arabī*, Introd., p. 146
foll.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[121:8](siim12.htm#fr_379) According to the
Ḥadíth, "I was a hidden treasure and I desired to be known, therefore I
created the creatures in order that I might be known."

<span id="fn_378"></span>[121:9](siim12.htm#fr_380) See [p.
94](siim09.htm#page_94) fol.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[122:1](siim12.htm#fr_381) *Ḥaqíqatu
’l-haqá’iq*, *i.e.*, the whole content of God's knowledge, the Divine
consciousness, the First Intelligence, the Logos. It is identical with
the *Ḥaqíqatu ’l-Muḥammadiyya*. Cf. Nyberg, *op. cit.*, Introd., p. 33
foll. and 50.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[122:2](siim12.htm#fr_382) *al-Yáqútatu
’l-bayḍá*.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[122:3](siim12.htm#fr_383) K II. 78, 5-98, 22.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[122:4](siim12.htm#fr_384) See [p.
108](siim11.htm#page_108) foll.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[122:5](siim12.htm#fr_385) Cf. [p.
121](siim11.htm#page_121), note [6](#fn_375).

<span id="fn_384"></span>[123:1](siim12.htm#fr_386) K II. 83, 22 foll.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[123:2](siim12.htm#fr_387) The universe, being
in space, requires a locus (*maḥall*). This locus is *al-habá*. It is
"logical" (*ḥukmí*), since it cannot be homogeneous with the universe;
otherwise it would need a locus for itself. Mystics call it " the First
Intelligence" and "the Spirit of Mohammed" (M 35 a). Cf. Nyberg, *op.
cit.*, Introd., p. 157.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[124:1](siim12.htm#fr_388) K II. 89, 18 foll.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[124:2](siim12.htm#fr_389) He says that it is
near to the land of Bulghár and that in winter they are not obliged to
perform the evening-prayer, because the dawn rises before sunset.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[124:3](siim12.htm#fr_390) Jílí inserts here a
short passage in which he distinguishes four species of Jinn according
as their nature is elemental, fiery, airy, or earthly. The "elementals"
are akin to the angels and never go outside of the spiritual world.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[125:1](siim12.htm#fr_391) Similarly, God set
over the Heaven of the Stars a prince (*ṭághiya*) like the people of
Paradise to serve as a pattern of the joys of Paradise. Moreover, the
images stored in the left side of the seat of *khayál* (see [p.
91](siim08.htm#page_91)) in the human brain are a copy of the Earth of
Misery, while those in the right side are a copy of the houris and other
Paradisal pleasures. Otherwise, Jílí argues, the intellect could not
know Paradise and Hell and would not be obliged to believe in them (K
II. 92, 22 foll.).

<span id="fn_390"></span>[125:2](siim12.htm#fr_392) K II. 93, 9 foll.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Return to the Essence](siim13)
