[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ebt14)  [Next](ebt16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

### TREES.

I find that practically all the named historic trees (including Gospel
Oaks) stand on leys. Such as King's Acre Elm, Eastwood Oak, Great Oak at
Eardisley, Oak near Moreton-on-Lugg Bridge, etc. Place names (which in
my previous articles on Crosses I too hastily held to signify the site
of a cross) also indicate trees as marks. Such are Lyde Cross Tree,
Cross of the Tree at Deerfold, Cross Oak, Cross Ash, Cross Colloe (hazel
tree cross), and two leys cross at these points. Actual trees are shown
at the cross roads in two of the above in Taylor's fine county map of
1757.

The Oak in the horse-shoe meadow at Ross is on the ley passing over Over
Ross (the place name indicates it) and Wilton Castle. The steep little
street coming down to the river from the Swan Hotel is dead on this ley.

Where a natural hill came under a ley it was often made a sighting point
by the planting of a single tree, hence the numerous "one tree" hills,
as at Backbury and on the Holmer Golf Links. All places called "The
Grove" seem to be on a ley, and a small group of trees (as at Ladylift)
was also used to mark a sighting point. Existing trees are probably
successors of original ones.

I see evidence that at one time such trees were called the "stock." The
site of the wayside cross at Winforton is known as the Stocks, and a
marking tump in the lane for Bowley Town (or Court) has an ash on it,
and is called by the same name, as are farms at Wellington, Almeley
Woonton, etc. The highest point (a hill near the Three Elms on the
"Roman" road from Kenchester to Lugg Bridge) is marked on the map as
Bobblestock Hill. I have known it as Bubblestock, but have no doubt it
was Baublestock, the tree or stock (we still buy apple stocks in the
market) where men who peddled necklaces and other baubles met the
buyers. To-day, if you ask in a shop whether they keep such goods, you
will, perhaps, be told that they have a good stock of them.

I think that the pole (Layster's Pole, Yarpole, Lyepole, etc.) was a
form of sighting point, lingering on to recent times as the May pole.

Every considerable avenue of trees (as in parks of country seats) which
I have tested has a ley down its centre.

Monnington Walks, a Scotch Fir avenue a mile long ([Plate
XIII](ebt26.htm#img_pl13).), is sighted through Monnington Church and
the Sear Rock, Brobury,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

which last can be seen central in the picture. I found the ancient track
still on the ley at the Scar, and alongside appeared to be an enclosed
camp with defences of a mild type, such as seem to be alongside many
other sighting points, as Longtown and Bridge Sollars Churches. Other
avenues on leys are at Trewyn (two), where the house, central with the
Scotch Fir avenue, has been proved to be on a burial mound, at
Llanvihangel Court, where tradition also asserts the house (central
again) to be on a burial mound; at Oakley Park, Ludlow (The Duchess
Walk); and at Longworth. A feature in most of these avenues is that, as
far as present roads or tracks go, they "lead to nowhere," and the
discovery of the ley solves this puzzle. A striking instance can be seen
from the Castle Mound at New Radnor, from which Harpton Court and Old
Radnor Church are in line, and the eye looks up the centre of an avenue
of trees climbing to the church. That beautiful avenue (half its beauty
gone since two recent gales) with the ancient name Green Crise, which
lines a public road out of Hereford, is on a ley which comes down the
County College Road, over Putson Ford, and passes through Aconbury
Church.

One sure sign of a ley is a long straight strip of wood marked on the
map, as from Franchise-stone to Litley, and towards Breinton Church.

The word "park" had a meaning different to its present usage, but was
probably connected with woodland, and certainly with leys, which pass
through each of the innumerable Park Woods and Park Farms.

The Scotch Fir or Pine is the tree which seems most characteristic of a
ley, for a group of them are almost always (I notice) signs of a
sighting point, as at Constable's Firs, Hampstead Heath.

At the present time it is impracticable to sight from point to point
(especially on water points) on account of intervening trees. It is
certain that for many centuries the sighting points were used, and that
trees did not then intervene. This throws a doubt on the usual glib
statement that ancient Britain was one dense forest. Perhaps the
increase of trees was a cause of the decay of the system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Camps](ebt16)
