[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ebt16)  [Next](ebt18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHURCHES.

These--if ancient--seem to be invariably on (not merely alongside) a
ley, and in many cases are at the crossing of two leys, thus
appropriating the sighting point to a new use. A ley often passes
through a tump adjacent to the church, and a cross ley through both
church and tump. In other cases a mark stone site became the churchyard
cross, and a cross ley comes through both church and cross. In many
cases one of the leys went through the tower only, and it is possible
that tower and steeple were built to be used as sighting points,
although on the other hand a large church did in fact block the road. I
will make no surmises on these interesting points. The sighting system
may have been in decay or the tracks abandoned when the churches were
first built on the sighting points. I do not think it probable that leys
were made to provide sites for churches.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

\[paragraph continues\] In almost every old town or village will be
found examples of a church built on and blocking an ancient road
although new roads (as at Weobley) are often made on one or both sides.
I show examples of a number. Broad Street blocked by All Saints, Offa
Street (a striking example) with St. Peter's Tower dead on one end, and
the Cathedral Tower dead on the other end. Other examples: Ledbury,
Wigmore, Shrewsbury (Fish Street), Kington, and Madley, where tower,
churchyard cross and village cross are on one ley, and tower, nave,
chancel, and a mark stone in the village on a lengthwise ley.

At Warwick a chapel is over a town gateway, and in Exeter an ancient
lane is also allowed to continue as a tunnel under the altar of a small
church, two curious instances of the right of way being continued and
the desire of the clergy to use the site also attained. Kenderchurch is
a striking instance of a church perched on the apex of a sighting mound,
and in other districts I can think of Bren Tor (Dartmoor), Harrow,
Churchdown (Gloucester), and the two St. Michael's Mounts, these last
obviously terminals of leys, as is St. Tecla's Chapel out in the channel
below Chepstow, the termination of the beach ley which gives its name to
Beachley Village.

In London St. Paul's blocks the Watling Street and Ludgate Hill leys,
and St. Clement Danes, St. Mary le Strand, and St. Martin's in the
Fields are all on another ley with subsidiary roads evolved on each side
of the churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Castles](ebt18)
