[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ebt19)  [Next](ebt21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HEREFORD TRACKWAYS.

More than a score come through Hereford. There are sighting tumps at
Hogg's Mount (Castle Green), Mouse Castle (also marked as Scots Hole),
Gallows Tump (Belmont Road), Holmer Golf Links, Holmer Lane (top of old
brick field), and an important one, Merryhill (in Haywood Forest), now
marked as Beachwood. There also have been (now demolished) sighting
tumps or points at Castle Hill, Palace Courtyard, Overbury (Aylestone
Hill), The Knoll, Tupsley. And remains of one for the Castle ferry is on
the line of earthwork bounding the Bishop's Meadow.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

A riverside track sighted over Hogg's Mount and Holmer Lane Tump is
illustrated in Plate VIII.

I have found trackways through the sites of each of the ancient
churches. St. John's Street extended passes exactly through the chancel
of the chapel of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem at Widemarsh.
Barrol Street through the site of St. Guthlac's. In evening light a
trackway can be seen from the Castle Green terrace, running through the
large elm stump in the Bishop's Meadow to certain railings on the river
bank, it runs by Vaga House, Quay Street, site of Blackfriars Church,
northwards to Brimfield Church, and southwards through a moat this side
of the rectory at Upper Bullingham. Other straight trackways are visible
through an orchard behind Kilburn (Aylestone Hill), on this year's
show-ground near the Three Elms, through Litley orchard, and descending
the meadow on the north slope of Aylestone Hill to pass by the Burcott
Pool, and on to Tenbury.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Traditional Wells](ebt21)
