[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ebt22)  [Next](ebt24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### ROMAN ROADS.

The exact relation of Roman roads to the earlier leys is a matter for
future investigation, but our co-member Mr. Jack is on the right lines
when investigating the surface construction to find whether a road can
be called Roman. It is not easy to realise that many British roads were
as ancient to the Roman invaders as the Roman remains are to us.

My general impressions from observed facts are that the Roman surveyors
used the sighting system; that they utilized the old trackways, imposing
greater width and their far superior road surface and foundations; also
that working during the degeneration of the ley system, they did not
appreciate the long distance primary points, but working on short
distance hills and points their roads are not so consistent and
individual. I find evidence that they established their stations on the
original leys, and that these were then so numerous as to form the
boundaries of stations or towns, and thus decide their polygonal shape.
It is also probable that a great many Roman roads of which portions
remain were never completed, although the sighting points of the
original ley continue on the line.

The road from Aymestry to Mortimer's Cross comes down to the Wye in the
cutting at Bridge Sollars.

The "Roman" straight road from Leintwardine through Paytoe and Wigmore
Moor (the subject of recent digging) continues as a ley through Lucton
and Kingsland Churches.

I consider the existing maps of Roman roads to have little value as
being based on the assumption that there were no straight sighted roads
before the Romans came, and that (quite illogically) such a road could
go round corners, and had to follow the tracks over which some old
writer had travelled. I find the so-called straight Roman roads, as from
Kenchester to Lugg Bridge, to be really on several slightly diverging
leys, three in this case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Place Names](ebt24.md)
