<HTML>
<META name="description" content="Sacred Texts: UFOs">
<META name="keywords" content="grey mib sacred texts ufo spirituality xfiles">
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Handling the News Media: What MUFON Members Need to Know</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
<FONT FACE="Arial">
<FONT SIZE="-2">
<CENTER>
<A HREF="../index">Intangible Textual Heritage</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="../eso/index">Esoteric &amp; Occult</A>
&nbsp;
<A HREF="../myst">Mysteries</A><BR>
<A HREF="../index">Buy CD-ROM</A>
&nbsp;
<A HREF="../books/ufo">Buy Books about UFOs</A>
<BR>
<A HREF="index">Index</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="martian">Previous</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="memo">Next</A>&nbsp;
</CENTER>
</FONT>
<H3 ALIGN="CENTER">Handling the News Media: What MUFON Members Need to Know</H3></FONT>
<HR>
<FONT FACE="Courier">
<PRE>

Handling the News Media:
What MUFON Members Need to Know
by Joe Lewels, Ph.D.

(Mutual UFO Network UFO Journal, Number 337, May 1996, Copyright 1996 by
the Mutual UFO Network, 103 Oldtowne Rd., Sequin, Texas 78155, published
monthly with a membership/subscription rate of $25/yr.)

---
Anyone who takes the UFO mystery seriously has, at one time or another,
been frustrated by the news media's often sophomoric and uninformed
coverage of the subject. As a former journalist and journalism
professor, I have often winced with embarrassment at the antics of
broadcast anchormen who somehow feel obliged to end every UFO story with
a snide comment or a dumb joke. It is as if by doing so, they can
distance themselves from the subject matter and demonstrate to the
audience how objective, credible and professional they are. Such
comments and raised eyebrows, I have noticed, do not explain to the
viewers why the TV station chose in the first place to air the story.
They are left to wonder why, if the story was so ridiculous, they
bothered to cover it at all. The reason, of course, is the ratings. TV
stations and newspapers are, first and foremost, businesses, and it is
this fact that accounts for much of their content. Editors and news
directors are well aware of the public's seemingly unquenchable thirst
for UFO information, and even if they themselves are ignorant of the
subject, they understand one thing quite well: UFOs sell newspapers and
boost ratings. MUFON members, who from time to time may find themselves
dealing with the press must be constantly aware of this truth, for it
can either be the cause of great consternation or it can provide
much-needed publicity opportunities. Three cases of media contact during
the last year serve to illustrate the problem. Not long ago, the State
Section Director in El Paso, Tex., Dr. Roberta Fennig, was contacted by
a television reporter who was anxious to get an interview for a story.
"We're doing a three- part series on UFOs and I need to see you right
away," he said. He was working on a short deadline and asked for a
meeting that same day. Dr. Fennig contacted me and we agreed to meet
with the reporter on the condition that the meeting be "off the record."
Since we did not know the reporter, we felt a need to act cautiously. We
needed to know what the program would cover and how it would be
approached. To determine this, we asked a few questions: "Why are you
interested in doing a series on UFOs?" we asked. "My news director
assigned me the story," he responded. "Is your news director interested
in UFOs?" "I don't think so." "Then why do the story? Has something
happened to stir up interest in the subject?" we queried. "I don't think
so." "Well, why do a series at this time," we probed. \` â€œIt has to do
with the ratings," he confessed. "Next week is sweeps week." (The week
in which audience sizes are measured to determine how much a station can
charge for advertising is called "sweeps week.") "Ok, what do you know
about UFOs?" "Not much," he replied honestly. "Have you read any books
on the subject?" "No." "Are you aware that your network (CBS) devoted an
hour of serious discussion to the subject on the \`48 Hours' program?"
we inquired. "Uh, no, I didn't see that." "How much air time will your
station devote to this three-part series?" "Each segment is going to be
about 2 to 3 minutes.' It quickly became obvious that 1) the reporter
was totally ignorant of the subject; 2) neither he nor anyone at his
station had any serious interest in the subject; 3) the only purpose of
the report was to hype the nightly news to gain higher ratings; and 4)
that the station was going to rush to throw together something without
much research or concern for the seriousness of the subject. In the end,
we opted not to participate, although we realized we were passing up an
opportunity to bring in new members and to publicize our hotline number.
We had good reason to be concerned that any comments we might make could
be taken out of context for the purpose of providing the station with a
20-second "sound byte" to be used to hype their evening news show. Dr.
Fennig, whose experience at dealing with the media is limited, was
amazed by the lack of professionalism demonstrated by the reporter. "I
thought he would have at least done a little research on the subject
before asking for an interview," she commented. This example should
serve as a lesson for MUFON spokespersons who will find that the job of
educating reporters is never ending. They cannot assume that journalists
know anything about the volumes of evidence pertaining to the reality of
UFOs or that they have even heard the names of persons like Dr. John
Mack, Budd Hopkins, Dr. J. Allen Hynek or other well-known researchers.
Walt Andrus, International Director of MUFON, recently received a call
from a reporter from a newspaper in Pensacola, Florida who wanted an
interview and information on the Gulf Breeze case. "He knew absolutely
nothing about the events of Gulf Breeze," says Walt, "even though
Pensacola is just a few miles across the bay. He didn't even know who Ed
Walters was. I asked him how long he had worked in Pensacola and he said
five years. I told him the Gulf Breeze case was at least eight years
old." On another occasion, a reporter for the El Paso Herald Post
approached me for help in arranging an interview with an abductee. She
wanted to do a feature story to accompany the story she was doing on
John Carpenter's lecture on the abduction phenomenon at the University
of Texas at E1 Paso. In the past, she had done an excellent job on a
front page story concerning a lecture by speaker Robert Dean. She had
even called him long distance for an interview. Since I had confidence
in her, I assisted her in setting up an interview with a local woman who
had a lifetime of UFO experiences. The interview resulted in a large,
front page article which was no doubt responsible for the large crowd
that attended Carpenter's presentation. It was a fair, in-depth and
serious effort to convey the terror, trauma and honest confusion
experienced by an otherwise intelligent, well-adjusted and productive
individual. The difference between these two cases of media contact
serves as a good lesson for MUFON members who may not have experience in
dealing with the press. Here are a few suggestions about how to handle
the media and to get better publicity: 1) Members should be taught to
handle unsolicited media contact properly. One person in the chapter,
preferably the State Section Director or another experienced individual,
should be designated as the spokesperson. All requests for information
or interviews should be directed to him or her. 2) The spokesperson
should seek out reporters who are interested in and knowledgeable about
the subject and work with them by being their sources of information.
Cultivate relationships with those who can be trusted to do a fair job.
3) Media contact is optional and should be on your own terms. You are
not obligated to speak to a reporter and you should not do so if you are
uncomfortable with the format or with the individual. Be prepared to be
badgered for a statement. Reporters know that if they can keep you on
the phone or engaged in conversation for more than a minute or so,
chances are you will end up "spilling your guts." Learn to say "no
comment," or "I can't be a source for you on this story," then hang up!
Remember that anything you say to a reporter is quotable unless you
received a pledge of anonymity before you made the statement. For that
reason, many reporters will attempt to strike up a casual conversation,
without telling you that you are being interviewed. As disagreeable as
it may seem, it is in your best interest to consider every newsperson as
an adversary, for he is capable of making you look extremely foolish. 4)
Before saying anything quotable, first find out what the nature of the
story is and what the reporter's views are. Ask for a face to face, off
the record meeting to get acquainted. Make it clear what comments are
"off the record" and which are for attribution. Tape record the
interview as a safeguard. 5) Do not assume the reporter knows anything
about the subject or has done any research. Find out what books he has
read and who else he is going to interview. Do not assume that the
reporter will be objective, fair or sympathetic. Remember, reporters use
people to get a story that will sell newspapers or get ratings. Their
own interests come first, not telling the truth. 6) When dealing with TV
stations, find out how much air time they plan to devote to the story.
Realize that even though they interview you for 20 minutes, they may
only use a 10- or 20- second film clip of the most sensational
statements you make. It will be totally out of context and could make
you look foolish. 7) Learn to exercise caution with your choice of words
and think carefully before you say anything on the air or for
attribution. Always opt for the most conservative choice of words and
qualify your statements. For example, investigators should use the term
"UFO" or "object" rather than "spaceship." Remember, you can't prove it
was a spaceship. Use the words, "apparent" or "potential" when
describing an abduction or alien encounter. Be cautious about stating as
fact those things that cannot be proven, such as "the government is
testing flying saucers," or "aliens are from Zeta Reticuli" or "alien
bodies were recovered at Roswell." 8) If your meetings are open to the
public, it is a good idea to ask if there are any reporters or media
representatives in the audience. If so, you may wish to ask for a
promise that the meeting be "off the record" or you may wish to ask the
person to leave. Having a reporter present at a meeting may seriously
interfere with a free and open discussion of important issues. Members
should not have to worry about being quoted in the newspaper for
statements made at meetings. 9) If your chapter is planning to have a
guest lecturer who doesn't mind the publicity, arrange for the lectur to
occur during "sweeps week." Contact your local stations to find out when
that week falls and offer to help the news director produce a segment on
UFOS, centered around your speaker. 10) For best results, hand-carry
well-written news releases to those reporters and editors you know will
do a good job. If your chapter produces a newsletter, send free copies
to all the media and to favored reporters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Memorandum II](memo)
