<HTML>
<META name="description" content="Sacred Texts: UFOs">
<META name="keywords" content="grey mib sacred texts ufo spirituality xfiles">
<HEAD>
<TITLE>UF0's and Mainstream Science</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
<FONT FACE="Arial">
<FONT SIZE="-2">
<CENTER>
<A HREF="../index">Intangible Textual Heritage</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="../eso/index">Esoteric &amp; Occult</A>
&nbsp;
<A HREF="../myst">Mysteries</A><BR>
<A HREF="../index">Buy CD-ROM</A>
&nbsp;
<A HREF="../books/ufo">Buy Books about UFOs</A>
<BR>
<A HREF="index">Index</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="schmemo">Previous</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="seti-e">Next</A>&nbsp;
</CENTER>
</FONT>
<H3 ALIGN="CENTER">UF0's and Mainstream Science</H3></FONT>
<HR>
<FONT FACE="Courier">
<PRE>
 
 
                              ³  ³
                              ³  ³
                 ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»
                 º   T R U S T   N O   O N E   º
                 ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ¼
                              ³  ³
                              ³  ³
                               /\
                              +--+
                             +----+
                            /      \               //======//
      ===\\                /        \             //     //
          \\              /          \           //====//
         ==\\            +------------+              ///
            \\======================================///
             \\====================================///
 
 
Things to beware of in 1997:

Slow phasing out of the Constitution in favor of 'New World Order'
ideals and 'One World Goverment' regime.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------


UF0's and Mainstream Science

by Bernhard Haisch, Ph. D.

[Bernhard Haisch is the Managing Editor of the Journal of Scientific
Exploration, P.O. Box 5848, Stanford, CA 94309. E-mail:
<haischGjse.com>]

(Mutual UFO Network UFO Journal, Number 335, March 1996, Copyright 1996
by the Mutual UFO Network, 103 Oldtowne Rd., Sequin, Texas 78155,
published monthly with a membership/subscription rate of $25/yr.)

---
\_The Journal of Scientific Exploration\_ (JSE), which I edit, is a
peer-reviewed research journal in which scholarly investigations on
phenomena not part of the currently accepted scientific paradigms may be
published. UFO's fall in this category, or more to the point, UFO's
certainly fall outside the realm of mainstream science. Is there any
possibility of changing this situation? The purpose of this essay is to
present some ideas along these lines to the community of UFO
investigators and supporters. By way of introduction I am not myself a
UFO researcher, but as editor of this unconventional journal I have been
exposed to enough data and met enough serious investigators to become
supportive of the need to carefully study whatever this phenomenon, or
perhaps phenomena, may be. My profession is that of astronomer and by
most criteria, apart from editing JSE, I am an insider in the scientific
mainstream: author of research papers, principle investigator on NASA
projects, associate editor of a leading journal in astrophysics. The
field of astronomy is supported by hundreds of millions of dollars in
government research funding every year, billions if one tallies such
major missions as the Hubble Space Telescope. For the recent meeting of
the American Astronomical Society in San Antonio, the head of NASA,
Daniel Goldin, flew down from Washington just to address us astronomers.
Is there any chance that even a fraction of such support and
respectability could ever come to ufology? At the moment, no, not a
chance. But as I was listening to Mr. Goldin speaking it occurred to me
that some of the points he was making might be worth passing on. Goldin
made it clear that NASA's job is not to support astronomers (although it
does that pretty abundantly, a situation I greatly appreciate!). Nor is
NASA's job to employ engineers and astronauts to keep the shuttle
flying. NASA's job, said Goldin, is to serve the American people. He
mentioned a talk he had given in Bozeman and the excitement that the
Hubble pictures elicited there among the ordinary men and women of
Montana, far removed from NASA centers. People want to know about the
universe. And people especially want to know whether there are other
worlds capable of sustaining life. The fact that the announcement at the
same astronomical society meeting of the discovery of two new planets
orbiting the stars 70 Virginis and 47 Ursae Majoris made the front pages
of major newspapers underscores this point. The search for the origins
of life and for other planetary systems is now a cornerstone objective
for NASA. Goldin discussed visionary plans to image other solar systems
using huge space-based interferometers in the new millennium. He
challenged us astronomers to find ways to photograph clouds and
mountains on earth-like planets in other solar systems, which must be
one of the most scientifically ambitious statements ever made by a head
of NASA. This, in his view, is what the American people want from NASA;
and I have no doubt that he is correct in his assessment. I pose to you
that there is a lesson here for ufology. If various public opinion polls
are to be believed there may be more Americans who believe there is
something going on having to do with UFO's than not. It even seems
probable, though I do not know this to be the case, that there are more
people who "believe in" UFO's than have heard about Hubble. If that is
the case, Goldin's lesson for NASA would apply here too. If the American
people truly want the UFO problem officially investigated, the
government will do that by and by. That does not automatically mean NASA
of course. Many appearances to the contrary, UFO's may have nothing to
do with outer space as astronomers view the universe. How would one
bring about government-sponsored research analogous to that of astronomy
or the other sciences. As Goldin urged us to do on behalf of NASA's
research: write, call, visit your representatives and senators.
Constituencies count. No doubt about it. NASA funds astronomical
research because the American people want this; even if most of it is
too esoteric for public consumption, the highlights such as Hubble
images and first extra-solar planets do make the newspapers and people
read with interest about what their tax dollars are paying for. But
there is a second key ingredient that really needs to come first, and
all the grassroots lobbying will come to naught until this second point
that Goldin made to us astronomers is translated into action in the
wilds of ufology. Given a mandate to support such research, who decides
what exactly will be done. Goldin reminded us astronomers that it is our
responsibility to come up with NASA's marching orders for the start of a
new century. The community of astronomers must reach consensus on
prioritizing projects, and he made it clear that those of us whose
projects may not make the cutoff, owing to fiscal limitations, are still
obligated as members of the research community to support those that are
selected. Community consensus and support of an agreed- upon plan, even
by those who lost in the proposal competitions, is essential. Without
that, the money would eventually stop flowing. And there is the
roadblock for ufology. There, in my view, is the principal reason
civilian government money has never started flowing, or even trickling.
The field is as far from consensus as it could be. There are many
possible factors in this ranging from sincere and professionally
motivated difference of opinion, to lack of understanding of scientific
methods, focus on personal aggrandizement rather than objectivity,
paranoia, etc. To be fair to the principles of objectivity and
comprehensiveness one must also acknowledge the possibility that the
disarray of ufology may be partially driven by official or semi-official
disinformation, or even, taking the view of the respected researcher
Jacques Vallee, by the UFO phenomenon itself. But even if those darker
possibilities were true, it would still be possible to press ahead if a
leadership and a position could be agreed upon, at least a tentative
one, a provisional one to get started, one that can be re-evaluated
after things get going. One has a better chance of arriving at a
destination even if one drives the car in the wrong direction and has to
turn around, than if no one is ever selected to start the car and pull
out the driveway! Lest I leave the wrong impression, this is not a
solicitation for anyone's vote for this astronomer to lead the charge. I
have no desire to become a ufology leader, nor am I here to recommend to
you in whom such leadership should be vested. My message is a simple but
absolutely realistic one as evidenced by Mr. Goldin\`s address.
Astronomy is doing reasonably well even in today's budget climate
because it is meeting a demonstrable desire of the American public and
has the professional structure, stature and behavior to effectively
translate that mandate into funded programs. The public climate is in
fact more and more receptive to new ideas and is certainly keenly
interested in the possibility of other intelligent life in the universe,
including the possibility of evidence for such right here under our
noses. It is conceivable that this could be turned into a public mandate
for government-sponsored UFO research. But that can only happen if
ufologists can somehow follow the successful example of the astronomical
community. This is difficult. Ph. D.'s in ufology are not conferred by
respected institutions as they are in astrophysics. But there are things
that can be done to start the process. Genuinely scholarly papers can be
written, which the \_Journal of Scientific Exploration\_ would consider,
for example. Note that I am not trying to solicit papers; the Journal is
highly selective and turns down more articles than are accepted. Journal
articles are one way to interest mainstream scientists. In fact,
eliciting the interest of mainstream scientists is a key factor in
raising the level of UFO respectability. This is extremely difficult in
the present environment of disarray, but this could change. A 1977 poll
of American astronomers, published in JSE, showed the following. Out of
2611 questionnaires 1356 were returned. In response to whether the UFO
problem deserved further study the replies were: 23% certainly, 30%
probably, 27% percent possibly, 17% probably not, 3% certainly not.
Interestingly, there was a positive correlation between the amount of
reading done on the subject and the opinion that further study was in
order. Professional researchers would be likely to lose interest if
there were a complete lack of credible data. This shows a surprisingly
high level of potential interest that could be brought into the open if
a proper professional structure could be provided. Scientists value
their reputations more than anything, and the perceived danger of
tainting one's hard won reputation by association with a disreputable
activity is a major obstacle. There is also a kind of non-linear
downward spiral. Scientists are both very busy and put off by the
appearance of much of ufology. As a result most scientists never look at
UFO evidence, which leads to their conclusion that there is no evidence.
Given the proper environment this could presumably be turned into a
favorable upward non-linearity: Given "evidence of evidence," credibly,
soberly presented, the interest of scientists can be piqued, which would
presumably lead to the "discovery" by scientists that there is evidence.
Two other obstacles are irrationality and paranoid claims. One cannot
avoid the possibility that, as Vallee argues, the element of
irrationality may be the actual key and purpose of the phenomenon so as
to force a change in human consciousness. This would not be welcome news
for the apparently large constituency of nuts-and-bolts saucer
enthusiasts, nor presumably for those who take all abduction reports at
face value. And this would be very difficult for science to deal with
because it is at first glance a frontal assault on science itself. But
consider the advent of quantum mechanics and relativity in the early
1900's. These were frontal assaults on the prevailing classical physics
that must have looked like madness to many physicists of the day. We do
not read about them of course. The textbooks discuss the Einsteins and
Plancks and other geniuses who prevailed, not the army of "ordinary
physicists" whose careers and worldviews looked to be shattered by what
must have seemed irrational to them. But life went on and science even
advanced! Scientists are also certainly not used to the possibility that
a phenomenon under investigation may be subject to clandestine
manipulation. This may be the greatest obstacle because of the, in my
view, small possibility that there may be some truth to it. It is not
hard to imagine that there may be a great deal of classified
information, but that would not by itself imply any greater
comprehension concerning the nature of the phenomenon by those holding -
and withholding n the data. The \_Journal of Scientific Exploration\_ is
publishing formerly classified information concerning multi-million
dollar remote viewing (ESP) programs funded by the CIA and other
intelligence agencies over the past 20 years. Projects that were highly
secret a decade or two ago are now a matter of public record. n This
demonstrates two things directly analogous to the UFO situation: yes,
there really were classified ESP programs as claimed; but no, the
vaunted government agencies were not able to come to deeper conclusions
regarding the nature of that phenomenon than was then or is now publicly
available. (The two public reports - by Utts and by Hyman - on this
20-year effort disagree on the strength of the evidence for remote
viewing. The view of the three leading figures in this program, Puthoff,
Targ and May, with all of whom I have had in- depth discussions, is that
there were astonishing successes in a fraction of the cases.
Unfortunately there was no way to distinguish in advance what would be
signal from what would be noise, hence the program could not achieve its
required operational intelligence potential.) Only in the unlikely
circumstance that the most paranoid vision of government conspiracy with
nonearthly intelligences should prove to be true would the existence of
classified programs obstruct a successful, open, funded research
initiative-either by blocking outright the establishment of an open
research program, or by turning it into a sham to further cover "the top
secret truth." In any case, nothing would be gained by letting
suspicions of this sort stop the attempt to establish an open research
program. Indeed, such efforts would perhaps point to valuable indicators
of opposition, if such there were. t seems from my unique vantage point
as both scientist and editor of JSE, that substantial evidence exists of
"something going on." But in the real world of competition and politics
and entrenched positions that by itself will not move the UFO debate off
square one. Evidence needs to be properly analyzed and then properly
presented using techniques and venues as close as possible to those of
mainstream science. The disparity of the evidence appears to be
confusing enough without layers of unproven theory and conspiracy.
Somehow out of organization of evidence there could arise not the truth
- that is too much - but there could arise a consensus on simply what to
do next, who would plan it, who would execute it, how would money be
spent in a responsible, accountable, way if made available. The outcome
would not be "the answer," but merely and sufficiently the input for the
next logical follow-on. If such a scientifically-oriented process could
be started, scientists could be attracted: grassroots political lobbying
could then point to realistic funding opportunities that a
representative or senator would be willing to vote for and tout at the
next election as his or her contribution to the legitimate needs and
wishes of the public. Even if the UFO phenomenon should turn out to be
deeper than we imagine, even should it prove to transcend science as we
know it, the scientific approach is the only feasible way in the real,
political, economic, technological world we live in to give us some
chance to control our dealings with this phenomenon, rather than letting
the phenomenon entirely control us... if such it is. Quo vadis, ufology?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Drake Equation](seti-e)
