<HTML>
<META name="description" content="Sacred Texts: UFOs">
<META name="keywords" content="grey mib sacred texts ufo spirituality xfiles">
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Eyewitness Testimony and the Paranormal</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY bgcolor="#000000" text="#00ff00" link="#ffffff" alink="#ffffff" vlink="#ffffff">
<FONT FACE="Arial">
<FONT SIZE="-2">
<CENTER>
<A HREF="../index">Intangible Textual Heritage</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="../eso/index">Esoteric &amp; Occult</A>
&nbsp;
<A HREF="../myst">Mysteries</A><BR>
<A HREF="../index">Buy CD-ROM</A>
&nbsp;
<A HREF="../books/ufo">Buy Books about UFOs</A>
<BR>
<A HREF="index">Index</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="swedborg">Previous</A>&nbsp;
<A HREF="theories">Next</A>&nbsp;
</CENTER>
</FONT>
<H3 ALIGN="CENTER">Eyewitness Testimony and the Paranormal</H3></FONT>
<HR>
<FONT FACE="Courier">
<PRE>
 
 
                              ³  ³
                              ³  ³
                 ÉÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ»
                 º   T R U S T   N O   O N E   º
                 ÈÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍÍ¼
                              ³  ³
                              ³  ³
                               /\
                              +--+
                             +----+
                            /      \               //======//
      ===\\                /        \             //     //
          \\              /          \           //====//
         ==\\            +------------+              ///
            \\======================================///
             \\====================================///
 
 
Things to beware of in 1997:

Slow phasing out of the Constitution in favor of 'New World Order'
ideals and 'One World Goverment' regime.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------


Eyewitness Testimony
and the Paranormal

RICHARD WISEMAN, MATTHEW SMITH, and JEFF WISEMAN

[Richard Wiseman is the Perrott-Warrick Senior Research Fellow at the
University of Hertfordshire, College Lane Hatfield Herts., ALlO 9A8,
UK., researching parapsychology and deception; Matthew Smith is a
research assistant at the University of Hertfordshire; Jeff Wiseman is a
freelance writer who assisted in the experiments.]

(The Skeptical Inquirer, Vol. 19, No. 6, Nov/Dec 1995, Copyright 1995 by
the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the
Paranormal, 3965 Rensch Road, Buffalo, NY 14228, published quarterly
with a membership/subscription rate of $25/yr.)

---
Much of the evidence relating to paranormal phenomena consists of
eyewitness testimony. However, a large body of experimental research has
shown that such testimony can be extremely unreliable. For example, in
1887 Richard Hodgson and S. John Davey held seances in Britain (in which
phenomena were faked by trickery) for unsuspecting sitters and requested
each sitter to write a description of the seance after it had ended.
Hodgson and Davey reported that sitters omitted many important events
and recalled others in incorrect order. Indeed, some of the accounts
were so unreliable that Hodgson later remarked: The account of a trick
by a person ignorant of the method used in its production will involve a
misdescription of its fundamental conditions. . . so marked that no clue
is afforded the student for the actual explanation (Hodgson and Davey
1887 p. 9). In a partial replication of this work, Theodore Besterman
(1932) in Britain had sitters attend a fake seance and then answer
questions relating to various phenomena that had occurred. Besterman
reported that sitters had a tendency to underestimate the number of
persons present in the seance room, to fail to report major disturbances
that took place (e.g., the movement of the experimenter from the seance
room), to fail to recall the conditions under which given phenomena took
place, and to experience the illusory movements of objects. More
recently, Singer and Benassi in the United States (1980) had a stage
magician perform fake psychic phenomena before two groups of university
students. Students in one group were told that they were about to see a
magician; the other group, that they were about to witness a
demonstration of genuine psychic ability. Afterward, all of the students
were asked to note whether they believed the performer was a genuine
psychic or a magician. Approximately two-thirds of both groups stated
they believed the performer to be a genuine psychic. In a follow-up
experiment the researchers added a third condition, wherein the
experimenter stressed that the performer was definitely a magician.
Fifty-eight percent of the people in this group still stated they
believed the performer to be a genuine psychic! These studies admirably
demonscrate that eyewitness testimony of supposedly paranormal events
can be unreliable. Additional studies have now started to examine some
of the factors that might cause such inaccuracy. Clearly, many
supposedly paranormal events are difficult to observe simply because of
their duration, frequency, and the conditions under which they occur.
For example, ostensible poltergeist activity, seance phenomena, and UFO
sightings often occur without warning, are over within a few moments,
take place under poor lighting or weather conditions, or happen at a
considerable distance from observers. In addition, some people have
sight/hearing deficiencies, while others have observed these phenomena
under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or when they are tired
(especially if they have had to wait a relatively long time for the
phenomena to occur). It is also possible that observers' beliefs and
expectations play an important role in the production of inaccurate
testimony. Different people clearly have different beliefs and
expectations prior to observing a supposed psychic - skeptics might
expect to see some kind of trickery; believers may expect a display of
genuine psi. Some seventy years ago Eric Dingwall in Britain (1921)
speculated that such expectations may distort eyewitness testimony: The
frame of mind in which a person goes to see magic and to a medium cannot
be compared. In one case he goes either purely for amusement or possibly
with the idea of discovering \`how it was done,' whilst in the other he
usually goes with the thought that it is possible that he will come into
direct contact with the other world (p. 211). Recent experimental
evidence suggests that Dingwall's speculations are correct. Wiseman and
Morris (1995a) in Britain carried out two studies investigating the
effect that belief in the paranormal has on the observation of conjuring
tricks. Individuals taking part in the experiment were first asked
several questions concerning their belief in the paranormal. On the
basis of their answers they were classified as either believers (labeled
"sheep") or skeptics (labeled "goats"). \[Gertrude Schmeidler, City
College, New York City, coined the terms sheep and goats.\] In both
experiments individuals were first shown a film containing fake psychic
demonstrations. In the first demonstration the "psychic" apparently bent
a key by concentrating on it; in the second demonstration he supposedly
bent a spoon simply by rubbing it. After they watched the film,
witnesses were asked to rate the "paranormal" content of the
demonstrations and complete a set of recall questions. Wiseman and
Morris wanted to discover if, as Hodgson and Dingwall had suggested,
sheep really did tend to misremember those parts of the demonstrations
that were central to solving the tricks. For this reason, half of the
questions concerned the methods used to fake the phenomena. For example,
the psychic faked the key-bending demonstration by secretly switching
the straight key for a pre-bent duplicate by passing the straight key
from one hand to the other. During the switch the straight key could not
be seen. This was clearly central to the trick's method; and one of the
"important" questions asked was whether the straight key had always
remained in sight. A second set of "unimportant" questions asked about
parts of the demonstration that were not related to the tricks' methods.
Overall, the results suggested that sheep rated the demonstrations as
more "paranormal" than goats did, and that goats did indeed recall
significancly more "important" information than sheep. There was no such
difference for the recall of the "unimportant" information. This is not
the only study to investigate sheep/goat differences in observation and
recall of "paranormal" phenomena. Jones and Russell in the United States
(1980) asked individuals to observe a staged demonstration of
extrasensory perception (ESP). In one condition the demonstration was
successful (i.e., ESP appeared to occur) while in the other it was not.
All individuals were then asked to recall the demonstration. Sheep who
saw the unsuccessful demonstration distorted their memories of it and
often stated that ESP had occurred. Goats tended to correctly recall the
demonstration, even if it appeared to support the existence of ESP. In
addition, Matthew Smith in Britain (1993) investigated the effect that
instructions (given prior to watching a film containing a demonstration
of apparent psychic ability) had on the recall of the film. Individuals
were split into two groups. One group was told that the film contained
trickery; the other group was told that it contained genuine paranormal
phenomena. The former group recalled significantly more information
about the film than the latter group. All of the above experiments were
carried out in controlled laboratory settings. However, another recent
study suggests that the same inaccuracies may exist in a more natural
setting, namely the seance room. Many individuals have reported
experiencing extraordinary phenomena during dark-room seances.
Eyewitness claims that objects have mysteriously moved, strange sounds
have been produced, or ghostly forms have appeared, and that these
phenomena have occurred under conditions that render normal explanations
practically impossible. Believers argue that conditions commonly
associated with a seance (such as darkness, anticipation, and fear) may
act as a catalyst to produce these phenomena (Batcheldor 1966). Skeptics
suggest that reports of seances are unreliable and that eyewitnesses are
either fooling themselves or being fooled by fraudulent mediums. The
authors carried out an experiment in the United Kingdom to assess both
the reliability of testimony relating to seance phenomena, and whether
paranormal events could be produced in a modern seance. We carried out
our experiment, titled "Manifestations," three times. Twenty-five people
attended on each occasion. They were first asked to complete a short
questionnaire, noting their age, gender, and whether they believed that
genuine paranormal phenomena might sometimes cake place during seances.
A seance room had been prepared. All of the windows and doors in the
room had been sealed and blacked out, and twenty-five chairs had been
arranged in a large circle. Three objects - a book, a slate, and a bell
had been treated with luminous paint and placed onto three of the
chairs. A small table, the edges of which were also luminous, was
situated in the middle of the circle. Two luminous maracas rested on the
table. Following a brief talk on the aims of the project, the
participants were led into a darkened seance room. Richard Wiseman
played the part of the medium. With the help of a torch, he showed each
person to a chair, and, where appropriate, asked them to pick up the
book, slate, or bell. Next, he drew participants' attention to the table
and maracas. Those participants who had picked up the other luminous
objects were asked to make themselves known, and the "medium" collected
the objects one by one and placed them on the table. He then pointed out
the presence of a small luminous ball, approximately 5 centimeters in
diameter, suspended on a piece of rope from the ceiling. Finally, he
took his place in the circle, extinguished the torch, and asked
everybody to join hands. The medium first asked the participants to
concentrate on trying to move the luminous ball and then to try the same
with the objects on the table. Finally, the participants were asked to
concentrate on moving the table itself. The seance lasted approximately
ten minutes. Clearly, it was important that some phenomena occurred to
assess the reliability of eyewitness testimony. The maracas were
therefore "gimmicked" to ensure their movement during the seance. In the
third seance the table was also similarly moved by trickery. Finally, we
also used trickery to create a few strange noises at the end of each
seance. All of the un-gimmicked objects were carefully placed on markers
so that any movement would have been detectable. After leaving the
seance room, the participants completed a short questionnaire that asked
them about their experience of the seance. No genuine paranormal
phenomena took place during any of the seances. However, our
questionnaire allowed us to assess the reliability of participants'
eyewitness testimony. Would participants remember which objects had been
handled before the start of the seance? As the maracas were gimmicked,
we had to ensure that they were not examined or handled by anyone.
Nevertheless, one in five participants stated that they had been. This
was an important inaccuracy as observers are likely to judge the
movement of an object more impressive if they think that the item has
been scrutinized beforehand. This type of misconception was not confined
to the maracas. In the first two seances, the slate, bell, book, and
table remained stationary. Despite this, 27 percent of participants
reported movement of at least one of these. In the third seance the
table was gimmicked so that it shifted four inches toward the medium,
but participants' testimony was again unreliable, with one in four
people reporting no movement at all. An interesting pattern develops if
the results are analyzed by separating the participants by belief. The
ball, suspended from the ceiling, did not move at any time. Seventy-six
percent of disbelievers were certain that it hadn't moved. In contrast,
the same certainty among believers was only 54 percent. In addition, 40
percent of believers thought that at least one other object had moved,
compared to only 14 percent of disbelievers. The answers to the question
"Do you believe you have witnessed any genuine paranormal phenomena?"
perhaps provide the most conclusive result for the believer/disbeliever
divide. One in five believers stated that he or she had seen genuine
phenomena. None of the disbelievers thought so. This would suggest that
while we are all vulnerable to trickery, a belief or expectation of
paranormal phenomena during seances may add to that vulnerability. The
results clearly show that it is difficult to obtain reliable testimony
about the seance. Indeed, our study probably underestimated the extent
of this unreliability as the seance lasted only ten minutes and
participants were asked to remember what had happened immediately
afterward. Although a minority of participants believed that they had
observed genuine paranormal phenomena, it does not seem unreasonable to
assume that these individuals might be the most likely to tell others
about their experience. Our results suggest that many of their reports
would be fraught with inaccuracies and it might only take a few of the
more distorted accounts to circulate before news that "genuine"
paranormal phenomena had occurred became widespread. In short, there is
now considerable evidence to suggest that individuals' beliefs and
expectations can, on occasion, lead them to be unreliable witnesses of
supposedly paranormal phenomena. It is vital that investigators of the
paranormal take this factor into account when faced with individuals
claiming to have seen extraordinary events. It should be remembered,
however, that such factors may hinder accurate testimony regardless of
whether that testimony is for or against the existence of paranormal
phenomena; the observations and memory of individuals with a strong need
to disbelieve in the paranormal may be as biased as extreme believers.
In short, the central message is that investigators need to be able to
carefully assess testimony regardless of whether it reinforces or
opposes their own beliefs concerning the paranormal. Accurate assessment
of the reliability of testimony requires a thorough understanding of the
main factors that cause unreliable observation and remembering. Research
is starting to reveal more about these factors and the situations under
which they do, and do not, occur. Indeed, this represents part of a
general movement to increase the quality of the methods used to
investigate psychic phenomena (Wiseman and Morris 1956). Given the
important role that eyewitness testimony plays in parapsychology,
understanding observation is clearly a priority for future research.
References Batcheldor, K. J. 1966. Report on a case of table levitation
and associated phenomena. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research,
43: 339-356. Besterman, T. 1932. The psychology of testimony in relation
to paraphysical phenomena: Report of an experiment. Proceedings of the
Society for Psychical Research, 40: 363-387. Dingwall, E. 1921. Magic
and mediumship. Psychic Science Quarterly, 1 (3): 206-219. Hodgson, R.,
and S. J. Davy. 1887. The possibilities of mal- observation and lapse of
memory from a practical point of view. Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research, 4:381-495. Jones, W H. and D. Russell. 1980. The
selective processing of belief disconfirming information. European
Journal of Social Psychology 10:309-312. Smith, M. D. 1993. The effect
of belief in the paranormal and prior set upon the observation of a
'psychic' demonstration. European Journal of Parapsychology; 9:24-34.
Singer, B. and V A. Benassi. 1980. Fooling some of the people all of the
time. SKEPTICAL INQUIRER, Winter:17-24. Wiseman, R. J. and R. L. Morris.
1995a. Recalling pseudo-psychic demonstrations. British Journal of
Psychology: 86:113-125. \_\_\_\_\_\_\_. 1995b. Guidelines for Testing
Psychic Claimants. Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Resolving The ET Question in a Vacuum of Data](theories)
