[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sft04)  [Next](sft06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

### PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION FOR FAIRY TALES

    All our troubles come from doing that in which we have no
interest.--EPICTETUS.

    That is useful for every man which is conformable to his own
constitution and nature.--MARCUS AURELIUS.

    Genuine interest means that a person has identified himself with, or
found himself in, a certain course of activity. It is obtained not by
thinking about it and consciously aiming at it, but by considering and
aiming at the conditions that lie back of it, and compel it.--JOHN
DEWEY.

I. THE INTERESTS OF CHILDREN

    Now that the value of fairy tales in education has been made clear,
let us consider some of those principles of selection which should guide
the teacher, the mother, the father, and the librarian, in choosing the
tale for the little child.

    Fairy tales must contain what interests children. It is a well-known
principle that selective interest precedes voluntary attention;
therefore interest is fundamental. All that is accomplished of permanent
good is a by-product of the enjoyment of the tale. The tale will go home
only as it brings joy, and it will bring joy when it secures the child's
interest. Now interest is the condition which requires least mental
effort. And fairy tales for little children must follow that great law
of composition pointed out by Herbert Spencer, which makes all language
consider the audience and the economy of the hearer's attention. The
first step, then, is to study the interests of the child. We do not wish
to give him just what he likes, but we want to give him a chance to
choose from among those things which he ought to have and, as good and
wise guardians, see that we offer what is in harmony with his interests.
Any observation of the child's interest will show that he loves the
things he finds in his fairy tales. He enjoys -

   *A sense of life.* This is the biggest thing in the fairy tales, and
the basis for their universal appeal. The little child who is just
entering life can no more escape its attraction than can the aged
veteran about to leave the pathway. The little pig, Whitie, who with his
briskly curling tail goes eagerly down the road to secure, from the man
who carried a load of straw, a bit with which to build his easily
destructible house; Red Riding Hood taking a pot of jam to her sick
grandmother; Henny Penny starting out on a walk, to meet with the
surprise of a nut falling on her head--the biggest charm of all this is
that it is life.

   *The familiar.* The child, limited in experience, loves to come in
touch with the things he knows about. It soothes his tenderness, allays
his fears, makes him feel at home in the world,--and he hates to feel
strange,--it calms his timidity, and satisfies his heart. The home and
the people who live in it; the food, the clothing, and shelter of
everyday life; the garden, the plant in it, or the live ant or toad; the
friendly dog and cat, the road or street near by, the brook, the hill,
the sky--these are a part of his world, and he feels them his own even
in a story. The presents which the Rabbit went to town to buy for the
little Rabbits, in How Brother Rabbit Frightens his Neighbors; the
distinct names, Miss Janey and Billy Malone, given to the animals of In
Some Lady's Garden, just as a child would name her dolls; and the new
shoes of the Dog which the Rabbit managed to get in Why Mr. Dog Runs
after Brother Rabbit--these all bring up in the child's experience
delightful familiar associations. The tale which takes a familiar
experience, gives it more meaning, and organizes it, such as The Little
Red Hen, broadens, deepens, and enriches the child's present life.

   *The surprise.* While he loves the familiar, nothing more quickly
brings a smile than the surprise. Perhaps the most essential of the
fairy traits is the combination of the familiar and the unfamiliar. The
desire for the unknown, that curiosity which brings upon itself
surprise, is the charm of childhood as well as the divine fire of the
scientist. The naughty little Elephant who asked "a new, fine question
he had never asked before," and who went to answer his own question of
"what the crocodile has for dinner," met with many surprises which were
spankings; and as a result, he returned home with a trunk and
experience. He is a very good example of how delightful to the child
this surprise can be. The essence of the fairy tale is natural life in a
spiritual world, the usual child in the unusual environment, or the
unusual child in the natural environment. This combination of the usual
and unusual is the chief charm of Alice in Wonderland, where a natural
child wanders through a changing environment that is unusual. For an
idle moment enjoy the task of seeing how many ideas it contains which
are the familiar ideas of children, and how they all have been "made
different." All children love a tea-party, but what child would not be
caught by having a tea-party with a Mad Hatter, a March Hare, and a
sleepy Dormouse, with nothing to eat and no tea! Red Riding Hood was a
dear little girl who set out to take a basket to her grandmother. But in
the wood, after she had been gathering a nosegay and chasing
butterflies, "just as I might do," any child might say, she met a wolf!
And what child's ears would not rise with curiosity? "Now something's
going to happen!" The Three Bears kept house. That was usual enough; but
everything was different, and the charm is in giving the child a real
surprise at every step. The house was not like an ordinary house; it was
in the wood, and more like a play-house than a real one. There was a
room, but not much in it; a table, but there was not on it what is on
your table only three bowls. What they contained was usual, but
unusually one bowl of porridge was big and hot, one was less big and
cold, and one was little and just right. There were usual chairs,
unusual in size and very unusual when Goldilocks sat in them. Upstairs
the bedroom was usual, but the beds were unusual when Goldilocks lay
upon them. The Bears themselves were usual, but their talk and action
was a delightful mixture of the surprising and the comical. Perhaps this
love of surprise accounts for the perfect leap of interest with which a
child will follow the Cock in The Bremen Town Musicians, as he saw from
the top of the tree on which he perched, a light, afar off through the
wood. Certainly the theme of a light in the distance has a charm for
children as it must have had for man long ago.

   *Sense impression.* Good things to eat, beautiful flowers, jewels,
the beauties of sight, color, and sound, of odor and of taste, all
gratify a child's craving for sense impression. This, in its height, is
the charm of the Arabian Nights. But in a lesser degree it appears in
all fairy tales. Cinderella's beautiful gowns at the ball and the fine
supper stimulate the sense of color, beauty, and taste. The sugar-panes
and gingerbread roof of the Witch's House, in Hansel and Grethel, stir
the child's kindred taste for sweets and cookies. The Gingerbread Boy,
with his chocolate jacket, his cinnamon buttons, currant eyes,
rose-sugar mouth, orange-candy cap, and gingerbread shoes, makes the
same strong sense appeal. There is a natural attraction for the child in
the beautiful interior of Sleeping Beauty's Castle, in the lovely
perfume of roses in the Beast's Rose-Garden, in the dance and song of
the Elves, and in the dance of the Goat and her seven Kids about the
well.

   *The beautiful.* Closely related to this love of the material is the
sense of the beautiful. "Beauty is pleasure regarded as the quality of a
thing," says Santayana. Pleasures of the eye and ear, of the imagination
and memory, are those most easily objectified, and form the groundwork
on which all higher beauty rests. The green of the spring, the odor of
Red Riding Hood's flowers, the splendor of the Prince's ball in
Cinderella--these when perceived distinctly are intelligible, and when
perceived delightfully are beautiful. Language is a kind of music, too;
the mode of speaking, the sound of letters, the inflection of the
voice--all are elements of beauty. But this material beauty is tied up
in close association with things "eye hath not seen nor ear heard," the
moral beauty of the good and the message of the true. The industry of
the little Elves reflects the worth of honest effort of the two aged
peasants, and the dance of the Goat and seven Kids reflects the triumph
of mother wit and the sharpness of love. The good, the true, and the
beautiful are inseparably linked in the tale, just as they forever grow
together in the life of the child. The tales differ largely in the
element of beauty they present. Among those conspicuous for beauty may
be mentioned Andersen's Thumbelina; the Indian How the Sun, the Moon,
and West Wind Went Out to Dinner; the Japanese Mezumi, the Beautiful;
and the English Robin's Christmas Song. Little Two-Eyes stands out as
one containing a large element of beauty, and Oeyvind and Marit
represents in an ideal way the possible union or the good, the true, and
the beautiful. This union of the good, the true, and the beautiful has
been expressed by an old Persian legend: "In the midst of the light is
the beautiful, in the midst of the beautiful is the good, in the midst
of the good is God, the Eternal One."

   *Wonder, mystery, magic.* The spirit of wonder, like a
will-o'-the-wisp, leads on through a fairy tale, enticing the child who
follows, knowing that something will happen, and wondering what. When
magic comes in he is gratified because some one becomes master of the
universe--Cinderella, when she plants the hazel bough, and later goes to
the wishing-tree; the fairy godmother, when with her wand she transforms
a pumpkin to a gilded coach and six mice to beautiful gray horses;
Little Two-Eyes, when she says, -

Little kid, bleat,  
I wish to eat!

and immediately her little table set with food so marvelously appears;
or Hop-o'-my-Thumb when he steps into his Seven-League Boots and goes
like the wind.

   *Adventure.* This is a form of curiosity. In the old tale, as the
wood was the place outside the usual habitation, naturally it was the
place where things happened. Often there was a house in the wood, like
the one "amidst the forest darkly green," where Snow White lived with
the Dwarfs. This adventure the little child loves for its own sake.
Later, when he is about eleven or twelve, he loves it for its motive.
This love of adventure is part of the charm of Red Riding Hood, of the
Three Bears, of the Three Pigs, or of any good tale you might mention.

   *Success.* The child likes the fairy tale to tell him of some one who
succeeds. He admires the little pig Speckle who outwitted the Wolf in
getting to the field of turnips first, or in going to the apple tree at
Merry-Garden, or to the fair at Shanklin; who built his house of brick
which would defy assault; and whose cleverness ended the Wolf's life.
This observation of success teaches the child to admire masterliness, to
get the motto, *Age quod agis*, stamped into his child life from the
beginning. It influences character to follow such conduct as that of the
Little Red Hen, who took a grain of wheat,--her little mite,--who
planted it, reaped it, made it into bread, and then ate it; who, in
spite of the Goose and the Duck, secured to herself the reward of her
labors.

   *Action.* Akin to his love of running, skipping, and jumping, to his
enjoyment in making things go and in seeing others make things go, is
the child's desire for action in his fairy tales; and this is just
another way of saying he wants his fairy tales to parallel life. Action
is the special charm of the Gingerbread Boy, who opened the oven door
and so marvelously ran along, outrunning an old Man, an old Woman, a
little Boy, two Well-Diggers, two Ditch-Diggers, a Bear, and a Wolf,
until he met the Fox waiting by the corner of the fence. Dame Wiggins of
Lee and Her Seven Wonderful Cats--a humorous tale written by Mrs. Sharp,
a lady of ninety, edited by John Ruskin, who added the third, fourth,
eighth, and ninth stanzas, and illustrated by Kate Greenaway--has this
pleasing trait of action to a unique degree. So also has The Cock, the
Mouse, and the Little Red Men, a modern tale by Felicite Lefevre. This
very popular tale among children is a retelling of two old tales
combined, The Little Red Hen and the Irish Little Rid Hin.

   *Humor.* The child loves a joke, and the tale that is humorous is his
special delight. Humor is the source of pleasure in Billy Bobtail, where
the number of animals and the noises they make fill the tale with
hilarious fun. There is most pleasing humor in Lambikin. Here the
reckless hero frolicked about on his little tottery legs. On his way to
Granny's house, as he met the Jackal, the Vulture, the Tiger, and the
Wolf, giving a little frisk, he said, -

To Granny's house I go,  
Where I shall fatter grow.  
Then you can eat me so!

Later, on returning, when the animals asked, "Have you seen Lambikin?"
cozily settled within his Drumikin, laughing and singing to himself, he
called out slyly -

Lost in the forest, and so are you.  
On, little Drumikin! Tum-pa, tum-too!

    Humor is the charm, too, of Andersen's Snow Man. Here the child can
identify himself with the Dog and thereby join in the sport which the
Dog makes at the Snow Man's expense, just as if he himself were
enlightening the Snow Man about the Sun, the Moon, and the Stove. There
is most delightful humor in The Cat and the Mouse in Partnership, where
the Cat has the face to play upon the credulity of the poor housekeeper
Mouse, who always "stayed at home and did not go out into the daytime."
Returning home from his ventures abroad he named the first kitten
Top-Off, the second one Half-Out, and the third one All-Out; while
instead of having attended the christening of each, as he pretended, he
secretly had been visiting the jar of fat he had placed for safe-keeping
in the church.

   *Poetic justice.* Emotional satisfaction and moral satisfaction based
on emotional instinct appeal to the child. He pities the plight of the
animals in the Bremen Town Musicians, and he wants them to find a
refuge, a safe home. He is glad that the robbers are chased out, his
sense of right and wrong is satisfied. Poetic justice suits him. This is
one reason why fairy tales make a more definite impression often than
life--because in the tale the retribution follows the act so swiftly
that the child may see it, while in life "the mills of the gods grind
slowly," and even the adult who looks cannot see them grind. The child
wants Cinderella to gain the reward for her goodness; and he wishes the
worthy Shoemaker and his Wife, in the Elves and the Shoemaker, to get
the riches their industry deserves,

   *The imaginative.* Fairy tales satisfy the activity of the child's
imagination and stimulate his fancy. Some beautiful spring day, perhaps,
after he has enjoyed an excursion to a field or meadow or wood, he will
want to follow Andersen's Thumbelina in her travels. He will follow her
as she floats on a lily pad, escapes a frog of a husband, rides on a
butterfly, lives in the house of a field-mouse, escapes a mole of a
husband, and then rides on the back of a friendly swallow to reach the
south land and to become queen of the flowers. Here there is much play
of fancy. But even when the episodes are homely and the situations
familiar, as in Little Red Hen, the act of seeing them as distinct
images and of following them with interest feeds the imagination. For
while the elements are familiar, the combination is unusual; and this
nourishes the child's ability to remove from the usual situation, which
is the essential element in all originality. By entering into the life
of the characters and identifying himself with them, he develops a large
sympathy and a sense of power, he gains insight into life, and a care
for the interests of the world. Thus imagination grows "in flexibility,
in scope, and in sympathy, till the life which the individual lives is
informed with the life of nature and of society," and acquires what
Professor John Dewey calls Culture.

   *Animals.* Very few of the child's fairy tales contain no animals.
Southey said of a home: "A house is never perfectly furnished for
enjoyment unless there is in it a child rising three years old and a
kitten rising six weeks; kitten is in the animal world what a rosebud is
in a garden." In the same way it might be said of fairy tales: No tale
is quite suited to the little child unless in it there is at least one
animal. Such animal tales are The Bremen Town Musicians, Henny Penny,
Ludwig and Marleen and The Elephant's Child. The episode of the hero or
heroine and the friendly animal, as we find it retained in Two-Eyes and
her little Goat, was probably a folk-lore convention--since
dropped--common to the beginning of many of the old tales. It indicates
how largely the friendly animal entered into the old stories.

   *A portrayal of human relations, especially with children.* In
Cinderella the child is held by the unkind treatment inflicted upon
Cinderella by her Stepmother and the two haughty Sisters. He notes the
solicitude of the Mother of the Seven Kids in guarding them from the
Wolf. In the Three Bears he observes a picture of family life. A little
child, on listening to The Three Pigs for the first time, was
overwhelmed by one thought and cried out, "And didn't the Mother come
home any more?" Naturally the child would be interested especially in
children, for he is like the older boy, who, when looking at a
picture-book, gleefully exclaimed, "That's me!". He likes to put himself
in the place of others. He can do it most readily if the character is a
small individual like Red Riding Hood who should obey her mother; or
like Goldilocks who must not wander in the wood; or like Henny Penny who
went to take a walk and was accosted by, "Where are you going?" In
Brother Rabbit and the Little Girl the Little Girl takes the keenest
enjoyment in putting herself in the customary grown-up's place of
granting permission, while the Rabbit takes the usual child's place of
mentioning a request with much persuasion. The child is interested, too,
in the strange people he meets in the fairy tales: the clever little
elves who lived in the groves and danced on the grass; the dwarfs who
inhabited the earth-rocks and the hills; the trolls who dwelt in the
wild pine forest or the rocky spurs, who ate men or porridge, and who
fled at the noise of bells; the fairies who pleased with their red caps,
green jackets, and sprightly ways; the beautiful fairy godmother who
waved her wonderful wand; or those lovely fairy spirits who appeared at
the moment when most needed--just as all best friends do--and who could
grant, in a twinkling, the wish that was most desired.

   *The diminutive.* This pleasure in the diminutive is found in the
interest in the fairy characters, Baby Bear, Little Billy-Goat, Little
Pig, the Little Elves, Teeny Tiny, Thumbelina, and Tom Thumb, as well as
in tiny objects. In the Tale of Tom Thumb the child is captivated by the
miniature chariot drawn by six small mice, the tiny butterfly-wing shirt
and chicken-skin boots worn by Tom, and the small speech produced by him
at court, when asked his name: -

My name is Tom Thumb,  
From the Fairies I come;  
When King Arthur shone,  
This court was my home.  
In me he delighted,  
By him I was knighted.  
Did you never hear of  
Sir Thomas Thumb?

   *Doll i' the Grass* contains a tiny chariot made from a silver spoon
and drawn by two white mice, and *Little Two-Eyes* gives a magic table.
The child takes keen delight in the fairy ship which could be folded up
and put into a pocket, and in the wonderful nut-shell that could bring
forth beautiful silver and gold dresses. The little wagon of Chanticleer
and Partlet that took them a trip up to the hill, and the tiny mugs and
beds, table and plates, of Snow White's cottage in the wood--such as
these all meet the approval of child-nature.

   *Rhythm and repetition.* The child at first loves sound; later he
loves sound and sense, or meaning. Repetition pleases him because he has
limited experience and is glad to come upon something he has known
before. He observes and he wants to compare,, but it is a job.
Repetition saves him a task and boldly proclaims, "We are the same."
Such is the effect of the repetitive expressions which we find in *Teeny
Tiny:* as, "Now when the teeny-tiny woman got home to her teeny-tiny
house, she was a teeny-tiny bit tired"; or, in *Little Jack Rollaround*,
who cried out with such vigorous persistence, "Roll me around!" and
called to the moon, "I want the people to see me!" In *The Little Rabbit
Who Wanted Red Wings*, one of the pleasantest tales for little children,
the White Rabbit said to his Mammy, "Oh, Mammy, I wish I had a long gray
tail like Bushy Tail's; I wish I had a back full of bristles like Mr.
Porcupine's; I wish I had a pair of red rubbers like Miss Puddleduck's."
At last, when he beheld the tiny red-bird at the Wishing-Pond, he said,
"Oh, I wish I had a pair of little red wings!" Then, after getting his
wings, when he came home at night and his Mammy no longer knew him, he
repeated to Mr. Bushy Tail, Miss Puddleduck, and old Mr. Ground Hog, the
same petition to sleep all night, "Please, kind Mr. Bushy Tail, may I
sleep in your house all night?" etc. Repetition here aids the child in
following the characters, the story, and its meaning. It is a distinct
help to unity and to clearness.

   *The Elephant's Child* is an example of how the literary artist has
used this element of repetition, and used it so wonderfully that the
form is the matter and the tale cannot be told without the artist's
words. " 'Satiable curtiosity," "the banks of the great, grey-green,
greasy, Limpopo River, all set about with fever-trees," and " 'Scuse
me," are but a few of those expressions for which the child will watch
as eagerly as one does for a signal light known to be due. The
repetition of the one word, "curtiosity," throughout the tale, simply
makes the point of the whole story and makes that point delightfully
impressive.

    Rhythm and repetition also make a bodily appeal, they appeal to the
child's motor sense and instinctively get into his muscles. This is very
evident in Brother Rabbit's Riddle:--

De big bird bob en little bird sing;  
De big bee zoon en little bee sting,  
De little man lead en big hoss foller-  
Kin you tell wat's good fer a head in a holler?

The song in *Brother Rabbit and the Little Girl* appeals also to the
child's sense of sound:--

De jay-bird hunt de sparrer-nes;  
De bee-martin sail all 'roun';  
De squer'l, he holler from de top er de tree,  
Mr. Mole, he stay in de ground;  
He hide en he stay twel de dark drap down-  
Mr. Mole, he hide in de groun'.

   *The simple and the sincere.* The child's taste for the simple and
the sincere is one reason for the appeal which Andersen's tales make. In
using his stories it is to be remembered that, although Andersen lacked
manliness in being sentimental, he preserved the child's point of view
and gave his thought in the true nursery story's mode of expression.
Since real sentiment places the emphasis on the object which arouses
feeling and the sentimental places the emphasis on the feeling,
sincerity demands that in using Andersen's tales, one lessen the
sentimental when it occurs by omitting to give prominence to the
feeling. Andersen's tales reflect what is elementary in human nature,
childlike fancy, and emotion. His speech is characterized by the
simplest words and conceptions, an avoidance of the abstract, the use of
direct language, and a naive poetic expression adapted to general
comprehension. He is not to be equaled in child conversations. The world
of the fairy tale must be simple like the world Andersen has given us.
It must be a world of genuine people and honest occupations in order to
form a suitable background for the supernatural. Only fairy tales
possessing simplicity are suited to the oldest kindergarten child of
five or six years. To the degree that the child is younger than five
years, he should be given fewer and fewer fairy tales. Those given
should be largely realistic stories of extreme simplicity.

   *Unity of effect.* The little child likes the short tale, for it is a
unity he can grasp. If you have ever listened to a child of five
spontaneously attempting to tell you a long tale he has not grasped, and
have observed how the units of the tale have become confused in the mind
that has not held the central theme, you then realize how harmful it is
to give a child too long a story. Unity demands that there be no heaping
up of sensations, but neat, orderly, essential incidents, held together
by one central idea. The tale must go to the climax directly. It must
close according to Uncle Remus's idea when he says, "De tale ain't
persoon atter em no furder don de place whar dey \[the characters\] make
der disappear'nce." It will say what it has to say and lose no time in
saying it; and often it will attempt to say only one thing. It will be
remarkable as well for what it omits as for what it tells. The Norse
*Doll i' the Grass* well illustrates this unity. Boots set out to find a
wife and found a charming little lassie who could spin and weave a shirt
in one day, though of course the shirt was tiny. He took her home and
then celebrated his wedding with the pleasure of the king. This unity,
which is violated in Grimm's complicated Golden Bird, appears pleasantly
in The Little Pine Tree that Wished for New Leaves. Here one feeling
dominates the tale, the Pine Tree was no longer contented. So she
wished, first for gold leaves, next for glass leaves, and then for
leaves like those of the oaks and maples. But the robber who stole her
gold leaves, the storm that shattered her glass leaves, and the goat
that ate her broad green leaves, changed her feeling of discontent,
until she wished at last to have back her slender needles, green and
fair, and awoke next morning, happy and contented.

    Fairy tales for little children must avoid certain elements opposed
to the interests of the very young child. Temperaments vary and one must
be guided by the characteristics of the individual child. But while the
little girl with unusual power of visualization, who weeps on hearing of
Thumbling's travels down the cow's mouth in company with the hay, may be
the exception, she proves the rule: the little child generally should
not have the tale that creates an emotion of horror or deep feeling of
pain. This standard would determine what tales should not be given to
the child of kindergarten age:--

   *The tale of the witch.* The witch is too strange and too fearful for
the child who has not learned to distinguish the true from the
imaginative. This would move Hansel and Grethel into the second-grade
work and Sleeping Beauty preferably into the work of the first grade.
The child soon gains sufficient experience so that later the story
impresses, not the strangeness.

   *The tale of the dragon.* This would eliminate Siegfried and the
Dragon. A dragon is too fearful a beast and produces terror in the heart
of the child. Tales of heroic adventure with the sword are not suited to
his strength. He has not yet entered the realm of bold adventure where
Perseus and Theseus and Hercules display their powers. The fact that
hero-tales abound in delightful literature is not adequate reason for
crowding the Rhinegold Legends, Wagner Stories, and Tales of King
Arthur, into the kindergarten. Their beauty and charm do not make it
less criminal to present to little children such a variety of images as
knighthood carries with it. These tales are not sufficiently simple for
the little child, and must produce a mental confusion and the crudest of
returns.

   *Giant tales.* This would omit Jack and the Beanstalk, Jack the
Giant-Killer, and Tom Hickathrift, moving them up into the primary
field. A little girl, when eating tongue, confidingly asked, "Whose
tongue?" and when told, "A cow's," immediately questioned with
tenderness, "Don't he feel it?" Thereafter she insisted that she didn’t
like tongue. To a child of such sensibilities the cutting off of heads
is savage and gruesome and should not be given a chance to impress so
prominently. Life cannot be without its strife and struggle, but the
little child need not meet everything in life at once. This does not
mean that absolutely no giant tale would be used at this time. The tale
of Mr. Miacca, in which "little Tommy couldn't always be good and one
day went round the corner," is a giant tale which could be used with
young children because it is full of delightful humor. Because of the
simplicity of Tommy's language and his sweet childishness it appeals to
the child's desire to identify himself with the character. Tommy is so
clever and inventive and his lively surprises so brimful of fun that the
final effect is entirely pleasing.

   *Some tales of transformation.* The little child is not pleased but
shocked by the transformation of men into animals. A little girl, on
looking at an illustration of Little Brother and Sister, remarked, "If
my Sister would turn into a fawn I would cry." When the animals are
terrifying, the transformation contains horror for the child. This,
together with the length and complexity of the story, would move Beauty
and the Beast up into the second grade where the same transformation
becomes an element of pleasure. A simple tale of transformation, such as
The Little Lamb and the Little Fish, in which Gretchen becomes a lamb
and Peterkin a little fish, is interesting but not horrible, and could
be used. So also could a tale such as Grimin's Fundevogel, in which the
brother and sister escape the pursuit of the witch by becoming, one a
rosebush and the other a rose; later, one a church and the other a
steeple; and a third time, one a pond and the other a duck. In both
these tales we have the witch and transformation, but the effect
contains no horror.

   *The tale of strange animal relations and strange creatures.* Tom Tit
Tot, which Jacobs considers the most delightful of all fairy tales, is
brimful of humor for the older child, but here the tailed man is not
suited to the faith and understanding of six years. Rumpelstiltskin, its
parallel, must also be excluded. The House in the Wood, and its Norse
parallel, The Two Step-Sisters, are both very beautiful, but are more
suited to the second grade. In the kindergarten it is much better to
present the tale which emphasizes goodness, rather than the two just
mentioned, which present the good and the bad and show what happens to
both. Besides there is a certain elation resulting from the superior
reward won by the good child which crowds out any pity for the erring
child. Such elation is a form of selfishness and ought not to be
emphasized. Snow White and Rose Red contains the strange dwarf, but it
is a tale so full of love and goodness and home life that in spite of
its length it could be used in the first grade.

   *Unhappy tales.* The very little child pities, and its tender heart
must be protected from depressing sadness as unrelieved as we find it in
The Little Match Girl. The image of suffering impressed on a child, who
cannot forget the sight of a cripple for days, is too intense to be
healthful. The sorrow of the poor is one of the elements of life that
even the very little child meets, and it is legitimate that his
literature should include tales that call for compassion. But in a year
or two, when he develops less impressionability and more poise, he is
better prepared to meet such situations, as he must meet them in life.

   *The tale of capture.* This would eliminate Proserpine. No more
beautiful myth exists than this one of the springtime, but its beauty
and its symbolism do not make it suitable for the kindergarten. It is
more suited to the elementary child of the fourth grade. In fact, very
few myths of any sort find a legitimate place in the kindergarten,
perhaps only a few of the simpler pourquois tales. The Legend of the
Pied Piper Of Hamelin, which is very beautiful, and appeals to little
children because of the piping and of the children following after,
should be omitted from the kindergarten because the capture at the
close--the disappearance of the children in the hill--is tragic in
pathos. It is better to leave the literature as it is and offer it later
when the child reaches the second grade. The effect of this tragic end
has been realized by Josephine Scribner Gates, who (St. Nicholas,
November, 1914) has given to the children, "And Piped Those Children
Back Again." This is a modern completion of The Pied Piper. It most
happily makes the little lame boy who was left in Hamelin when the Piper
closed the door of the mountain, the means of the restoration of the
other children to their parents.

    The very long tale. This would omit The Ugly Duckling. The Ugly
Duckling is a most artistic tale and one that is very true to life. Its
characters are the animals of the barn-yard, the hens and ducks familiar
to the little child's experience. But the theme and emotional interest
working out at length through varied scenes, make it much better adapted
to the capacities of a third-grade child. The White Cat, a feminine
counterpart of Puss-in-Boots--which gives a most charming picture of how
a White Cat, a transformed princess, helped a youth, and re-transformed
became his bride--because of its length, is better used in the first
grade at the same time with Puss-in-Boots. The same holds true of Peter,
Paul, and Espen, or its parallel, Laboulaye's Poucinet. This is a fine
tale telling how the youngest of three sons succeeded in winning the
king's favor and finally the princess and half the kingdom. First, Espen
had to cut down the giant oak that shadowed the palace and dig a well in
the courtyard of the castle deep enough to furnish water the entire
year. But after winning in these tests, he is required to conquer a
great Ogre who dwells in the forest, and later to prove himself cleverer
in intellect than the princess by telling the greater falsehood. It is
evident that not only the subject-matter but the working out of the long
plot are much beyond kindergarten children.

   *The complicated or the insincere tale.* This would eliminate a tale
of complicated structure, such as Grimm's Golden Bird; and many of the
modern fairy tales, which will be dealt with later on.

    The fairy tales mentioned above are all important tales which the
child should receive at a later time when he is ready for them. They are
mentioned because they all have been suggested for kindergarten use. The
whole field of children's literature is largely unclassified and
ungraded as yet, and such arrangements as we possess show slight respect
for standards. There is abundant material for the youngest, and much
will be gained by omitting to give the very young what they will enjoy a
little later, much better and with freshness. It is true that a few
classics are well-suited to the child at any age, such as Alice in
Wonderland, The Jungle Books, and Uncle Remus Tales. In regard to this
grading of the classics, Lamb in Mockery End, speaking of his sister's
education, said, "She was tumbled early, by accident or design, into a
spacious closet of good old English reading, without much selection or
prohibition, and browsed at will upon that fair and wholesome pasturage.
Had I twenty girls they should be brought up exactly in this fashion."
Lamb would have argued: Set the child free in the library and let him
choose for himself, and feed on great literature, those stories which
give general types of situation and character, which give the simplest
pictures of a people at different epochs. But with all due respect to
Lamb it must be said that Lamb is not living in this scientific day of
discovery of the child's personality and of accurate attention to the
child's needs. Because the Odyssey is a great book and will give much to
any child does not prove at all that the same child would not be better
off by reading it when his interests reach its life. This outlook on the
problem would eliminate the necessity of having the classics rewritten
from a new moral viewpoint, which is becoming a custom now-a-days, and
which is to be frowned upon, for it deprives the literature of much of
its vigor and force.

II\. THE FAIRY TALE AS LITERATURE

    From the point of view of the child, we have seen that in a
subjective sense, fairy tales must contain the interests of children. In
an objective sense, rather from the point of view of literature, let us
now consider what fairy tales must contain, what are the main standards
which determine the value of fairy tales as literature, and as such,
subject-matter of real worth to the child.

    The old tale will not always be perfect literature; often it will be
imperfect, especially in form. Yet the tale should be selected with the
standards of literature guiding in the estimate of its worth and in the
emphasis to be placed upon its content. Such relating of the tale to
literary standards would make it quite impossible later in the primary
grades when teaching the reading of Three Pigs, to put the main stress
on a mere external like the expression of the voice. A study of the
story as literature would have centered the attention on the situation,
the characters, and the plot. If the voice is receiving training in
music and in the phonics of spelling, then when the reading of the tale
is undertaken it will be a willing servant to the mind which is
concentrating on the reality, and will express what the thought compels.

    The fairy tale first must be a classic in reality even if it lacks
the crowning touch of perfect form given through the re-treatment of a
literary artist. In Reynard the Fox we have an exact example of the
folktale that has been elevated into literature. But this was possible
only because the tales originally possessed the qualities of a true
classic. "A true classic," Sainte-Beuve has said, "is one which enriches
the human mind, has increased its treasure and caused it to advance a
step, which has discovered some moral and unequivocal truth or revealed
some eternal passion in that heart where all seemed known and
discovered; which is an expression of thought, observation, or
invention, in no matter what form, only provided it be broad and great,
refined and sensible, sane and beautiful in itself; which speaks in its
own peculiar style which is found to be also that of the whole world, a
style new and old, easily contemporary with all time." Immediately some
of the great fairy tales stand out as answering to this test -Red Riding
Hood, Sleeping Beauty, Jack and the Beanstalk, Cinderella, Jack the
Giant-Killer,--which has been said to be the epitome of the whole life
of man--Beauty and the Beast, and a crowd of others. Any fairy tale
which answers to the test of a real classic must, like these, show
itself to contain for the child a permanent enrichment of the mind.

    Fairy tales must have certain qualities which belong to all
literature as a fine art, whether it is the literature of knowledge or
the literature of power. Literature is not the book nor is it life; but
literature is the sense of life, whose artist is the author, and the
medium he uses is words, language. It is good art when his sense of life
is Truth, and fine art when there is beauty in that truth. The one
essential beauty of literature is in its essence and does not depend
upon any decoration. As words are the medium, literature will
distinguish carefully among them and use them as the painter, for
particular lights and shades. According to Pater literature must have
two qualities, mind and soul. Literiture will have mind when it has that
architectural sense of structure which foresees the end in the beginning
and keeps all the parts related in a harmonious unity. It will have soul
when it has that "vagrant sympathy" which makes it come home to us and
which makes it suggest what it does not say. Test the Tale of Cinderella
by this standard. As to mind, it makes one think of a bridge in which
the very keystone of the structure is the condition that Cinderella
return from the ball by the stroke of twelve. And its "vagrant sympathy"
is quite definite enough to reach a maid of five, who remarked: "If I'd
have been Cinderella, I wouldn't have helped those ugly sisters, would
you?"

    If the fairy tale stands the test of literature it must have proved
itself, not only a genuine classic according to Sainte-Beuve's standard,
and a tale possessing qualities of mind and soul according to Pater's
Style, but it must have shown itself also a work owning certain features
distinguishing it as literature. These particular literary marks which
differentiate the literary tale from the ordinary prose tale have been
pointed out by Professor Winchester in his Principles of Literary
Criticism. They apply to the old tale of primitive peoples just as well
as to the modern tale of to-day. As literature the tale must have: (1) a
power to appeal to the emotions; (2) a power to appeal to the
imagination; (3) a basis of truth; and (4) a form more or less perfect.

    (1) A power to appeal to the emotions. This appeal to the emotions
is its unique distinguishing literary trait. Literature appeals, not to
the personal emotions but to the universal ones. For this reason,
through literature the child may come in time to develop a power of
universal sympathy, which is not the least value literature has to
bestow upon him, for this sympathy will become a benediction to all
those with whom he may have to deal. In order that emotion in the tales
may be literary--make a permanent appeal--according to Professor
Winchester's standards, it must have justness given by a deep and worthy
cause; vividness so that it may enlarge and thrill; a certain steadiness
produced by everything in the tale contributing to the main emotion; a
variety resulting from contrasts of character; and a high quality
obtained through its sympathy with life and its relation to the conduct
of life, so that the feeling for the material beauty of mere sights and
sounds is closely related to the deepest suggestions of moral beauty.
The best literary tales will possess emotion having all five
characteristics. Many tales will exhibit one or more of these traits
conspicuously. No tale that is literature will be found which does not
lay claim to some one of these qualities which appeal to the broadly
human emotions.

    Applying the test of emotion to fairy tales, Cinderella possesses a
just emotion, Cinderella's cause is the cause of goodness and kindness
and love, and deserves a just reward. The Town Musicians of Bremen
exhibits vivid emotion, for all four characters are in the same
desperate danger of losing life, all four unite to save it, and to find
a home. Andersen's Steadfast Tin Soldier is a good example of steadiness
of emotion, as it maintains throughout its message of courage. The Tin
Soldier remained steadfast, whether on the table just escaped from the
toy-box, or in the street after a frightful fall from the window, or
spinning in a paper boat that bobbed, or sailing under the crossing, or
lying at full length within the fish that swallowed him, or at last
melting in the full glare of the hearth fire. It is a very good example,
too, of vividness of emotion. The Little Elves illustrates steadiness of
emotion, it is pervaded by the one feeling, that industry deserves
reward. The French tale, Drakesbill, is especially delightful and
humorous because "Bill Drake" perseveres in his happy, fresh vivacity,
at the end of every rebuff of fortune, and triumphantly continues his
one cry of, "Quack, quack, quack! When shall I get my money back?"
Lambikin leaves the one distinct impression of light gaiety and
happy-heartedness; and The Foolish, Timid Rabbit preserves steadily the
one effect of the credulity of the animals, made all the more prominent
by contrast to the wisdom of the Lion. Variety of emotion appears in
tales such as Cinderella, Little Two-Eyes, Sleeping Beauty, and Three
Pigs, where the various characters are drawn distinctly and their
contrasting traits produce varied emotional effects. All the great fairy
tales appeal to emotion of a high moral quality and it is this which is
the source of their universal appeal. It is this high moral quality of
the spiritual truth, which is the center of the tale's unity, holding
together all the parts under one emotional theme. This is the source of
the perennial freshness of the old tale; for while the immortal truth it
presents is old, the personality of the child that meets it is new. For
the child, the tale is new because he discovers in it a bit of himself
he had not known before, and it retains for him a lasting charm so that
he longs to hear it again and again. The beauty of truth, the reward of
goodness, and the duty of fairness, give a high emotional quality to
Little Two-Eyes; and Sleeping Beauty illustrates the blighting power of
hatred to impose a curse and the saving power of love to overcome the
works of hatred.

    Considering folk-tales from the standpoint of emotion, if asked to
suggest what author's work would rank in the same class, one is rather
surprised to find, that for high moral quality, variety, and worthy
cause, the author who comes to mind is none other than Shakespeare.
Perhaps, with all due respect to literature's idol, one might even
venture to question which receives honor by the comparison, Shakespeare
or the folk-tales? It might be rather a pleasant task to discover who is
the Cordelia, the Othello, the Rosalind, and the Portia of the
folk-tales; or who the Beauty, the Bluebeard, the Cinderella, the
Puss-in-Boots, and the Hop-o'-my-Thumb, of Shakespeare.

    The little child is open to emotional appeal, his heart is tender
and he is impressionble. If he feels with the characters in his tales he
develops a power of emotion. In Andersen's Snow Man it is hard to say
which seems more human to him or which makes more of an emotional
appeal, the Snow Man or the Dog. He is sorry for the poor Shoemaker in
The Little Elves, glad when he grows rich, delighted for the Elves when
they receive their presents, and satisfied at the happy end. Since
literature depicts life and character in order to awaken noble emotions,
it follows that one must omit to present what awakens repulsive or
degrading emotions. And it is for this reason, as has been mentioned
under the heading "Elements to be avoided," that the tales of the witch
and the dragon must be excluded, not for all time, but for the earliest
years, when they awaken horror.

    Through fairy tales we have seen that the emotional power of the
child is strengthened. This has been effected because, in the tale just
as truly as in life, action is presented in real situations; and back of
every action is the motive force of emotion. This cumulative power of
emotion, secured by the child through the handling of tales, will serve
daily a present need. It will be the dynamic force which he will require
for anything he wishes to accomplish in life. It will give the child the
ability to use it in any situation similar to that in which it was
acquired. It will make a difference in his speech; he will not have to
say so much, for what he does say will produce results. This growing
power of emotion will carry over into feelings of relation and thus lead
to judgment of values. This evaluation is the basis of reasoning and
answers to the child's daily call to think from causes to consequences.
This increasing power of emotion develops into the aesthetic
sensibilities and so results in a cultivation of taste and an
understanding of life. Emotion therefore leads to appreciation, which,
when logically developed, becomes expression. Fairy tales, thus, in
conducting emotional capacity through this varied growth and toward this
high development, hold an educational value of no mean order.

    (2) The power to appeal to the imagination. Emotion can be aroused
by showing the objects which excite emotion. Imagination is this power
to see and show things in the concrete. Curry says, "Whenever the soul
comes vividly in contact with any fact, truth, etc., whenever it takes
them home to itself with more than common intensity, out of that meeting
of the soul and its object there arises a thrill of joy, a glow of
feeling. It is the faculty that can create ideal presence." When through
imagination we select spontaneously from the elements of experience and
combine into new wholes, we call it creative imagination.--The creative
imagination will be viewed here as it appears in action in the creative
return given by the child to his fairy tales.--When we emphasize a
similarity seen in mere external or accidental relations or follow
suggestions not of an essential nature in the object, we call it fancy.
Ruskin, in his Modern Painters, vol. I, part iii, Of the Imaginative
Faculty, would distinguish three classes of the imagination:--

    (a) The associative imagination. This is the power of imagination by
which we call into association other images that tend to produce the
same or allied emotion. When this association has no common ground of
emotion it is fancy. The test for the associative imagination, which has
the power to combine ideas to form a conception, is that if one part is
taken away the rest of the combination goes to pieces. It requires
intense simplicity, harmony, and absolute truth. Andersen's Fairy Tales
are a perfect drill for the associative imagination. Literature
parallels life and what is presented calls up individual experience. Any
child will feel a thrill of kinship with the experiences given in The
Tin Soldier--a little boy's birthday, the opening of the box, the
counting of the soldiers, and the setting of them upon the table. And
because here Andersen has transformed this usual experience with a
vivacity and charm, the tale ranks high as a tale of imagination. Little
Ida's Flowers and Thumbelina are tales of pure fancy. Grimm's The Straw,
the Coal, and the Bean and The Spindle, the Shuttle, and the Needle rank
in the same class, as also do the Norse The Doll i' the Grass and the
English Tom Thumb.

    (b) The penetrative imagination. This power of imagination shows the
real character of a thing and describes it by its spiritual effects. It
sees the heart and inner nature of things. Through fancy the child
cannot reach this central viewpoint since fancy deals only with
externals. Through the exercise of this power the child develops
insight, intuition, and a perception of spiritual values, and gains a
love of the ideal truth and a perpetual thirst for it. He develops
genuineness, one of the chief virtues of originality. He will tend not
to have respect for sayings or opinions but will seek the truth, be
governed by its laws, and hold a passion for perfection. This power of
imagination makes of him a continual seeker, "a pilgrim upon earth."
Through the penetrative imagination the child forgets himself and enters
into the things about him, into the doings of Three Pigs or the
adventures of Henny Penny.

    (c) The contemplative imagination. This is that special phase of the
imagination that gives to abstract being consistency and reality.
Through the contemplative imagination the child gains the significance
of meaning and discerns the true message of the tale. When merely
external resemblance is caught, when the likeness is forced, and the
image created believed in, we have fancy. The contemplative imagination
interprets the past in the tale and relates it to the future. It shows
what is felt by indicating some aspect of what is seen. Through the
exercise of this power the child develops the capacity to see. This
capacity has received a high estimate from Ruskin, who said, "Hundreds
of people can talk for one who can think, thousands can think for one
who can see." For language-training the capacity to see gives that
ability to image words which results in mental growth.

    The labor of the spirit seeking the full message of the fairy tale,
often is rewarded with bits of philosophy which are the essence of its
personal wisdom. Even the Woman Suffragists of our day might be amused
to find, in The Cat and Mouse in Partnership, this side-light on one of
their claims. The Mouse said she did not know what to think of the
curious names, Top-Off, Half-Out, and All-Out, which the Cat had chosen.
To which the Cat replied, "That is because you always stay at home. You
sit here in your soft gray coat and long tail, and these foolish whims
get into your head. It is always the way when one does not go out in the
daytime." Sometimes the philosopby of the tale is expressed not at all
directly. This is the case in Andersen's The Emperor's New Suit, a gem
in story-telling art--more suited to the second grade--where the purpose
of the story is veiled, and the satire or humor is conveyed through a
very telling word or two.--"'I will send my old, honest minister to the
weavers,' thought the Emperor. And the old, honest minister went to the
room where the two swindlers sat working at empty looms. 'Heaven
preserve me!' thought the old minister, opening his eyes wide. 'Why, I
cannot see anything!' But he did not say so." The entire tale is a
concrete representation of one point; and the concreteness is so
explicit that at the close of the story its philosophy easily forms
itself into the implied message of worldly wisdom: People are afraid to
speak truth concerning much through cowardice or through fear of acting
otherwise than all the world. The philosophy underlying The Steadfast
Tin Soldier is even finer as a bit of truth than the perfect art of the
literary story: That what happens in life does not matter so much as the
way you take it. The Tin Soldier always remained steadfast, no matter
what happened. Kipling's Elephant's Child is more charming than ever
when looked at from the standpoint of its philosophy. It might be
interpreted as an allegory answering the question,"How should one get
experience?" a theme which cannot be said to lack in universal appeal.
The Ugly Duckling is full of sayings of philosophy that contribute to
its complete message. The Cat and the Hen to whom the Duckling crept for
refuge said, "We and the world," and could not bear a difference of
opinion. "You may believe me," said the Hen, "because I tell you the
truth. That is the way to tell your friends." Their treatment of the
Duckling expressed the philosophy: "If you can't do what I can you're no
good." The Hen said to him, "You have nothing to do, that's why you have
such strange ideas." The Duckling expressed his philosophy by saying
quietly, "You don't understand me."

    These bits of philosophy often become compressed into expressions
which to-day we recognize as proverbs. The words of the Mother Duck,
"Into the water he goes if I have to kick him in," became a Scandinavian
proverb. "A little bird told it," a common saying of to-day, appears in
Andersen's Nightingale and in Thumbelina. But this saying is traceable
at least to the third story of the fourth night in Straparola,
translated by Keightley, The Dancing Water, the Singing Apple, and the
Beautiful Green Bird, in which the bird tells the King that his three
guests are his own children. "Even a cat may look at a king," is
probably traceable to some fairy tale if not to Puss-in-Boots. The
philosophy in the fairy tales and the proverbs that have arisen in them,
are subjects which offer to the adult much pleasure and fruitfulness.

    But one must ask, "Does this philosophy appeal to the child? Is it
not adult wisdom foreign to his immaturity?" The old folk-tales are the
products of adult minds; but the adults were grown-ups that looked upon
the world with the eyes of children, and their philosophy often was the
philosophy of childhood. For childhood has its philosophy; but because
it meets with repression on so many sides it usually keeps it to itself.
When given freedom and self-activ,ity and self-expression, the child's
philosophy appears also. And it is the inner truth of the tale rather
than the outer forms of sense and shapes of beauty which, when suited to
the little child, appeals to this child-philosophy and makes the deepest
impression upon him.

    In the literary fairy tale there often appears a philosophy which is
didactic and above and beyond the child's knowledge of the world. It
remains a question how much this adult philosophy appeals to him.
Although his tales were written for his grandchildren, so finished a
telling of the tale as we find in Laboulaye, with its delightful hits of
satire, appeals more to the grown-up versed in the ways of the world.
But the sage remarks of worldly wisdom of Uncle Remus could not fail to
impress a little boy: "Go where you will and when you may, and stay long
ez you choosen ter stay, en right dar en den you'll sholy fin' dat folks
what git full er consate en proudness is gwine ter git it tuck out 'm
um."--Uncle Remus treated the little boy as if he was "pestered with
sense, like grown-ups," and surely the little boy gained much amusement
from sayings such as these: "If you know the man that would refuse to
take care of himself, I'd like mighty well if you'd point him
out."--"Well, well," said Uncle Remus soothingly, "in deze low groun's
er sorrer, you des got to lean back en make allowances fer all sorts er
folks. You got ter low fer dem dat knows too much same ez dem what knows
too little. A heap er sayin's en a heap er doin's in dis roun' worl' got
ter be tuck on trus'. "--The child does not get the full force of the
philosophy but he gets what he can and that much sinks in.

    It is through the contemplative imagination that the child realizes
the meaning of particular tales. He learns: that Cinderella means that
goodness brings its own reward; that Three Pigs means that the wise
build with care and caution, with foresight; that Star Dollars means
compassion for others and kindness to them; and that Red Riding Hood
means obedience.

    The power of the contemplative imagination is based on the
indistinctness of the image. It suggests, too, the relation between
cause and effect, which reason afterwards proves; and therefore it is a
direct aid to science. In the tales there are expressed facts of truth
symbolically clothed which since then has discovered. And now that
folk-lore is being studied seriously to unfold all it gives of an
earlier life, perhaps this new study may reveal some new truths of
science hidden in its depths. The marvels of modern shoe manufacture
were prophesied in The Little Elves, and the power of electricity to
hold fast was foretold in Dummling and his Golden Goose. The wonders of
modern machinery appeared in the magic axe of Espen that hit at every
stroke; and the miracle of modern canals sees a counterpart in the
spring which Espen brought to the giant's boiling-pot in the wood. The
magic sleep from which there was an awakening, even after a hundred
years, may have typified hypnotism and its strange power upon man. These
are realizations of some of the wonders of fairyland. But there may be
found lurking in its depths many truths as yet undiscovered by science.
Perhaps the dreams of primitive man may suggest to the present-day
scientist new possibilities.--What primitive man has done in fancy
present-day man can do in reality.

    (3) A basis of truth. All fine emotional effects arise from truth.
The tale must hold the mirror and show an image of life. It must select
and combine facts which will suggest emotion but the facts must be a
true expression of human nature. The tale, whether it is realistic in
emphasizing the familiar, the commonplace, and the present, or romantic
in emphasizing the strange, the heroic, and the remote, must be
idealistic to interpret truly the facts of life by high ideals. If the
tale has this basis of truth the child will gain, through his handling
of it, a body of facts. This increases his knowledge and strengthens his
intellect. And it is to be remembered that, for the child's all-round
development, the appeal of literature to the intellect is a value to be
emphasized equally with the appeal to the emotions and to the
imagination. Speaking of the nature of the intellect in his essay on
Intellect, Emerson has said: "We do not determine what we will think. We
only open our senses, clear away as we can all obstruction from the
fact, and suffer the intellect to see." Attention to the intellectual
element in literature gives a power of thought. The consideration of the
truth of the fairy tale aids the child to clear, definite thinking
because the experience of the tale is ordered from a beginning, through
a development, to a climax, and to a conclusion. It assists him to form
conclusions because it presents results of circumstances and
consequences of conduct. Continued attention to the facts, knowledge,
and truth presented in the tales, helps the child to grow a sincerity of
spirit. This leads to that love of actual truth, which is one of the
armors of middle life, against which false opinion falls harmless.

    (4) A form, more or less perfect. Form is the union of all the means
which the writer employs to convey his thought and emotion to the
reader. Flaubert has said, "Among all the expressions of the world there
is but one, one form, one mode, to express what I want to say."--"Say
what you have to say, what you have a will to say, in the simplest, the
most direct and exact manner possible, with no surplusage," Walter Pater
has spoken. Then the form and the matter will fit each other so
perfectly there will be no unnecessary adornment.

    In regard to form it is to be remembered that feeling is best
awakened incidentally by suggestion. Words are the instruments, the
medium of the writer. Words have two powers: the power to name what they
mean, or denotation; and the power to suggest what they imply, or
connotation. Words have the power of connotation in two ways: They may
mean more than they say or they may produce emotional effect not only
from meaning but also from sound. To make these two suggestive powers of
words work together is the perfect art of Milton. Pope describes for us
the relation of sound to sense in a few lines which themselves
illustrate the point:--

Soft is the strain when zephyr gently blows,  
And the smooth stream in smoother numbers flows.  
But when loud surges lash the sounding shore,  
The hoarse, rough verse, should like the torrent roar.  
When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,  
The line too labors, and the words move slow:  
Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain,  
Flies o'er the unbending corn and skims along the main.

    When a kindergarten child, the most timid one of a group, on
listening to the telling of the Bremen Town Musicians, at the
description of the Donkey and the Dog coming to the Cat, sitting in the
road with a face "dismal as three rainy Sundays," chuckled with humor at
the word "dismal," it was not because she knew the meaning of the word
or the significance of "three rainy Sundays, but because the sounds of
the words and the facial expression of the story-teller conveyed the
emotional effect, which she sensed.

    The connection between sound and action appears in Little Spider's
First Web: The Fly said, "Then I will buzz"; the Bee said, "Then I will
hum"; the Cricket said, "Then I will chirp"; the Ant said, "Then I will
run to and fro"; the Butterfly said, "Then I will fly"; and the Bird
said, "Then I will sing." The effect is produced here because the words
selected are concrete ones which visualize. Repetitive passages in the
tales often contribute this effect of sound upon meaning, as we find in
The Three Billy-Goats Gruff: "Trip, trap; trip, trap! went the bridge as
the youngest Billy-Goat Gruff came to cross the bridge." The sound of
the words in this entire tale contributes largely to the meaning. The
Troll roared and said, "Now I'm coming to gobble you up!" Usually the
bits of rhyme interspersed throughout the tales, illustrate this
contribution of sound to meaning; as in the Three Pigs:--

   Then I'll huff,  
   And I'll puff,  
   And I'll blow your house in!

Especially is this the case in tales dignified by the cante-fable form;
such as Grimm's Cinderella:--

   Rustle and shake yourself, dear tree,  
   And silver and gold throw down to me!

Or in Little Two-Eyes:--

   Little kid, bleat,  
   I wish to eat!

Or in The Little Lamb and the Little Fish:--

   Ah, my brother, in the wood  
   A lamb, now I must search for food!

    The suggestive power of words to convey more than they mean, is
produced, not only by the sounds contained in the words themselves, but
also largely by the arrangement of the words and by the speech-tunes of
the voice in speaking them. Kipling's Elephant’s Child is a living
example of the suggestive power of words. The "new, fine question"
suggests that the Elephant's Child had a habit of asking questions which
had not been received as if they were fine. "Wait-a-bit thorn-bush,"
suggests the Kolokolo Bird sitting alone on the bush in placid quiet.
"And still I want to know what the crocodile has for dinner" implies
that there had been enough spankings to have killed the curiosity, but
contrary to what one would expect, it was living and active. When
Kolokolo Bird said with a mournful cry, "Go to the banks of the great,
grey-green, greasy Limpopo River," etc., the implication of mournful is,
that there the Elephant's Child would have a sorry time of it. The
expression, "dear families," which occurs so often, is full of
deliglitful irony and suggests the vigorous treatment, anything but
dear, which had come to the Elephant's Child from them.

    Perfect form consists in the "ability to convey thought and emotion
with perfect fidelity." The general qualities characteristic of perfect
form, which have been outlined by Professor Winchester, in his
Principles of Literary Criticism, are: (1) precision or clearness; (2)
energy or force; (3) delicacy or emotional harmony; and (4) personality.
Precision or clearness demands the precise value and meaning of words.
It requires that words have the power of denotation. It appeals to the
intellect of the reader or listener and demands that language be neither
vague nor ambiguous nor obscure. Energy or force demands that perfect
form have the quality of emotion. It requires that words have especially
the power of connotation. It appeals to the emotions of the reader or
listener and has the power to hold the attention. It demands of language
that sympathy which will imply what it would suggest. Delicacy or
emotional harmony demands that perfect form please the taste. It
requires that an emotional harmony be secured by a selection and
arrangement of the melody of words and of the emotional associations
which, together with the meanings, are tied up in words. It demands that
words have the power of perfect adaptation to the thought and feeling
they express, that words have both the power of denotation and of
connotation. It appeals to the aesthetic sense of the reader or
listener, it gives to form beauty and charm. Personality is the
influence of the author, the charm of individuality, and suggests the
character of the writer.

    At the same time that perfect form is characterized by the general
qualities of precision, energy, delicacy, and personality, as
composition consisting of words, sentences, paragraphs, or large wholes,
its elements must be controlled by certain main principles, which have
been presented by Professor Barrett Wendell in English Composition.
Perfect form cannot possess the four general qualities above mentioned
unless its elements are controlled by these main principles. These are:
(1) the principle of sincerity; (2) the principle of unity; (3) the
principle of mass; and (4) the principle of coherence. Sincerity demands
of perfect form that it be a just expression. Unity demands that every
composition should group itself about a central idea. There must be one
story, all incidents subordinated, one main course of action, one main
group of characters, and one tone of feeling to produce an emotional
effect. Variety of action must lead to one definite result and variety
of feeling to one total impression. Unity demands that the tale must
have a plan that is complete, with no irrelevant material, and that
there must be a logical order and a climax. Mass demands that the chief
parts of every composition should readily catch the eye. It maintains a
harmonious proportion of all the parts. Coherence demands of any
composition that the relation of each part to its neighbors should be
unmistakable, and that the order, forms, and connections of the parts
preserve this relation.

    When form secures a perfect adaptation of the language to the
thought and feeling expressed, it may be said to possess style, in a
broad sense of the word. In a more detailed sense, when form is
characterized by precision, energy, delicacy, and personality, and at
the same time has the elements of its composition controlled by the
principles of sincerity, unity, mass, and coherence, it is said to
possess style. The fairy tale which is a classic characterized by that
perfect form called style, will possess the general qualities of
precision, energy, delicacy, and personality; and the elements of its
structure, its words, its sentences, its paragraphs, will display a
control of the principles of sincerity, unity, mass, and coherence.

    A tale which well illustrates the literary form possible to the
child's tale, which may be said to possess that perfection of form we
call style, and which may be used with the distinct aim to improve the
child's English and perfect his language expression, is the modern
realistic fairy tale, Oeyvind and Marit.

    Oeyvind and Marit is so entirely realistic as to be excluded here,
but the talking rhymes which the Mother sings to Oeyvind bring in the
fairy element of the talking animals. In the form of this tale, the
perfect fidelity with which the words fit the meaning is
apparent--nothing seems superfluous. When Oeyvind asked Marit who she
was, she replied:--

    "I am Marit, mother's little one, father's fiddle, the elf in the
house, granddaughter of Ole Nordistuen of the Heidi farms, four years
old in the autumn, two days after the frost nights, I!"

    And Oeyvind replied:--

    "Are you really?"--and drew a long breath which he had not dared to
do so long as she was speaking.

    The story is full of instances illustrating precision, energy, and
delicacy. In fact, almost any passage exemplifies the general qualities
of form and the qualities of composition. The personality of the writer
has given to the tale a poetic and dramatic charm of simplicity. Note
the precision and delicacy displayed in the opening paragraph:--

    Oeyvind was his name. A low barren cliff overhung the house in which
he was born; fir and birch looked down on the roof, and wild cherry
strewed flowers over it. Upon this roof there walked about a little
goat, which belonged to Oeyvind. He was kept there that he might not go
astray; and Oeyvind carried leaves and grass up to him. One fine day the
goat leaped down, and away to the cliff; he went straight up and came
where he never had been before.

    Energy is apparent in the following passage:--

    "Is it yours, this goat?" asked the girl again.

    "Yes," he said, and looked up.

    "I have taken such a fancy to the goat. You will not give it to me?"

    "No, that I won't."

    She lay kicking her legs and looking down at him, and then she said,
"But if I give you a butter-cake for the goat, can I have him then?"

 

    The justness of expression, the sincerity, is especially impressive
when Oeyvind's Mother came out and sat down by his side when the goat no
longer satisfied him and he wanted to hear stories of what was far away.
There is emotional harmony too, because the words suggest the free
freshness of the mountain air and the landscape which rose round about
the Boy and his Mother.

    So she told him how once everything could talk: "The mountain talked
to the stream, and the stream to the river, the river to the sea, and
the sea to the sky."--But then he asked if the sky did not talk to any
one: "And the sky talked to the clouds, the clouds to the trees, the
trees to the grass, the grass to the flies, the flies to the animals,
the animals to the children, the children to the grownup people. . . ."
Oeyvind looked at the mountain, the trees, and the sky and had never
seen them before.

    There is delicacy or emotional harmony also in the Mother's song.
When Oeyvind asked, "What does the Cat say?" his Mother sang:--

   At evening softly shines the sun,  
   The cat lies lazy on the stone.  
   Two small mice,  
   Cream, thick and nice,  
   Four bits of fish,  
   I stole behind a dish,  
   And am so lazy and tired,  
   Because so well I have fared.

    The unity is maintained through the central interest of the two
Children and the goat.

    The tale is characterized by fairly good mass. As the story aims to
portray a natural picture of child life, obviously it could not maintain
a style of too great solidity and force, but rather would seek one of
ease and naturalness. Mass, as shown in Oeyvind and Marit, appears in
the following description of Oeyvind's play with the goat, after he
first realized its return:--

    He jumped up, took it by the two fore-legs, and danced with it as if
it were a brother; he pulled its beard, and he was just going in to his
mother with it, when he heard someone behind him; and looking, saw the
girl sitting on the greensward by his side. Now he understood it all,
and let go the goat.

    The story of child-friendship is told in distinct little episodes
which naturally connect. That unmistakable relation of the parts which
is essential to coherence, appears in the following outline of the
story:--

1\. A new acquaintance: Oeyvind and Marit meet.

   The exchange of a goat for a cake.

   The departure of the goat. Marit sings to the goat.

   The return of the goat. Marit accompanies the goat.

2\. New interests.

   The stories of what the animals say, told to Oeyvind by his

     Mother.

   The first day of school.

3\. An old acquaintance renewed: Oeyvind again meets Marit at

     school.

    The Children's love of the goat, the comradeship of Oeyvind and
Marit, of Oeyvind and his Mother, and of Marit and her Grandfather, are
elements which assist in producing coherence. The songs of Marit, and
the songs and stories of Oeyvind's Mother, especially preserve the
relation of parts. In the following paragraphs, which give distinct
pictures, note the coherence secured internally largely by the
succession of verbs denoting action and also by the denotation of the
words.

    When he came in, there sat as many children round a table as he had
ever seen at church; others were sitting on their luncheon-boxes, which
were ranged round the walls; some stood in small groups round a large
printed card; the school-master, an old gray-haired man, was sitting on
a stool by the chimney-corner, filling his pipe. They all looked up as
Oeyvind and his mother entered, and the mill-hum ceased as if the water
had suddenly been turned off....

    As he was going to find his seat, they all wanted to make room for
him. He looked round a long time,, while they whispered and pointed; he
turned round on all sides, with his cap in his hand and his book under
his arm....

    Just as the boy is going to turn round to the school-master, he sees
close beside him, sitting down by the hearthstone on a little red
painted tub, Marit, of the many names; she had covered her face with
both hands, and sat peeping at him through her fingers.

    The imagination is appealed to continually through the simple
concrete expressions which present an image; as, "He grew hot all over,
looked around about, and called, 'Killy-killy-killy-goat!'"

    The emotional element is distinct, and pleasing and contributes to
the total impression of admiration for the characters. We admire Oeyvind
for his fondness for the goat and for his pain at losing it; for his
dissatisfaction in keeping it after Marit returned it, though she wanted
it; for his delight in his Mother's stories; and for his pleasure in
Marit's friendship at school. We admire Marit for her appreciation of
the beautiful goat; for her obedience to her Grandfather; for her sorrow
at giving up the goat, for her generosity in giving the neck-chain with
it; and for the childish comradeship she gave to Oeyvind. We admire the
goat for his loyalty to his little master. We trust the Grandfather who
trained Marit to be fair and courteous; who guarded her from the cliff;
and who bought for her another goat. We have faith in the Mother who had
feeling for the little goat her son bartered for a cake; and who had the
wisdom to sing for her little boy and tell him stories when he was
sorrowful and needed new interests.

    Undoubtedly Oeyvind and Marit is a tale which conveys its thought
clearly and makes you feel its feeling, and therefore may be said to
possess style in a broad sense. In a particular sense, because its form
is marked by the four general qualities: precision, energy, delicacy,
and personality; and its elements are controlled by the principles of
composition: sincerity, unity, mass, and coherence, it therefore may be
said to possess style.

    An old tale which has a literary form unusual in its approach to the
perfect literary form, is the Norse, The Three Billy-Goats Gruff, told
by Dasent in Tales from the Norse. Indeed after looking carefully at
this tale one is tempted to say that, for perfection of style, some of
the old folk-tales are not to be equaled. Note the simple precision
shown in the very first paragraph:--

    Once on a time there were three Billy-Goats, who were to go up to
the hill-side to make themselves fat, and the name of all three was
"Gruff."

    Energy or force appeals to the emotions in the words of the tiny
Billy-Goat Gruff to the Troll:--

    "Oh, no! pray don't take me. I'm too little, that I am," said the
Billy-Goat; "wait a bit till the second Billy-Goat Gruff comes. he's
much bigger."

    There is emotional harmony displayed in the second paragraph; the
words used fit the ideas:--

    On the way up was a bridge over a burn they had to cross; and under
the bridge lived a great ugly Troll, with eyes as big as saucers, and a
nose as long as a poker.

    The quality of personality is best described, perhaps, by saying
that the tale seems to have impersonality. Any charm of the
story-tellers of the ages has entered into the body of the tale, which
has become an objective presentment of a reality that concentrates on
itself and keeps personality out of sight. The character of the tellers
is shown however in the qualities of the tale. The charm of the
primitive story-tellers has given the tale inimitable morning-dew
freshness. This seems to result from a fine simplicity, a sprightly
visualization, a quaint picturesqueness, a pleasing terseness, and all
Anglo-Saxon vigor.

    Sincerity is displayed in the words of the Troll and of the three
Billy-Goats. Note the sincerity of little Billy-Goat Gruff:--

    "Oh! it is only I, the tiniest Billy-Goat Gruff; and I'm going up to
the hillside to make myself fat," said the Billy-Goat, with such a small
voice.

    The unity in this tale is unusually good. The central idea which
groups all the happenings in the tale is: Three Billy-Goats are crossing
a bridge to go up to the hillside to make themselves fat. There are four
characters, three Goats and the Troll. All that happens in the tale
contributes to the one effect of a bridge going trip, trap! as a Goat
crossed it on his way up the hillside; of a Troll roaring: "Who's that
tripping over my bridge?" of the explanation of the Billy-Goat; of the
answer of the Troll, "Now I'm coming to gobble you up"; and of the
Billy-Goat's final petition. Unity is emphasized by the repetition in
the tale, as the three Billy-Goats successively cross the bridge and
reply to the Troll. The climax is the big Billy-Goat Gruff's tramp
across the bridge.

    This tale is characterized by perfect mass, the paragraphs always
end with words that deserve distinction, and the sentences have their
strongest words at the points where the eye would most readily see them;
as, "But just then up came the big Billy-Goat Gruff." The coherence is
fine, and is secured largely by the cumulative plan in a threefold
sense. The relation of the parts is unmistakable. The similarity and
contrast evident in the episodes of the three Billy-Goats makes this
relation very clearly defined. To make doubly sure the end has been
reached the tale concludes:--

Snip, snap, snout,  
This tale's told out.

    Let us examine the folk-tale generally as to its literary form. The
folk-tale originally did not come from the people in literary form. The
tale was first told by some nameless primitive man, who, returning from
some adventure of everyday life, would narrate it to a group of his
comrades. First told to astonish and interest, or to give a warning of
the penalty of breaking Nature's laws, or to teach a moral lesson, or to
raise a laugh, later it became worked up into the fabulous stories of
gods and heroes. These fabulous stories developed into myth-systems, and
these again into household tales. By constant repetition from one
generation to another, incidents likely to happen in everyday life,
which represented universal experiences and satisfied common needs of
childhood, were selected and combined. These gradually assumed a form of
simplicity and literary charm, partly because, just as a child insists
on accuracy, savage people adhered strictly to form in repeating the
tale, and because it is a law of permanence that what meets the
universal need will survive. The great old folk-tales have acquired in
their form a clearness and precision; for in the process of telling and
re-telling through the ages all the episodes became clearly defined. And
as irrelevant details dropped out, there developed that unity produced
by one dominant theme and one dominant mood. The great old folktales,
then, naturally acquired a good classic literary form through social
selection and survival. But many of the tales as we know them have
suffered either through translation or through careless modern
retelling. Many of the folk-tales take on real literary form only
through the re-treatment of a literary artist. Mrs. Steel, who has
collected the Tales of the Punjab, tells how the little boys of India
who seek to hold their listening groups will vary the incidents in a
tale in different tellings, proving that the complete tale was not the
original unit, but that single incidents are much more apt to retain
their stock forms than plots. The combination we now have in a given
tale was probably a good form once hit upon and thereafter transmitted.

    Jacob (1785-1863) and William (1786-1859) Grimm, both fine scholars,
incapable of any but good work, did not undertake to put the tale into
literary form suited to children. They were interested in preserving
folk-lore records for scientific purposes. And we must distinguish
between the tale as a means of reflecting the ideals of social and
religious life, of displaying all the genius of primitive man for
science to interpret, and the tale as a means of pleasing and educating
the child. The Grimms obtained most of their tales from the lips of
people in Hesse and Hanau, Germany. They were very fortunate in securing
many of the tales they were thirteen years in collecting, from an old
nurse, Frau Viehmannin, the wife of a cowherd, who lived at
Niederzwehrn, near Cassel, who told her story with exactness and never
changed anything in repeating. Grimm himself said, "Our first care was
faithfulness to the truth. We strove to penetrate into the wild forests
of our ancestors, listening to their noble language, watching their pure
customs, recognizing their ancient freedom and hearty faith." The Grimms
sought the purity of a straightforward narration. They were against
reconstruction to beautify and poetize the legends. They were not
opposed to a free appropriation for modern and individual purposes. They
kept close to the original, adding nothing of circumstance or trait, but
rendering the stories in a style and language and development of detail
which was their own literary German.

    Perrault (1628-1703) had taken the old tales as his son, Charles, a
lad of ten or twelve, told them. The father had told them to the son as
he had gathered them up, intending to put them into verse after the
manner of La Fontaine. The lad loved the stories and re-wrote them from
memory for his father with such charming naivete that the father chose
the son's version in preference to his own, and published it. But the
tales of Perrault, nevertheless, show the embellishment of the mature
master-Academician's touch in subduing the too marvelous tone, or adding
a bit of court manners, or a satirical hit at the vanity and failings of
man.

    Dasent (1820-96) has translated the Norse tales from the original
collection of Asbjornsen and Moe. Comrades from boyhood to manhood,
scholar and naturalist, these two together had taken long walks into the
secluded peasant districts and had secured the tales from the people of
the dales and fells, careful to retain the folk-expressions. Dasent,
with the instinct, taste, and skill of a true scholar, has preserved
these tales of an honest manly race, a race of simple men and women,
free and unsubdued. He has preserved them in their folk-language and in
their true Norse setting. Harris (1848-1908) has given his tales in the
dialect of Uncle Remus. Jacobs (1854-) has aimed to give the folk-tales
in the language of the folk, retaining nurses' expressions, giving a
colloquial and romantic tone which often contains what is archaic and
crude. He has displayed freedom with the text, invented whole incidents,
or completed incidents, or changed them. His object has been to fill
children's imaginations with bright images. Andrew Lang (1844-1912) has
given the tale mainly to entertain children. He has accepted
translations from many sources and has given a straightforward
narration. He has collected fairy tales indefatigably in his rainbow
Fairy Books, but they are not always to be recommended for children.

    Andersen (1805-75), like Perrault, made his tale for the child as an
audience, and he too has put the tale into literary form. Andersen's
tale is not the old tale, but an original creation, a number of which
are based on old folk-material. Preserving the child's point of view,
Andersen has enriched his language with a mastery of perfection and
literary style. And the "mantle of Andersen" has, so far, fallen on no
one.

    To-day it is to be questioned if the child should be given the tale
in nurses' talk. To-day children are best cared for by mothers who feel
ignorant if they cannot tell their children stories, and who, having an
appreciation of their mother English, want their children to hear
stories, not only told by themselves rather than by their servants, but
also told in the best literary form possible. They recognize that these
earliest years, when the child is first learning his language, are the
years for a perfection of form to become indelibly impressed. The fairy
tale, like every piece of literature, is an organism and "should be put
before the youngest child with its head on, and standing on both feet."
The wholesale re-telling of every tale is to be deplored. And stories
which have proved themselves genuine classics, which have a right to
live, which have been handed down by tradition, which have been
preserved by folk-lore records, and which have been rescued from
oblivion,--in this age of books should have a literary form, which is
part of their message, settled upon them. The Grimm tales await their
literary master.

III\. THE FAIRY TALE AS A SHORT-STORY

    The fairy tale, then, which in an objective sense, from the
standpoint of literature, has proved itself subject-matter of real
worth, must be a classic, must have the qualities of mind and soul, must
possess the power to appeal to the emotions, a power to appeal to the
imagination, and it must have a basis of truth and a perfection of form.
Put in addition to possessing these characteristics, because the fairy
tale is a special literary form,--the short-story,--as literature it
must stand the test of the short-story.

    The three main characteristics of the short-story, as given by
Professor Brander Matthews in his Philosophy of the Short-Story, are
originality of theme, ingenuity of invention, and brevity, or
compression. A single effect must be conceived, and no more written than
contributes to that effect. The story depends for its power and charm on
(1) characters; (2) plot; and (3) setting. In The Life and Letters of
Robert Louis Stevenson, by Graham Balfour, Stevenson has said,
concerning the short-story:--

    "There are, so far as I know, three ways, and three ways only, of
writing a story. You may take a plot and fit characters to it, or you
may take a character and choose incidents and situations to develop it,
or lastly--you must bear with me while I try to make this clear.... You
may take a certain atmosphere and get action persons to express and
realize it. I'll give you an example--The Merry Men. There I began with
the feeling of one of those islands on the west coast of Scotland, and I
gradually developed the story to express the sentiment with which the
coast affected me."

    According to the method by which the story was made, the emphasis
will be on character, plot, or setting. Sometimes you may have a perfect
blending of all three.

    (1) Characters. The characters must be unique and original, so that
they catch the eye at once. They dare not be colorless, they must have
striking experiences. The Elephant's Child, Henny Penny, Medio Pollito,
Jack of the Beanstalk, the Three Pigs, the Three Bears, and
Drakesbill--the characters of the fairy tales have no equal in
literature for freshness and vivacity. The very mention of the thought
brings a smile of recognition; and it is for this reason, no doubt, that
leading men in large universities turn aside from their high scholarly
labors, to work or play with fairy tales. Besides the interesting chief
characters, moreover, there are many more subordinate characters that
are especially unique: the fairies, the fairy godmothers and wise women,
the elves of the trees, the dwarfs of the ground, the trolls of the
rocks and hills, and the giants and witches. Then that great company of
toilers in every occupation of life bring the child in touch with many
novel phases of life. At best we are all limited by circumstances to a
somewhat narrow sphere and like to enter into all that we are not. The
child, meeting in his tale the shoemaker, the woodcutter, the soldier,
the fisherman, the hunter, the poor traveler, the carpenter, the prince,
the princess, and a host of others, gets a view of the industrial and
social conditions that man in simple life had to face. This could not
fail to interest; and it not only broadens his experience and deepens
his sympathy, but is the best means for acquiring a foundation upon
which to build his own vocational training. This acquisition is one
contribution of literature to industrial work. Those characters will
appeal to the child which present what the child has noticed or can
notice. They should appear as they do in life, by what they say and by
what they do. This, in harmony with the needs of the young child, makes
the tales which answer to the test of suitability, largely dramatic.

    (2) Plot. The characters of the tales can be observed only in
action. Plot is the synthesis of the actions, all the incidents which
happen to the characters. The plot gives the picture of experience and
allows us to see others through the events which come to them. According
to Professor Bliss Perry, the plot should be entertaining, comical,
novel, or thrilling. It should present images that are clear-cut and not
of too great variety. It should easily separate itself into large,
leading episodes that stand out distinctly. The sequence of events
should be orderly and proceed without interruption. The general
structure should easily be discerned into the beginning, the middle, and
the end. Various writers of tales have their particular ways of
beginning. Andersen loses no time in getting started, while Kipling
begins by stating his theme. The old tales frequently began with the
words, "Once upon a time," which Kipling modified to " In the High and
Far-Off times, O Best Beloved," etc. Hawthorne begins variously with
"Once upon a time", or, "Long, long ago"; or, "Did you ever hear of the
golden apples?" etc.--Hawthorne has been omitted in this book because,
so far as I can discover, he furnishes no tale for the kindergarten or
first grade. His simplest tale, Midas and the Golden Touch, properly
belongs in the second grade when told; when read, in the fourth
grade.--The introduction, in whatever form, should be simple and to the
point. It should give the time and place and present the characters; and
if good art it will be impatient of much preliminary delay. The great
stories all show a rise of interest culminating in one central climax;
and after that, sometimes following on its very heels, the conclusion
where poetic justice is meted out. This climax is a very important
feature in the tale, so important that it has been said, "The climax is
the tale." It is the point where interest focuses. It makes the story
because it is where the point of the story is made. In a good story this
point always is made impressive and often is made so by means of
surprise. The conclusion must show that the tale has arrived at a
stopping place and in a moral tale it must leave one satisfied, at rest.

    If the folk-tale is good narration, in answer to the question,
"What?" it will tell what happened; in answer to the question, "Who?" it
will tell to whom it happened; in answer to the question, "Where?" it
will tell the place where, and the time when, it happened; and in answer
to the question, "Why?" it will give the reason for telling the story,
it will give the message, and the truth embodied in its form. As
narration the tale must have truth, interest, and consistency. Its
typical mood must be action and its language the language of suggestion.
This language of suggestion appears when it shows an object by
indicating how it is like something else; by telling what we feel when
we see the object; and by telling what actions of the person or object
make it hateful or charming. We learn to know Andersen's Snow Man
through what the Dog says of him.

    Description, in the sense of a static, detailed delineation of
various qualities of objects, has no place in the child's story, for it
bores the child, who is very persistent in wanting the main theme
uninterrupted. But description that has touches of movement and action
or that lays emphasis on a single effect and has point, distinctly aids
visualization, and produces a pleasing result, as we have seen in
Kipling's Elephant's Child. The young child of to-day, trained in nature
study to look upon bird, tree, and flower with vital interest, to
observe the color and the form of these, gains a love of the beautiful
that makes him exclaim over the plumage of a bird or tint of it flower.
To him beauty in the tale must make a direct appeal which the child
unfamiliar with these things might not feel. The Wonderful Adventures of
Nils makes an appeal to the modern child which could not possibly have
been felt by the child living before 1850. The modern child brought up
on phonics is sensitive to sound also, and open to an appreciation of
the beauty of the individual word used in description. This description,
when it occurs, should be characterized mainly by aptness and
concreteness.

    Having observed the general characteristics of the narrative
contained in the plot, let us examine the structure of a few tales to
see: What is the main theme of the plot and how it works itself out;
what are the large, leading episodes, and how they culminate in the
climax; and what is the conclusion, and how closely it follows the
climax.

The Story of Three Pigs

I. Introduction. Time. Place. Characters: Mother and Three Pigs. Mother
gone.

II\. Rise.

 1. First Pig's venture with a man with a load of straw.

 Builds a straw house. (Wolf enters.)

 Wolf comes and destroys him.

 2. Second Pig's venture with a man with a load of furze.

 Builds a furze house.

 Wolf comes and destroys him.

 3. Third Pig's venture with a man with a load of bricks.

 Builds a brick house.

 Wolf comes. (Climax.)

III\. Conclugion. Third Pig outwits the Wolf.

At the turnip-field in Mr. Smith's home-field.

At the apple tree in Merry-Garden.

At the fair at Shanklin.

At his own brick house.

    Evidently the climax here is when the Wolf comes to the third Pig's
brick house. After that things take a turn; and the final test of
strength and cleverness comes at the very end of the tale, at Little
Pig's brick house.

    Grimm's Briar Rose is a model of structure and easily separates
itself into ten large episodes.

Briar Rose

1\. The Introduction.

2\. The Christening Feast.

 (a) The Fairies and their gifts.

 (b) The wicked Fairy and her curse.

3\. The King's decree.

4\. Princess Rose's birthday.

 (a) Princess Rose's visit to the old tower.

 (b) Princess Rose and the wicked Fairy spinning.

 (c) The magic sleep.

5\. The hedge of briars.

6\. The Prince and the old Man.

7\. The Prince and the opening hedge.

8\. The Prince in the castle. (Climax.)

9\. The awakening.

10\. The wedding. (Conclusion.)

    The climax here is the Prince's awakening kiss. The blossoming of
the hedge into roses prepares for the climax; and the conclusion--the
awakening of all the life of the castle and the wedding--follow
immediately after.

    (3) Setting. The third element of the short-story that is essential
to its power and charm is setting. The setting is the circumstances or
events which surround the characters and action. The setting occupies a
much more important place in the tale than we realize, for it is the
source of a variety of sensations and feelings which it may arouse. It
gives the poetic or artistic touch to a tale. In the old tale the
setting is given often in a word or two which act like magic, to open to
our eyes a whole vision of associations. The road in the Three Pigs, the
wood in Red Riding Hood, the castle in the Sleeping Beauty--these add
charm. Often the transformation in setting aids greatly in producing
effect. In Cinderella the scene shifts from the hearth to the palace
ballroom; in the Princess and the Pea, from the comfortable castle of
the Queen to the raging storm, and then back again to the castle, to the
breakfast-room on the following morning. In Snow White and Rose Red the
scene changes from the cheery, beautiful interior of the cottage, to the
snowstorm from which the Bear emerged. In accumulative tales, such as
The Old Woman and her Pig, Medio Pollito, and The Robin's Christmas
Song, the sequence of the story itself is preserved mainly by the change
of setting. This appears in the following outline of The Robin's
Christmas Song, an English tale which is the same as the Scotch Robin's
Yule-Song, which has been attributed to Robert Burns. This tale
illustrates one main line of sequence:--

The Robin's Christmas Song

1\. Introduction. A sunny morning. Waterside. A Gray Pussy. A Robin came
along.

2\. Rise.

Pussy said  "See my white fur."

Robin replied  "You ate the wee mousie."

Change in setting. Stone wall on border of the wood. A greedy Hawk,
sitting.

Hawk said,  "See the speckled feather in my wing."

Robin replied  "You pecked the sparrow," etc.

Change in setting. Great rock. A sly Fox.

Fox said  "See the spot on my tail."

Robin replied  "You bit the wee lambie."

Change in setting. Banks of a rivulet. A small Boy.

Boy said  "See the crumbs in my pocket."

Robin replied  "You caught the gold finch."

Change in setting. King's palace. The window sill.

The King at the window.

Robin sang  "A song for the King."

King replied  "What shall we give Robin?"

3\. Conclusion.

No change in setting. King's palace. The window sill.

The King at the window.

King  Filled a plate and set it on the window sill.

Robin  Ate, sang a song again, and flew away.

    Here, not only the sequence of the tale is held largely by the
change in setting, but also the pleasure in the tale is due largely to
the setting, the pictures of landscape beauty it presents, and the
feelings arising from these images.

    A Japanese tale, in which the setting is a large part of the tale,
and a large element of beauty, is Mezumi, the Beautiful, or The Rat
Princess.

    A Grimm tale in which the setting is a very large element of
pleasure and in which it preserves the sequence of the tale, is The
Spider and the Flea, a lively accumulative tale that deserves attention
for several reasons.--A Spider and a Flea dwelt together. One day a
number of unusual occurrences happened, so that finally a little Girl
with a water-pitcher broke it, and then the Streamlet from which she
drew the water asked, "Why do you break your pitcher, little Girl?"

    And she replied:

    The little Spider's burned herself,

    And the flea weeps;

    The little Door creaks with the pain,

    And the Broom sweeps;

    The little Cart runs on so fast,

    And the Ashes burn;

    The little Tree shakes down its leaves,

    Now it is my turn!

    And then the Streamlet said, "Now I must flow."

    And it flowed on and on, getting bigger and bigger, until it
swallowed up the little Girl, the little Tree, the Ashes, the Cart, the
Broom, the Door, the Flea, and at last, the Spider--all together.

    Here we have a tale, which, in its language, well illustrates
Stevenson's "pattern of style," especially as regards the harmony
produced by the arrangement of letters. From the standpoint of style,
this tale might be named, The Adventure of the Letter E; it illustrates
the part the phonics of the tale may contribute to the effect of the
setting. Follow the letter e in the opening of the tale, both as to the
eye and the ear:--

    A Spider and a Flea dwelt together in one house and brewed their
beer in an egg-shell. One day when the Spider was stirring it up she
fell in and burned herself. Thereupon the Flea began to scream. And then
the Door asked, "Why are you screaming, little Flea?"

    If we follow the e sound through the tale, we find it in Flea, beer,
scream, creak, weeps, sweep, reason, heap, Tree, leaves, and Streamlet.
This repetition of the one sound puts music into the tale and creates a
center of the harmony of sound. But if we examine the next part of the
tale we find a variety of sounds of o in thereupon, Door, Broom, stood,
and corner. Later, in connection with Cart, we have began, fast, past,
and Ashes. Other phonic effects are crowded into the tale; such as the
sound of l in violently, till, all, leaves, and fell; the sound of i in
little and Girl; of p in pitcher and passing; of t in little and
pitcher; and of ew in threw and drew. Altogether this very effective use
of sound is a fine employment of concrete language, words which present
images that are clear-cut as a cameo. It also gives to the tale a
poetical touch.

    Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse, an English tale, and a parallel of The
Spider and the Flea, preserves the same beauty and sequence by means of
its setting and illustrates the same very unusual contribution of the
sounds of particular letters combined in the harmony of the whole. The
Phonics of the Fairy Tales is a subject which yields much interest and,
as yet, has been almost untouched.

    In The Adventures of Chanticleer and Partlet, in part i, The Trip to
the Nut-Hill, taken from Arthur Rackham's Grimm Tales, the setting
contributes largely to the attractiveness of the tale, as is shown in
Rackham's beautiful illustration. The setting is given throughout the
tale often in a telling word or two. Chanticleer and Partlet went up the
nut-hill to gather nuts before the squirrel carried them all away. The
day was bright and they stayed till evening. The carriage of nut-shells;
the Duck they met; the dirty road they traveled in the pitch dark; the
Inn they arrived at; the night at the Inn; the early dawn; the hearth
where they threw the egg-shells; the Landlord's chair whose cushion
received the Needle; the towel which received the Pin; the heath over
which they hurried away; the yard of the Inn where the Duck slept and
the stream he escaped by; the Landlord's room where he gained experience
with his towel; the kitchen where the egg-shells from the hearth flew
into his face; and the arm-chair which received him with a Needle these
are all elements of setting which contribute largely to the humor and
the beauty of the tale.

    A blending of the three elements, characters, plot, and setting,
appears in the following outline of The Elves and the Shoemaker:--

The Elves and the Shoemaker

1\. Introduction. A poor Shoemaker. A poor room containing a bed and a
shoemaker's board. Leather for one pair of shoes.

2\. Development.

First night  Cut out shoes. Went to bed. Shoes ready next morning. Sold
them. Bought leather for two pairs.

Second night  Cut out shoes. Went to bed. Shoes ready next morning. Sold
them. Bought leather for four pairs.

One night  Conversation of Shoemaker and his wife: "I should like to sit
up to-night to see who it is that makes the shoes." They sat up. Two
Elves ran in, sewed, rapped, and tapped, and ran away when the shoes
were made.

Day after  Conversation. "These Elves made us rich. I should like to do
something for them. You make each of them a little pair of shoes, and I
will make them each a little shirt, a coat, a waistcoat, trousers, and a
pair of stockings."

Christmas Eve. Finished shoes and clothes put on the table. Shoemaker
and Wife hid in the corner of the room behind clothes, and watched.
(Climax.)

Elves came in and put on clothes.

3\. Conclusion.

Happy end. Elves danced and sang,

    "Smart and natty boys are we,

    Cobblers we'll no longer be."

Shoemaker and Wife became happy and prosperous.

    The characters of this tale are usual, a poor Shoemaker and his
Wife; and unusual, the dainty Elves who made shoes in a twinkling. But
the commonplace peasants become interesting through their generosity,
kindness, and service to the Elves; and the Elves become human in their
joy at receiving gifts. The structure of the tale is so distinct as to
be seen a thing itself, apart from the story. The framework is built on
what happens on two nights and following nights, the conversation of the
next day, and what happens on Christmas Eve. The climax evidently is
what the Shoemaker and his Wife hid in the corner to see--the entrance
of the Elves on Christmas Eve--which episode has been interpreted
charmingly by the English illustrator, Cruikshank. The joy of the Elves
and of the two aged people, the gifts received by the one and the riches
won by the other, form the conclusion, which follows very closely upon
the climax. The commonplace setting, the poor room with its simple bed
and table, becomes transformed by the unusual happenings in the place.
If we should take away this setting, we see how much the tale would
suffer. Also without the characters the tale would be empty. And without
the interesting, human, humorous, and pleasing plot, characters and
setting would be insufficient. Each element of the short-story
contributes its fair share to the tale, and blends harmoniously in the
whole.

    Various standards for testing the folk-tale have been given by
writers. One might refer to the standards given by Wilman in his
Pedagogische Vortrage and those mentioned by William Rein in Das Erste
Schuljahr. We have seen here that the fairy tale must contain the
child's interests and it must be able to stand the test of a true
classic. It must stand the test of literature in its appeal to emotion
and to imagination, in its appeal to the intellect through its basis of
truth, and to the language-sense through its perfection of form; it must
stand the test of the short-story and of good narration and of
description. Let us now examine a few of the old tales to see how they
stand the complete test:--

    How the Sun, Moon, and West Wind went out to Dinner

    This story of How the Sun, Moon, and West Wind Went out to Dinner
appeals to the children's interest in a family dinner--they went to dine
with their Uncle and Aunt, Thunder and Lightning. The characters are
interesting to the child, for they are the inhabitants of his sky that
cause him much wonder: the star, the sun, the moon, the thunder, and the
lightning. To the little child, who as she watched a grown-up drying her
hands, remarked, "I wouldn't like to be a towel, would you?" the idea of
the moon, sun, and wind possessing personality and going to a
dinner-party will amuse and please. The theme of the story finds a place
in the experience of children who go to a party; and secretly they will
enjoy making comparisons. When they go to a party they too like to bring
something home; but they wouldn't think of hiding goodies in their
hands. They are fortunate enough to have their hostess give them a toy
animal or a box of sweetmeats, a tiny dolly or a gay balloon, as a
souvenir. The greediness and selfishness of the Sun and Wind impress
little children, for these are perhaps the two sins possible to
childhood; and all children will fully appreciate why the Sun and the
Wind received so swiftly the punishment they deserved. The
thoughtfulness of the loving gentle Moon to remember her Mother the
Star, appeals to them. The rapid punishment, well-deserved, and the
simplicity of the story with its one point, make it a very good tale for
little children. The whole effect is pleasing. What children recall is
the motherly Star; and the beautiful Moon, who was cool and calm and
bright as a reward for being good.

    The structure of the tale is neat and orderly, dominated by a single
theme. The form of the tale, as given in Jacobs's Indian Tales, shows a
good use of telling expressions; such as, "the Mother waited alone for
her children's return," "Kept watch with her little bright eye," "the
Moon, shaking her hands showered down such a choice dinner," etc. Here
we have too, the use of concrete, visualized expressions and direct
language. There is also a good use of repetition, which aids the child
in following the plot and which clarifies the meaning. The Mother Star,
when pronouncing a punishment upon Sun, repeated his own words as he had
spoken when returning from the dinner: "I went out to enjoy myself with
my friends." In her speech to Wind she included his own remark: "I
merely went for my own pleasure."--The examination of this tale shows
that it stands well the complete test applied here to the fairy tale.

    The Straw Ox

    The Straw Ox is an accumulative tale which has sufficient plot to
illustrate the fine points of the old tale completely. A poor woman who
could barely earn a living had an idea and carried it out
successfully.--Her need immediately wins sympathy in her behalf.--She
asked her husband to make her a straw ox and smear it with tar. Then
placing it in the field where she spun, she called Out, "Graze away,
little Ox, graze away, while I spin my flax!" First a Bear came out of
the Wood and got caught by the tar so that the Straw Ox dragged him
home. The old Man then put the Bear in the cellar. Then a Wolf, a Fox,
and a Hare got caught in the same way and also were consigned to the
cellar.--The plot has so far built itself up by an orderly succession of
incidents.--But just when the Man is preparing to kill the animals, they
save their lives by promising various offerings: The Bear promises
honey; the Wolf a flock of sheep; the Fox a flock of geese; and the Hare
kale and cauliflower.--Then the plot, having tied itself into a knot,
unties itself as the animals return, each with the gift he promised.

    The setting is the field where the old Woman placed the Ox and where
she spun, the wood from which the animals came, and the peasant home.
The characters are two poor people who need food and clothing and seek
to secure both; and the animals of the forest. The peasants need the
Bear for a coat, the Wolf for a fur cap, the Fox for a fur collar, and
the Hare for mittens. This human need produces an emotional appeal so
that we wish to see the animals caught. But when the plot unties itself,
the plight of the animals appeals to us equally and we want just as much
to see them win their freedom. Each animal works out his own salvation
by offering the old people a worthy substitute. Each animal is true to
his nature in the substitute he offers, he promises what is only natural
for him to procure, and what he himself likes best. The conclusion is
satisfying because in the end everybody is happy: the old people who
have all they need; and the animals who have life and freedom. The
distinct pictures offered to the imagination are the capture of the four
animals and their return with their life-substitutes. The form of the
tale is a good example of folk-story style, with its vivid words, direct
language, and repetition. This is one of the tales which is finer than
at first appears because it has a strong sense of life. It touches the
present-day problem: "How can the inhuman slaughter of animals for man's
use be avoided?" Its underlying message is: Self-help is a good way out
of a difficulty.--The Straw Ox also answers the complete test of the
tale with much satisfaction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Telling of Fairy Tales](sft06)
