[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](saab33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Salaman and Absal*, by Jami, tr. Edward Fitzgerald, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### NOTES

Page [1](saab03.htm#page_1). <span class="smallcaps">Laila</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Majnún</span>.—all well-known Types of Eastern Lovers.
<span class="smallcaps">Shírín</span> and her Suitors figure in Sec. XX.

Page [1](saab03.htm#page_1). To <span class="smallcaps">Cozen the
World</span>.—the Persian Mystics also represent the Deity Dice-ing with
Human Destiny behind the Curtain.

Page [2](saab03.htm#page_2). <span class="smallcaps">Censor</span>.—"the
Appollonius of Keat's Lamia."

Page [2](saab03.htm#page_2). <span class="smallcaps">No Room for
Two</span>.—This Súfí Identification with Deity (further illustrated in
the Story of Sect. XIX.) is shadowed in a Parable of Jelaladdín, of
which here is an outline. "One knocked at the Beloved's Door; and a
Voice asked from within, 'Who is there?' and he answered,' It is I: Then
the Voice said, This House will not hold Me and Thee.' And the Door was
not opened. Then went the Lover into the Desert, and fasted and prayed
in Solitude. And after a Year he returned, and knocked again at the
Door. And again the Voice asked, 'Who is there?' and he said, 'It is
Thyself!' and the Door was opened to him."

Page [3](saab03.htm#page_3). <span class="smallcaps">The Poet's
Name</span>.—the name "<span class="smallcaps">Jami</span>," also
signifying "A Cup." The Poet's <span class="smallcaps">Yúsuf</span> and
<span class="smallcaps">Zulaikha</span> opens also with this Divine
Wine, the favourite Symbol of Hafíz and other Persian Mystics. The
"Tavern" spoken of is The World.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I listen in the Tavern of Sweet Songs,  
And catch no Echo of their Harmony:  
The Guests have drunk the Wine and are departed,  
Leaving their empty Bowls behind—not one  
To carry on the Revel Cup in hand!  
Up <span class="smallcaps">Jami</span> then! and whether Lees or Wine  
To offer—boldly offer it in Thine!

</div>

Page [4](saab04.htm#page_4). <span class="smallcaps">Old
Stories</span>.—"Yúsuf and Zulaikha," "Layla and Majnún," etc.

Page [4](saab04.htm#page_4). <span class="smallcaps">Glasses Turn’d to
Four</span>.—first notice of Spectacles in Oriental Poetry, perhaps.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

Page [4](saab04.htm#page_4). "The Master," whose Verse is quoted, is
Jellalladdín, the Great Sufi Teacher. The "King Himself" is Yacúb Beg,
whose Father's Vision appears in the next Section.

Page [7](saab05.htm#page_7). <span
class="smallcaps">Sháhzemán</span>.—"Lord of the World, <span
class="smallcaps">Sovereign</span>; <span
class="smallcaps">Hasan</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Beautiful</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Good</span>." <span class="smallcaps">Hasan Beg</span>
of Western Persia, famous for his Beauty, had helped Jámi with Escort in
a dangerous Pilgrimage. He died (as History and a previous line in the
Original tell) before Salámán was written, and was succeeded by his Son
<span class="smallcaps">Yácúb</span>.

Page [8](saab05.htm#page_8). <span class="smallcaps">Yún</span>.—or
"<span class="smallcaps">Yavan</span>," Son of Japhet, from whom the
Country was called "<span class="smallcaps">Yúnan</span>,"—<span
class="smallcaps">Ionia</span>, meant by the Persians to express <span
class="smallcaps">Greece</span> generally. Sikander is, of course,
Alexander the Great, of whose Ethics Jámi wrote, as Nizami of his Deeds.

Page [9](saab06.htm#page_9). <span class="smallcaps">Káf</span>.—the
Fabulous Mountain supposed by Asiatics to surround the World, binding
the Horizon on all sides.

Page [9](saab06.htm#page_9). <span
class="smallcaps">Seráb</span>.—miráge; but, of two Foreign Words, why
not the more original Persian? identical with the Hebrew Sháráb; as in
<span class="smallcaps">Isaiah</span> XV. 7; "The <span
class="smallcaps">Sháráb</span> (or <span
class="smallcaps">Miráge</span>) shall become a Lake;"—rather, and
better, than our Version, "The parched Ground shall become a Pool."—See
<span class="smallcaps">Gesenius</span>.

Page [11](saab07.htm#page_11). <span class="smallcaps">The
Deluge</span>: in the Kúran God engages to save Noah and his Family
meaning all who believed in the Warning. One of Noah's Sons (Canaan or
Yam, some think) would not believe. "And the Ark swam with them between
waves like Mountains, and Noah called up to his Son, who was separated
from him, saying, 'Embark with us, my Son, and stay not with the
Unbelievers.' He answered, 'I will get on a Mountain which will secure
me from the Water.' Noah replied, 'There is no security this Day from
the Decree of God, except for him on whom he shall have Mercy.' And a
Wave passed between them, and he became one of those who were drowned.
And it was said, 'Oh Earth, swallow up thy waters, and Thou, oh Heaven,
withhold thy Rain!' And immediately

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the Water abated and the Decree was fulfilled, and the Ark rested on the
Mountain Al Judi, and it was said, 'Away with the ungodly People!'—Noah
called upon his Lord and said, 'Oh Lord, verily my Son is of my Family,
and thy Promise is True; for Thou art of those who exercise Judgment.'
God answered, 'Oh Noah, verily he Is not of thy Family; this
intercession of thine for him is not a righteous work.'"—Sale's <span
class="smallcaps">Kurán</span>, Vol. II. p. 21.

Page [13](saab08.htm#page_13). <span class="smallcaps">A Ring to Lead
by</span>.—'<span class="smallcaps">Mihar</span>,' a Piece of Wood put
through a Camel's Nose to guide him by.

Page [14](saab08.htm#page_14). <span class="smallcaps">Sulayman and
Balkís</span>.—Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.

Page [15](saab09.htm#page_15). "<span
class="smallcaps">Mussulman</span>" is very usually derived from the
same "<span class="smallcaps">Salem</span>" element as "<span
class="smallcaps">Salámán</span>." So "Solomon," etc.

Page [16](saab09.htm#page_16). <span class="smallcaps">The Eye's
Baby</span>: literally, <span class="smallcaps">Mardumak</span>—the
<span class="smallcaps">Mannikin</span>, Or <span
class="smallcaps">Pupil</span>, of the Eye, corresponding to the Image
so frequently used by our old Poets.

Page [17](saab09.htm#page_17). <span class="smallcaps">Years and
Courage</span>: the same Persian Word serving for Both.

Page [17](saab09.htm#page_17). <span class="smallcaps">The
Ball</span>.—the Game of <span class="smallcaps">Chúgán</span>, for
Centuries the Royal Game of Persia, and adopted (Ouseley thinks) under
varying modifications of Name and Practice by other Nations, was played
by Horsemen, who, suitably habited, and armed with semicircular-headed
Bats or Sticks so short the Player must stoop below the Saddle-bow to
strike, strove to drive a Ball through a Goal of upright Pillars. See
<span class="smallcaps">Frontispiece</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Appendix</span>.

Page [18](saab10.htm#page_18). <span class="smallcaps">Fitting The
Cord</span>.—bows being so gradually stiffened, to the Age and Strength
of the Archer, as at last to need five Hundredweight of Pressure to
bend, says an old Translation of Chardin, who describes all the Process
up to bringing up the String to the Ear, "as if to hang it there" before
Shooting. Then the First Trial was, who could shoot highest; then, the
Mark, etc.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

"Premièrement, à bander l’arc; dont l’Art consiste à le bien tenir, à le
bander, et à laisser partir la Corde à l’aise, sans que la main gauche
qui tient l’arc, et qui est toute étendue, ni la main droite qui manie
la Corde, remuent le moins du monde. On en donne d’abord d’aises à
bander; puis de plus durs par degrès. Les maitres de ces Exercises
apprennent à bander l’arc devant soi, derrière soi, à coté de soi, en
haut, en bas—bref, en cent postures différentes, toujours vite et
aisement. Ils ont des arcs fort difficiles à bander, et, pour essayer la
force, on les pend contre un mur à une Cheville, et on attache des poids
à la Corde de l’arc à l’endroit où l’on appuie la coche de la Flêche.
Les plus durs portent cinque cents pesant avant d’être bandés," etc.—Sir
<span class="smallcaps">John Chardin</span>, Vol. III. 437. He elsewhere
says, "La bonté d’un Arc consiste, comme on le dit en Perse, en ce que
d’abord il soit rude à bander, jusqu’ à ce que la Flêche soit à moitié
dessus; et qu ’ensuite il soit mou et aisé, jusqu’ à ce que le bout de
la Flêche soit entré dans la Corde."

Page [19](saab10.htm#page_19). <span class="smallcaps">The
Pleiads</span>.—i.e. compactly strung, as opposed to Discursive
Rhetoric, which is compared to the scattered Stars of <span
class="smallcaps">The Bier and its Mourners</span>, or what we call
<span class="smallcaps">The Great Bear</span>. This contrast is
otherwise prettily applied in the Anvari Soheili—"When one grows poor,
his Friends, heretofore compact as <span class="smallcaps">The
Pleiads</span>, disperse wide asunder as <span class="smallcaps">The
Mourners</span>."

Page [19](saab10.htm#page_19). <span class="smallcaps">Hátim's
Bounty</span>.—The Persian Type of Liberality, infinitely celebrated.

Page [20](saab11.htm#page_20). <span class="smallcaps">An Alien
Shah</span>.—the Hero of the Story being of <span
class="smallcaps">Yúnan</span>—<span class="smallcaps">Ionia</span>, or
<span class="smallcaps">Greece</span> generally, (the Persian Geography
not being very precise,)—and so not of <span class="smallcaps">The
Faith</span>.

Page [21](saab11.htm#page_21). <span class="smallcaps">Adorning the
Bows</span>: with dark Indigo Paint, as the Archery Bow with a thin
Papyrus-like Bark.

Page [21](saab11.htm#page_21). <span class="smallcaps">A Grain of
Musk</span>.—a '<span class="smallcaps">Patch</span>,' sc.—"Noir comme
le Musc."—De Sacy.

Page [23](saab13.htm#page_23). <span class="smallcaps">Fortune's
Shadow</span>.—alluding to the Phœnix, the Shadow of whose wings
foretold a Crown upon the Head it passed over.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

Page [27](saab16.htm#page_27) and elsewhere—<span class="smallcaps">The
Throne</span> is spoken of as 'under Foot.' The Persepolitan Sculpture
still discovers its King keeping his Chair as Europeans do with a
separate Footstool. But in Jámi's time The Throne was probably of the
same Fashion that Chardin saw Solíman twice crowned on 200 years
after—perhaps the very same—"Un petit Tabouret carré," 3 feet high,
Golden and Jewelled, on which the Prince gathers up his feet in Oriental
fashion, so as it serves for Throne and Footstool too. "Ce Tabouret,
hors le Temps qu’il sert à cette Céremonie se garde avec grand Soin dans
le Trésor Royal qui est au Donjon de la Forteresse d’Ispahan," where
also, to prove the Conservatism of Persia so far as Habits go,"
J’ai’vu," he says, "des Habits de Tamurlan; ils sont taillés tout comme
ceux qu’on fait aujourd’hui, sans aucune difference." So the Mirrors
used in Persia 200 years ago were commonly of polished Metal, just as
Jámi so often describes. \[Solíman's 2nd Coronation came about because
of his having fallen so ill from Debauchery, that his Astrologers said
his first must have taken place under an Evil conjunction of Stars—so he
must be crowned again—which he was—Chardin looking on both times.\]

Page [27](saab16.htm#page_27). <span
class="smallcaps">Rakhsh</span>.—"<span
class="smallcaps">Lightning</span>.' The name of <span
class="smallcaps">Rustam's</span> famous Horse in the <span
class="smallcaps">Shah-Nameh</span>.

Page [27](saab16.htm#page_27). "<span class="smallcaps">Kai</span>"
which almost signifies "Gigantic King," properly belongs to Khusrau, 3rd
King of the Kaianian Dynasty; but is here borrowed for Parvíz as a more
mythical Title than Shah or King.

Page [27](saab16.htm#page_27). <span class="smallcaps">Khusrau
Parvíz</span> (Chosroc The Victorious), Son of <span
class="smallcaps">Noshíravan</span> The Great; slain, after Thirty Years
of Prosperous Reign, by his Son <span class="smallcaps">Shirúeh</span>,
who, according to some, was in Love with his Father's Mistress <span
class="smallcaps">Shírín</span>. See further, Section XXI., for one of
the most dramatic Tragedies in Persian History.

Page 28. The Pen of "<span class="smallcaps">Kûn</span>"—"Esto!"—The
famous Passage of Creation stolen from Genesis by the Kurán.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

Page [28](saab17.htm#page_28). <span class="smallcaps">Seven and
Four</span>: Planets?—adding Sun, Moon, and the Nodal Dragon's Head and
Tail; according to the Sanscrit Astronomy adopted by Persia.

I have proposed "The Planets" for those mysterious "<span
class="smallcaps">Seven and Four</span>." But there is a large Choice,
especially for the ever mystical "<span
class="smallcaps">Seven</span>"—Seven Commandments; 7 Climates; 7
Heavens, etc. The "<span class="smallcaps">Four</span>" may be the 4
Elements, or even the 4 acknowledged Mahommedan Gospels—namely, The
Pentateuch, Psalms, New Testament, and Kurán. For Salámán, though fabled
'not' of <span class="smallcaps">The Faith</span>, yet allegorically
represents The Mirror of all Faith, and as The original Form of the
Human Soul might be intuitively enlightened with all the Revelations
that were to be—might even be, in esoteric Sufíism, The Come and Coming
Twelfth Imám who had 'read' all the previous Eleven; it being one
Doctrine in the East that it is ever the 'Last' and most perfect Prophet
who was 'First' Created and reserved in the Interior Heaven nearest to
God till the Time of his Mission should come.

Sir John Chardin quotes Seven Magnificats written in gold upon azure
over Shah Abbas’ Tomb in the great Mosque at Kóm—composed, he says, "par
le docte Hasan-Cazy," mainly in glory of <span
class="smallcaps">Ali</span> the Darling Imám of Persia, but of which
the First Hymn "est tout de Mahomet." This has some passages so very
parallel with the Sage's Address to <span
class="smallcaps">Salámán</span>, that (knowing how little worth such
parallels are, especially in a Country where Magnificent Titles of
Honour are stereotyped ready to be lavished on Prophet or Khan)
nevertheless really seemed borrowed by "le docte Hasan-Cazy," who
probably was hard set to invent any new. They show at least how Jámi
saluted his 'Alien' Prince with Titles due to Mahomet's Self, and may
perhaps light any curious Reader to a better understanding of these
Seven and Four. He calls Mahomet "Infaillible Expositeur des Quatre
Livres"—those Gospels;—\[So Sir John: but the Kurán being one, this
looks rather addrest to Ali than Mahomet.\]-

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Conducteur des
huit mobiles" the 8 Heavens of the Planets, says the Editor; "Gouverneur
des Sept Parties" the Climates; "Archetype des Choses créées; Instrument
de la Creation du Monde: le plus relevé de la race d’Adam. Ce Peintre
incomprehensible, qui a tiré tout d’un seul Coup de Pinceau '<span
class="smallcaps">Koun Fikoun</span>,' n’a jamais fait un si beau
portrait que le Globe de ton Visage."

Page [29](saab18.htm#page_29). <span class="smallcaps">The Ten
Intelligences</span>.—this passage finds its explanation in the last
Section.

Page [32](saab21.htm#page_32). <span class="smallcaps">Gau and
Mahi</span>.—The Bull and Fish—the lowest Substantial Base of Earth. "He
first made the Mountains; then cleared the Face of Earth from Sea; then
fixed it fast on Gau; Gau on Mahi; and Mahi on Air; and Air on what? on
<span class="smallcaps">Nothing</span>; Nothing upon Nothing, all is
Nothing—Enough." Attar quoted in De Sacy's <span
class="smallcaps">Pendnamah</span>, XXXV.

Page [32](saab21.htm#page_32). The Sidereal Dragon, whose Head,
according to the Pauránic (or Poetic) Astronomers of the East, devoured
the Sun and Moon in Eclipse. "But <span class="smallcaps">we</span>
know," said Ramachandra to Sir W. Jones, "that the supposed Head and
Tail of the Dragon mean only the <span class="smallcaps">Nodes</span>,
or Points formed by Intersections of the Ecliptic and the Moon's Orbit."
Sir W. Jones’ Works, Vol. IV. P. 74.

Page [33](saab21.htm#page_33). "Iram Garden." "Mahomet," says Sir W.
Jones, "in the Chapter of The Morning, towards the end of his Alcoran,
mentions a Garden called 'Irem,' which is no less celebrated by the
Asiatic Poets than that of the Hesperides by the Greeks. It was planted,
as the Commentators say, by a King named Shedád,"—deep in the Sands of
Arabia Felix—"and was once seen by an Arabian who wandered far into the
Desert in search of a lost Camel."

Page [34](saab21.htm#page_34). <span
class="smallcaps">Wámik</span>.—Another Typical <span
class="smallcaps">Lover of Azra, a Virgin</span>.

Page 35. <span class="smallcaps">A Mirror</span>.—mythically attributed
by the East—and in some wild Western Avatar—to this Shah's Predecessor,
Alexander the Great.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perhaps (V. Hammer
thinks) the Concave Mirror upon the Alexandrian Pharos, which by Night
projected such a fiery Eye over the Deep as not only was fabled to
exchange Glances with that on the Rhodian Colossus, and in Oriental
Imagination and Language to penetrate "<span class="smallcaps">The
World</span>," but by Day to Reflect it to him who looked therein with
Eyes to see. The Cup of their own <span class="smallcaps">Jamshíd</span>
had, whether Full or Empty, the same Property. And that Silver Cup found
in Benjamin's Sack—"Is not this it in which my Lord drinketh, and
whereby indeed he <span class="smallcaps">Divineth</span>?—Gen. XLIV. 5.
Our Reflecting Telescope is going some way to realize the Alexandrian
Fable.

Page [35](saab22.htm#page_35). <span class="smallcaps">The Cup of
Happiness and Tears</span>. κρατηρα μακρον ἡδονης καὶ δακρυων κιρνωντες
εξεπινον αχρις ες μεθην.

Page [36](saab22.htm#page_36). <span class="smallcaps">Hurl’d Him,
Etc</span>.—One Story is that Khusrau had promised if Firhád cut through
a Mountain, and brought a Stream through, Shírín should be his. Firhád
was on the point of achieving his Work, when Khusrau sent an old Woman
(here, perhaps, purposely confounded with Fate) to tell him Shírín was
dead; whereon Firhád threw himself headlong from the Rock. The Sculpture
at Beysitún (or Besitún), where Rawlinson has decyphered Darius and
Xerxes, was traditionally called Firhád's.

Page [36](saab22.htm#page_36). <span class="smallcaps">Will
Discharged</span>.—He Mesmerizes Him!—See also further on this Power of
the Will in Sections XXIII. and XXVI.

Page [38](saab24.htm#page_38). <span class="smallcaps">The
Minion</span>.—"Shah" and "Sháhid" (Mistress)—a sort of Punning the
Persian Poets are fond of.

Page [41](saab26.htm#page_41). <span class="smallcaps">Anguish</span>.—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"When the Cloud of Spring beheld the Evil Disposition of Time,  
"Its Weeping fell upon the Jessamine and Hyacinth and Wild Rose."—<span
class="smallcaps">Hafiz</span>.

</div>

Page [44](saab28.htm#page_44). "<span class="smallcaps">Zuhrah</span>."
The Planetary and Celestial Venus.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Page [45](saab28.htm#page_45). <span class="smallcaps">The
Spirit.—"Maany</span>." The Mystical pass-word of the Súfís, to express
the Transcendental New Birth of The Soul.

Page [46](saab29.htm#page_46). <span class="smallcaps">My
Son</span>.—one sees Jámi taking Advantage of his Allegorical Shah to
read a Lesson to the Real—whose Ears Advice, unlike Praise, scarce ever
reached unless obliquely. The Warning (and doubtless with good Reason)
is principally aimed at the Minister.

Page [49](saab30.htm#page_49). The Story is of 'Generals,' though
enacted by 'Particulars.'

Page [50](saab31.htm#page_50). "These Intelligences are only another
Form of the Neo-Platonic Dæmones. The Neo-Platonists held that Matter
and Spirit could have no Intercourse—they were, as it were,
'incommensurate.' How then, granting this premise, was Creation
possible? Their answer was a kind of gradual Elimination. God the "Actus
Purus," created an Œon; this Œon created a Second; and so on, until the
Tenth Œon was sufficiently Material (as the Ten were in a continually
descending Series) to affect Matter, and so cause the Creation by giving
to Matter the Spiritual 'Form.'

Similarly we have in Sufíism these Ten Intelligences in a corresponding
Series, and for the same End.

There are Ten Intelligences, and Nine Heavenly Spheres, of which the
Ninth is the Uppermost Heaven, appropriated to the First Intelligence;
the Eighth, that of the Zodiac, to the Second; the Seventh, Saturn, to
the Third; the Sixth, Jupiter, to the Fourth; the Fifth, Mars, to the
Fifth; the Fourth, The Sun, to the Sixth; the Third, Venus, to the
Seventh; the Second, Mercury, to the Eighth; the First, The Moon, to the
Ninth; and <span class="smallcaps">The Earth</span> is the peculiar
Sphere of the <span class="smallcaps">Tenth</span>, or lowest
Intelligence, celled <span class="smallcaps">The Active</span>.''

 

 

 
