[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ycw04)  [Next](ycw06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

# TRANSLATOR'S NOTES.

<span id="xref_1"></span>1. The doctrine of reincarnation is not
indigenous in China. We must consider this opening passage as showing a
strong Hindu influence which was introduced to China through Buddhism.
The *Jâtaka Stories* tell us that Buddha appeared a great many times as
a Bodhisatthva on this earth, again and again practising the six virtues
of perfection (*pâramitâ*). The *Taoist Book of Incarnations* (*Hua
Shu*), contains narrations of the previous lives of Lord Scripture
Glory, written in the same tone as the Buddhist *Jâtaka*.

<span id="xref_2"></span>2. For the exact meaning of this word see the
Preface.

<span id="xref_3"></span>3. We omit here a few lines which to the
English reader, not familiar with Chinese ways, would appear to
interrupt the context. In the opening sentence of the Chinese text, Lord
Scripture Glory alludes to a number of moral stories, well known among
the Chinese, as instances of rewards of virtue. We have removed the
lines here omitted to the Chinese Commentary, where they are printed in
the same type as our translation of the text of Yin Chih Wen, so as to
render them easily recognizable. For all we know the passages may be a
later addition which has crept into the text, but even then, of course,
they must be older than the commentaries belonging to them in which the
stories alluded to are told. For further details see the Chinese
Commentary 3-6, entitled "A Good Judge," [CC4](ycw04.htm#xref_CC4)
"Humaneness Rewarded," [CC5](ycw04.htm#xref_CC5) "Saving Many Lives,"
and "The Double-Headed Snake." [CC6](ycw04.htm#xref_CC6)

<span id="xref_4"></span>4. "Bliss of happiness" is a Buddhist term and
its Sanskrit original is probably *punyakshetra*.

<span id="xref_5"></span>5. The word benevolence translates the Chinese
*fang pien* literally "deeds of benevolence," which is the common
version

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of the Buddhist term *upâya* and means "method" or "successful way of
attaining an end." It is especially applied in the literature of the
Mahayana, in the sense which the English word "method" has acquired
among Wesleyan Methodists. *Prajnâ*, "wisdom," is in itself insufficient
because it is enlightenment in the abstract. In order to become
efficient for salvation it must be applied, and the method of applying
*prajnâ* is *upâya*, commonly designated *kausala*, i. e., "good or
excellent." The method of salvation according to Buddhist teachers is by
"deeds of benevolence" as indicated by its Chinese translation.

The commentator interprets the term *fang pien* in a popular sense and
takes it for "any deed that is beneficial to others." In Buddhism this
word plays a very important part, and its adoption here shows how
strongly the author of this short treatise was influenced by Indian
thought.

<span id="xref_6"></span>6. "Creatures" should be understood in the
broadest sense, for it refers to all objects about us.

<span id="xref_7"></span>7. "Impartiality of heart" again belongs to
Buddhist phraseology. The Sanskrit original is *samatâcitta* or
*samatâhridaya*. The commentator, however, understands it in the sense
of the Confucian Golden Rule, that whatever you do not desire to have
done to you, you should not do to others (the *Lun Yü*, XII, 21), and
also in the Buddhist sense that a Bodhisattva (intelligent being) should
be free from the thought of an ego (*atmasamjnâ*). (*The Diamond-Cutter
Sutra*.)

<span id="xref_8"></span>8. According to a Chinese Buddhist sutra, the
first obligation is to the parents, the second to all sentient beings,
the third to the ruler of the country, and the fourth to the Triple
Treasure (*triratna*) of Buddhism. Though the author must have borrowed
the idea from Buddhism, the commentator's enumeration does not agree
with the latter. He puts teachers and elders in place of the Triple
Treasure, and Heaven and Earth, for all sentient beings.

<span id="xref_9"></span>9. The three doctrines are Confucianism,
Buddhism and Taoism. The commentator evidently thinks humaneness (*jên*)
to be the essence of Confucianism, compassion (*karunâ*) that

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

of Buddhism, and response and retribution (*kan ying*) that of Taoism,
and declares that they all come out of the human heart, which is one and
the same in all three religions.

<span id="xref_10"></span>10. It is strange that the author does not say
anything here about the relation between husband and wife, while he is
manifestly referring to the five eternal virtues (*wu chang*) of
Confucianism.

<span id="xref_11"></span>11. The term "the Truthful One" (i. e.,
*chen*) refers to the religion of the Taoists. *Chen* may denote Lao
Tze, or the doctrine in general, or Taoist saints, or the Taoist sacred
book, *T'ai-Shang Kan-Ying Pien*.

<span id="xref_12"></span>12. The term "Sutras" originally refers only
to Buddhist books, but the commentator does not wish to have the phrase
interpreted in that sense, and says: "Though they seem specifically to
denote Buddhist literature, we may better understand them as virtually
including all the classical books belonging to the three religions."

<span id="xref_13"></span>13. This is a Buddhist custom, for the saving
of lives is considered to be very meritorious. The Buddhist theory is
that if in this life we do not act humanely we are sure to be born in
the form of a lower animal and to suffer for what we have done. We may
perchance find some of our own ancestors among horses or dogs or birds
whom we now treat carelessly and contemptuously, forgetting the good
they did for us.

<span id="xref_14"></span>14. This is also distinctly a Buddhist
sentiment, not originally found in China.

<span id="xref_15"></span>15. In the *Lun Yü* (Confucian Analects) we
read: "The Master angled, but did not use a net. He shot, but not at
birds perching." (XII, 27.) The passage is understood to mean that
Confucius was so tender-hearted as not to take advantage of animals when
hunting, and that he killed them only when it was necessary for the
sustenance of human life.

<span id="xref_16"></span>16. The Chinese show great respect for writing
and writing materials, because, they say, by them we become acquainted
with the virtues, wisdom and sayings of ancient sages. Any

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

writing, to the Chinese, partakes of the nature of spirit, and there is
a special order of monks who make it their duty to collect written
scraps of paper and burn them, to save them the disgrace of any
disrespectful treatment.

<span id="xref_17"></span>17. Says a Taoist sage, according to the
commentator: "I have three canonical books, which altogether consist of
only six characters. The one-character book reads, 'Meekness'; the
two-character book, 'Good-will'; and the three-character book, 'Do your
duty.' These three sacred books are not found in the Great Tripitaka
\[collection of Buddhist literature\], but in your own heart."

<span id="xref_18"></span>18. "Let go hatred" translates the words
*hsieh yüan*. "To owe a grudge" is called in Chinese, "Tieing (the knot
of) hatred or enmity," that is, *chieh yüan*; and so to return to an
amicable relation is conceived as a loosening, or untieing.

<span id="xref_19"></span>19. This means not to forget for a moment the
deeds or instructions of wise men of old, "to be always on guard lest
the heart might go astray." Says Confucius (*Lun Yü*, IV, 5): "The
superior man does not, even for a space of a single meal, act contrary
to virtue. In moments of haste his mind dwells on it. In time of danger
his mind dwells on it." In the *Chung Yung, (Doctrine of the Mean)*, it
is said that the *tao* ("path," or "doctrine") is not for a moment to,
be ignored, for that which can be ignored is not the *tao*.

<span id="xref_20"></span>20. This is decidedly Confucian. The *Great
Learning (Tai Hsiao)* as well as *The Doctrine of the Mean (Chung Yung)*
teach one to be watchful over himself when he is alone. This
watchfulness is not merely intellectual, but full of religious feelings.
In spite of their agnostic tendencies, the Confucians show a great
earnestness and solemn reverence toward Heaven's Reason (*Tien Tao*).

<span id="xref_21"></span>21. This is one of the noblest injunctions
given by the Buddha. (The *Dhammapada*, verse 183). In Pali it reads:

"Sabba pâpassa akaranam,  
Kusalassa upasampadâ."

Niao Che, a Buddhist recluse who lived in Hang Chou about 800 A. D.,
declares: "Even a three year old child can

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

say this, but even a gray-haired man finds it difficult to practise."
Cf. also Psalm xxxiv, 14 and xxxvii, 27.

<span id="xref_22"></span>22. "The Chinese word *shen* means god or any
spiritual being, and according to the context would here best be
translated by "angel."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index.](ycw06)
