<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act005)  [Next](act007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001)

Other evils, unhappily, assail the church (Chapter 6). The flesh begins
to shew itself, in the midst of the power of the Holy Ghost, the trouble
arising from the different circumstances of the disciples, and in those
things in which grace had been especially manifested, on the side on
which they were connected with the flesh. The Hellenists (Jews born in
Grecian or heathen countries) murmur against the Hebrews (natives of
Judea), because the widows of the latter were favoured, as they
imagined, in the distribution of the goods bestowed on the assembly by
its wealthier members. But here the wisdom given by the Spirit meets the
difficulty, profiting by the occasion to give development to the work,
according to the necessities that were growing up; and seven persons are
named to undertake this business, for which the apostles would not
forsake their own work. We also find, in the case of Philip and Stephen,
the truth of what Paul says: "Those who have used the office of a deacon
well, purchase to themselves a good degree and great boldness in the
faith which is in Christ Jesus."

Observe here, that the apostles put prayer before preaching in their
work, their conflict with the power of evil being more especially
carried on in it, as well as their realisation of the power of God for
the strength and wisdom they needed; and, in order that they might act
directly on God's part, it was necessary that grace and unction should
be maintained in their hearts.

Observe also the grace that discovers itself under the influence of the
Spirit of God in this matter: all the names, as far as we can judge, are
those of Hellenists.

The influence of the word extended, and many priests were obedient to
the faith. Thus, until now, the opposition from without, and the evil
within, did but minister occasion to the progress of the work of God, by
the manifestation of His presence in the midst of the church. Take
especial notice of this fact. It is not only that the Spirit does good
by His testimony, but, although evil is there without and within, yet
where power displays itself, that evil does but bear witness to the
efficacy of His presence. There was evil, but there was power to meet
it. Still it shewed there was leaven even in the Pentecostal cake.

The energy of the Spirit manifests itself especially in Stephen, who is
full of grace and power. The Hellenist Jews oppose him; and, not being
able to answer him, they accuse him before the council, and in
particular of having announced in the name of Jesus the destruction of
the temple and of the city, and the change of the customs of their law.
Here, observe, we see the free power of the Holy Ghost, without any
sending by any other to the work, as in the apostles appointed by Christ
Himself. It is not authority in the apostles, it is not in the Jews of
Palestine. He distributes to whom He will. It is the godly and devoted
Hellenist who renders the last testimony to the heads of the nation. If
priests believe on the one side, Jews from without Judea bear testimony
on the other, and prepare the way for a still more extended testimony;
but at the same time for the definitive rejection, morally, of the Jews
as the basis and centre of the testimony, and of the work of gathering
together. For as yet Jerusalem was the centre of testimony and
gathering. Peter had testified of a glorious Christ promising His return
on their repentance, and they had stopped His testimony. Now judgment is
pronounced on them by the Holy Ghost through the mouth of Stephen, in
whom they shew themselves open adversaries to this testimony. It is not
the apostles who, by official authority, break off with Jerusalem. The
free action of the Holy Ghost anticipates a breach, which did not take
place so as to form a part of the scripture narrative. The thing is done
by the power of God; and the taking up to heaven of the witness raised
up by the Spirit to denounce the Jews as adversaries, and to declare
their fallen condition, placed the centre of gathering in heaven
according to the Spirit that heaven to which the faithful witness, who
was filled with the Spirit, had gone up. Already, while on earth, he had
the appearance of an angel to the eyes of the council who judged him;
but the hardness of their hearts would not let them stop in the path of
hostility towards the testimony rendered to Christ a testimony which
comes out here in a special way as the testimony of the Holy Ghost.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 7](act007)

</div>
