<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act016)  [Next](act018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001)

In the last case it was the power exercised by the enemy over the
passions of the Gentiles that caused the persecution of the apostles: at
Thessalonica we again find the old and universal enmity of the Jews.
Nevertheless many Jews and proselytes received the gospel. After a
tumult there also, the apostles go away to Berea. There the Jews are
more noble; what they hear, they examine by the word of God. Through
this a great number among them believed. Nevertheless the Jews of
Thessalonica, jealous of the progress the gospel made, go over to Berea.
Paul leaves the city and passes on to Athens. Silas and Timothy remain
for the moment at Berea, Paul being the special object of the Jews'
pursuit. At Athens, although he resorted to the synagogue, yet, his
spirit stirred at the sight of the universal idolatry in that idle city,
he disputes daily in public with their philosophers; consequent on these
interviews, he proclaims the true God to the chief men of that
intellectual capital. He had sent word to Silas and Timothy to join him
there.

With a people like the Athenians such is the effect of intellectual
cultivation without God he has to come down to the lowest step in the
ladder of truth. He sets forth the oneness of God, the Creator, and the
relationship of man to Him, declaring also that Jesus will judge the
world, of which God had given proof by raising Him up from the dead.
With the exception of the judgment of this world being put in place of
the promises respecting the return of Jesus, we might think it was Peter
addressing the Jews. We must not imagine that the historian relates
everything that Paul said. What is given is his defence, not his
preaching. The Holy Ghost gives us that which characterised the manner
in which the apostle met the circumstances of those he addressed. That
which remained on the minds of his first hearers was that he preached
Jesus and the resurrection. It appears even that some took the
resurrection, as well as Jesus, to be a God. It is, indeed, the basis of
Christianity, which is founded on Jesus personally, and the fact of His
resurrection; but it is only the basis.

I have said that we are reminded here of Peter's preaching. I mean as to
the degree of height in his doctrine with regard to Christ. We shall
observe, at the same time, the appropriateness of the application of
facts in either case to the persons addressed. Peter set forth the
rejected Christ ascended on high, ready to return on the repentance of
the Jews, and who would establish at His coming all things of which the
prophets had spoken. Here the judgment of the world sanction of the
truth to the natural conscience is presented to the learned men, and to
the inquisitive people; nothing that could interest their philosophic
minds, but a plain and convincing testimony to the folly of their
idolatry, according even to that which the natural conscience of their
own poets had acknowledged.

The dishonest gain, to which Satan ministered opportunity, met the
gospel at Philippi; the hardness and moral indifference of knowledge
that flattered human vanity, at Athens; at Thessalonica, the efforts of
Jewish jealousy. The gospel goes on its way, victorious over the one,
yielding to the effect of another, and, after laying bare to the learned
Athenians all that their condition tolerated, leaving them, and finding,
amid the luxury and the depraved manners of the wealthy city of Corinth,
a numerous people to bringinto the assembly. Such are the ways of God,
and the exercises of His devoted servant led by the Holy Ghost.

We may notice, that this energy, which seeks the Gentiles, never loses
sight of the favour of God towards His elect people a favour that sought
them until they rejected it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 18](act018)

</div>
