<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act003)  [Next](act005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

In a word, they are invited to return by repentance, and enjoy all the
promises made to Israel. The Messiah Himself should return from heaven
to establish their blessing. The whole nation is here addressed as
natural heirs of the promises made to Abraham. But, while they were
speaking, the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees
came to lay hands on them, being grieved that they preached the
resurrection, which their unbelief and dogmatic system did not receive.
They put them in prison, for it was evening. The hope of Israel was set
aside; the grace of God had spoken in vain, great and patient as it was.
Many, however, believed their word: five thousand persons already
confessed the Lord Jesus.

We have seen the address which God, in His grace, sent to Israel by the
mouth of Peter. We shall now see, not only the reception (already
noticed) which it met with from the rulers of the people, but the
deliberate answer of their inmost heart, as we may call it. On the
morrow the rulers, the elders, and the scribes assemble at Jerusalem,
together with Annas and his kindred; and, setting the apostles in their
midst, they demand by what power or in what name they have wrought this
miracle on the impotent man. Peter, full of the Holy Ghost, declares
announcing it to all Israel, and with the utmost readiness and entire
boldness that it was by Jesus, whom they had crucified, and whom God had
raised from the dead. Thus the question between God and the rulers of
Israel was very formally stated, and that by the Spirit of God. Jesus
was the stone rejected by them, the builders, which had become the head
of the corner. Salvation could nowhere else be found. No carefulness not
to offend, with regard to the adversaries and the rulers; with the
people, as such, ignorant and misled, everything to win them. The
council recognised them as former companions of Christ: the man who had
been healed was there. What could they say or do in the face of the
multitude who had witnessed the miracle? They could only exhibit a will
in decided opposition to the Lord and His testimony, and yield to the
public opinion, which was necessary to their own importance, by which
too they were governed. With threats they commanded the apostles to
teach no more in the name of Jesus. We may remark here, that Satan had
Sadducean instruments arrayed against the doctrine of the resurrection,
as he had Pharisees as suited instruments against a living Christ. We
must expect the well-ordered opposition of Satan against the truth.

Now Peter and John allow of no ambiguity with respect to their course.
God had commanded them to preach Christ: the prohibition of man had no
weight with them. "We cannot," say they, "but speak the things which we
have seen and heard." What a position for the rulers of the people!
Accordingly, a testimony like this plainly demonstrates that the leaders
of Israel were fallen from the place of interpreters of the will of God.
The apostles do not drive them away do not attack them: God would judge
them; but they act immediately on the part of God, and disregard their
authority altogether with respect to the work that God had committed to
themselves. The testimony of God was with the apostles, and not with the
rulers of the temple; and the presence of God was in the assembly, and
not there.

Peter and John return to their own company, for a separate people who
knew each other was formed; and all, moved by the Holy Ghost (for it was
there that God dwelt by His Spirit, not now in the temple), lift up
their voice to God, the Governor of all things, to acknowledge that this
opposition of the rulers was but the accomplishment of the word and the
counsels and the purposes of God. These threatenings were but the
occasion of asking God to manifest His power in connection with the name
of Jesus. In a word, the world (including the Jews, who formed a part of
it in their opposition) had stood up against Jesus, the Servant of God,
and opposed itself to the testimony rendered to Him. The Holy Ghost is
the strength of this testimony, whether in the courage of those who bore
witness ([Act 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008)), or in His presence
in the assembly ([Act 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031)), or in the
energy of service ([Act 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#033)), or in
the fruits that are again produced among the saints with a power which
makes it manifest that the Holy Ghost has dominion in their hearts over
all the motives that influence man, making them walk by those of which
He is the source. It is the energy of the Spirit in the presence of
opposition, as before it was His natural fruit in those among whom He
dwelt. Fresh persons sell their goods, and lay their price at the
apostles' feet; among others, a man whom the Holy Ghost takes pleasure
in distinguishing Barnabas, from the island of Cyprus.

To sum up this Chapter demonstrates, on one side, the condition of the
Jews, their rejection of the testimony which was addressed to them in
grace; and on the other, the power of the Holy Ghost and God's presence
and guidance elsewhere, namely, in the midst of the disciples.

These three Chapters (2-4) present the first forming of the assembly,
and its blessed character through the Holy Spirit dwelling in it. They
present to us its first beauty as formed of God, and His habitation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 5](act005)

</div>
