<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo006)  [Next](amo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#001)

God had long waited patiently. More than once He had been on the point
of giving Israel up to judgment. The intercession of the prophet, that
is to say, of the Spirit of Christ which wrought in the prophets (an
intercession, indeed, that owed its efficacy to His sufferings; see
Psalm 18), had arrested the scourge. But now Jehovah would arise to
judgment, with the measuring-line in His hand, and nothing should turn
Him aside. With the house of Jehu Israel should fall. In fact this is
what took place. It may be that the preceding judgments apply to the
downfall of the family of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat; and to that of the
family of Ahab. Israel had been raised up again after each of those
events, but not so after the house of Jehu had fallen.

A prophecy like this was out of place in the king's chapel. A religion,
arranged by the policy of man without the fear of God, cannot endure the
testimony of truth. Bethel was the house of the kingdom. The priest
reports it all to the king. Let the prophet go away to Judah. There
Judah was owned, and the truth might be proclaimed; but this was not the
place for such unpalatable truths. The king was the ruler in all
religious matters: man was master. But Jehovah does not renounce His own
rights. Amos was neither a prophet nor the son of a prophet. He had not
this function from man, nor from the desire of his own heart. Jehovah,
in His sovereign will, had appointed him, and his word was the word of
Jehovah. The priest, who opposed it, should suffer the consequences of
his rashness, and Israel should surely go into captivity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 8](amo008)

</div>
