<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1027)  [Next](ch1029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#001)

It is David who places Solomon on the throne, who commands the princes
to aid him, and who appoints prophecy in inspired psalms \[See Note
\#1\]. He ordains the age at which the Levites' service should
commence-a different age from that ordained by Moses \[See Note \#2\].
It is the whole order of the house of God and of the king, which is
appointed under his hand; a new system which is established, founded
upon grace as its principle.

Solomon only puts in execution the order and plans of divine wisdom in
David. Glory is but the fruit of grace. It is the Christ who has
suffered, who is the wisdom and the power of God, unto whom all the
order of the house belongs. All the rest is glorious, but it is only a
result. Only we have already seen that it is in peace, and by Christ, as
Prince of peace, that this house must be built. It did not become the
habitual manifestation of the glory of God, that there should be enemies
to combat; neither was it suitable to the character of His people's joy.
The character of such a state of things should be that of blessing
-flowing without obstacle from God.

It is very important to observe how everything here is ruled by David.
It is important, in the first place, morally. The intelligence, the
right of ordering all things, the energy which grasps the whole thought
of God, the fellowship with Him in His counsels, the germ and moral
foundation of all these counsels, as well as the power of maintaining
them, are connected with the sufferings which Christ underwent for the
glory of His Father. This is true of us also in our measure. It is the
humbled suffering Christ, who is morally on a level with all this glory.
It is important, in the second place, as to intelligence in the ways of
God; for I doubt not that Christ, at the commencement of His reign, will
act in the character of David. We may also remark here, that the extent
of authority which David exercised was very great and of wide bearing.
The whole religious order was reconstructed. Everything, even to the age
of the Levites' service, depends on the authority and regulations of
David, as formerly on those of Moses. All the pattern of the temple, and
of its vessels, is given him by inspiration, as that of the tabernacle,
and all belonging to it had been given to Moses. He also introduced
singing, and divers musical instruments, which are even called "the
musical instruments of God," and which, as well as the singing, had
previously formed no part of the public service. With the exception of
the ark, even the various vessels were different from those of the
tabernacle; and for each thing the precise weight in gold or in silver
was determined by David.

Note \#1

Heman himself, apparently, was inspired also. Several psalms are
ascribed to him, as well as to Asaph.

Note \#2

At any rate the probably probationary period of four years is not
mentioned. David ordains the age by his own authority.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 29](ch1029)

</div>
