<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2015)  [Next](ch2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 13 through 16.

In his wars with Jeroboam, Abijah stands entirely upon this ground, and
he is blessed.

Asa follows his steps; and, whether at peace, or while at war with the
Ethiopians, Israel prospers in his reign. He takes away the strange
gods; for we continually find them again. Energy is required to cast
them out and prevent their return. Even the king's mother is deprived of
her royal position, on account of her idolatry. Nevertheless "the high
places were not taken away."

But, although Asa's faithfulness continued, his trust in God failed
afterwards. Jealous of the Israelites resorting to Judah, Baasha builds
a city to prevent it; and Asa, instead of looking to the Lord, allies
himself with Syriaan alliance which produced the desired effect, but
which stirred up Gentiles against Israel. And this was not all; alliance
with the world prevents our overcoming the world. Had he not done this,
the Syrians would have fallen into the hands of Asa; for "the eyes of
the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards him." Solemn
and precious word! Wounded in his self-love, and irritated at having
thus missed so good an opportunity, Asa puts the seer who gave this
testimony in prison; and he oppresses the people. He is chastened of
God, and alas! he does not seek God in the chastening. Nevertheless,
except in this instance, Asa continued faithful and was honored.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 17](ch2017)

</div>
