<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2034)  [Next](ch2036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 33 through 36.

Manasseh, his son, who gave himself up to iniquity in spite of the
warnings of the prophets, brought desolation and ruin upon himself and
afterwards upon Israel. Guilty of sins which God could not forget, his
personal repentance in his captivity procured him personal restoration
and peace through the mercy of God; and after his return to Jerusalem he
acted faithfully and was jealous for the glory of God; for the time of
Judah's judgment was not yet come. His son Amon followed him in his
iniquity, but not in his repentance, and he dies by the hand of his own
servants. We find in Josiah a tender heart, subject to the word, and a
conscience that respected the mind and will of God: only at last he had
too much confidence in the effect of this to secure blessing from God,
without the possession of that faith which gives intelligence in His
ways to understand the position of God's people. God however makes use
of this confidence to take Josiah away from the evil He was preparing in
the judgments which were to fall upon Judah, the knowledge of which
should have made Josiah walk more humbly. At the age of sixteen he began
by the grace of God to seek Jehovah; and at twenty he had acquired the
moral strength necessary for acting with energy against idolatry, which
he destroyed even unto Naphtali. We see here how sovereign grace came
in; for both Hezekiah and Josiah were the sons of extremely wicked
fathers.

Having cleansed the land from idolatry, Josiah begins to repair the
temple; and there the book of the law was found. The king's conscience,
and his heart also, are bowed under the authority of the word of his
God. He seeks for the prophetic testimony of God with respect to the
state in which he sees Israel to be, and God makes known to him by
Huldah the judgment about to fall upon Israel; but tells him at the same
time that his eyes shall not see the evil. It was this communication
which should have made him act with less precipitation, and with a more
exercised heart than he manifested when he went up against the king of
Egypt. The knowledge that their well-deserved judgment was soon to
overwhelm Israel, and that there was no remedy for their sins (although
Josiah himself was spared), ought to have prevented his going up against
Pharaoh, when the latter did not attack him, and even warned him to
forbear; but he would not hearken, and was lost through a hardihood
which was not of God.

His death opened the sluices to the affliction of Judah and Jerusalem,
which had been blessed through his means; for they had followed Jehovah
all the days of Josiah, and had therefore been blessed; they had also
mourned for his death. Jeremiah (that is to say, the Spirit of God by
the prophet), in lamenting over the last king who would maintain the
relations of God with His people, wept for the ruin and desolation which
sin would bring upon the flock which Jehovah lovedthe vineyard that He
had planted with the choicest vine.

However faithful Josiah had been, this had not changed the heart of the
people (compare [Jer 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010)). Josiah's
faith was in action, and overruled this state of things; and, as we have
constantly seen, blessing depended on the conduct of the king, although
the undercurrent was always tending to the ruin and rejection of the
people.

It remains for us to notice the passover. Everything is set in order
according to the ordinances of Moses and David, and that in a remarkable
manner. It appears that even the ark had been removed from its place
([Ch2 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#003)); but now, the ark being
restored to its rest, the Levites occupy themselves diligently with
their service, and even make ready for the priests, that they might keep
the feast. They were all in their places according to the blessing of
Israel in the rest they enjoyed under Solomon. Those who taught all
Israel no longer bore the ark, but they ministered to God and to His
people. The singers were there also, according to their order, so that
there had not been such a passover since the days of Samuel. It was like
the last glimmering of the lamp which God had lighted among His people
in the house of David. It was soon extinguished in the darkness of the
nation which knew not God, and those who had been His people came under
the judgment expressed by the word Lo-ammi (Not-my-people); but this was
only to give occasion afterwards to the manifestation of His infinite
grace towards the one, and His unchangeable faithfulness to the others.
Ezekiel dates his prophecy from the year of this passover, when he says
"the thirtieth year." Why so, I cannot tell. Was it the year of the
jubilee? or did the passover itself form an epoch?

Little need be said of the succeeding reigns. The king of Egypt took
possession of the land, and the iniquity of Jehoiakim, whom he made king
in Jerusalem, was far from leading to restoration on God's part. One
more powerful than the king of Egypt, a king by whom God would commence
the dominion of the Gentiles, comes up against Jerusalem, and binds
Jehoiakim in fetters, yet leaves him after all to end his reign and his
life at Jerusalem. Three years after he carried away his son to Babylon.

Zedekiah, whom this king had made to swear by Jehovahthus acknowledging
the authority of that Name over his conscience,more sinful in this
respect than Nebuchadnezzar, despises his oath and the name of Jehovah;
and, after an interval of fruitless resistance, in which he perseveres
in spite of Jeremiah's testimony, he falls into the hands of the king of
Babylon, who utterly destroys the city and the sanctuary. For both
people and priests were thoroughly corrupted; they dishonored Jehovah,
and despised His prophets, till there was no remedy, and the land
enjoyed her sabbaths.

Sad and solemn lesson of the sin and iniquity of man, and of the just
judgment of God!

"You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities." But in His judgments God
remembers mercy; and in the counsels of His grace He had already
prepared, and even proclaimed by His prophets (and that by name), an
instrument to give His people some respite.

After the seventy years which Jeremiah had announced as the period of
Judah's captivity, Jehovah put it into the heart of Cyrus to proclaim
publicly that it was Jehovah the God of heaven, who had given him all
the kingdoms of the earth, and that He had charged him to build Him a
house at Jerusalem. He invites the people of God to go thither, assuring
them that Jehovah their God will be with them.

Thus it is by mercy, but by a mercy which recognises that power has
passed into the hands of the Gentiles that the history of Israel's
downfall concludes; the downfall of a people placed in the most
favorable circumstances, so that God could say to them, "What could have
been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it?" of a people
that had already been pardoned once; and who, after having allowed the
ark of Jehovah to fall into the enemy's hands, and after God had
forsaken Shiloh, habitation, had been re-established in blessing, but
re-established in vain. The long-suffering of God, the restoration He
had granted them, the establishment of the house of David in grace, all
was fruitless. The vineyard (for they were men) brought forth wild
grapes. Its walls were broken down; it had been laid waste. Jerusalem
had ceased for the present to be the throne of Jehovah, and government
and power in the earth have been entrusted to the Gentiles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 36](ch2036)

</div>
