<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2004)  [Next](ch2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 through 7.

Thus Solomon having prayed, and entreated Jehovah that His eyes should
be open, and His ears attent to the prayers that should be offered to
Him in that place (quoting David's petition in Psalm 132, and using His
mercies to David as a plea), the fire comes down and consumes the
burnt-offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of Jehovah fills the
house. And now, it is not only that the priests cannot enter, but the
children of Israel behold the glory which rests upon the house; they
fall upon their faces and worship. It is the public acceptance of the
sacrifice which sets the people in public connection with God, and makes
them confess that "Jehovah is good, and that his mercy endureth for
ever" (compare [Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024)). Only in
this last passage the acknowledgment of God's unwearied mercy was not
the point.

There is also another element in the scene we are considering, and that
is the public and joyful assembly of the whole people, the feast of
tabernacles, the great congregation ([Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025)), and also the dedication of the
altar. These are the two things which mark Israel's participation in the
blessing, namely, the altar, and the feast of tabernacles; worship
subsequent to their fall and ruin, founded on the acceptance of the
sacrifice, and the realised effect of the promises, the people being no
longer in distress.\[See Note \#1\]

We find again here the musical instruments of Jehovah, which David had
made to praise Jehovah, "because his mercy endureth for ever"; when
David himself "praised by their ministry" ([Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006)); blessed thought! for who is this
David? (compare [Psa 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)). The
people saw themselves blessed and happy in all the goodness of Jehovah.
After this the Lord sets before Solomon the conditions under which He
places him, as well as the people, for the enjoyment, or for the
recovery of these blessings. He had chosen this house of prayer. If
there was chastening and the people humbled themselves, there was
respite: the eyes and the heart of Jehovah should be there perpetually.

Then, with respect to Solomon and the seed of David generally, on their
faithfulness the blessing of the whole people was to depend. If the
house of David should turn away from God, Israel should be rooted out of
the land; and the house, which had been sanctified by the worship of
Jehovah, should become a by-word among all nations, and a witness to the
just judgment of God.

Note \#1

It does not appear however that they made booths with the branches of
trees. Since Joshua, this had not been done until the days of Nehemiah.
At the time which we are considering, joy and prosperity had made them a
little neglectful of the word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 6](ch2006)

</div>
