<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1009)  [Next](co1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001)

The apostle then gives the Corinthians the ways of God with Israel in
the wilderness, as instruction with regard to His ways with us,
declaring that the things which happened to them were types or figures
which serve as patterns for us: an important principle, and one which
ought to be clearly apprehended, in order to profit by it. It is not
Israel who is the figure, but that which happened to Israel the ways of
God with Israel. The things themselves happened to Israel; they were
written for our instruction who find ourselves at the close of God's
dispensations. That which shall follow will be the judgment of God, when
these examples will no longer serve for the life of faith.

Two principles are next established which also have great practical
importance: "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall."
This is our responsibility. On the other side we have the faithfulness
of God. He does not permit us to be tempted beyond our strength, but
provides a way of escape in order that we may not stumble.

He enjoins, with regard to idolatry, that holy fear which avoids the
occasion of doing evil, the occasion of falling. There is association
and communion through the table of which we partake with that which is
on it; and we Christians, being many, are but one bread and one body,
\[See Note \#9\] inasmuch as we share the same bread at the Lord's
supper. Those in Israel who ate of the sacrifices were partakers of the
altar were identified with it. So those who ate of idol's meat as such
were identified with the idol it was offered to. Was this to say that
the idol was anything? No. But as it is written (Deut. 32), "The things
which the Gentiles offered, they offered to demons and not to God."
Should a Christian then, partake of the table of demons? The table was
the table of demons, the cup the cup of demons an important principle
for the assembly of God. Would one provoke the Lord by putting Him on a
level with demons? Allusion is again made to [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021). The apostle repeats his
principle already established, that he had liberty in every respect, but
that on the one hand he would not put himself under the power of
anything; on the other, being free, he would use his liberty for the
spiritual good of all. To follow out this rule, these are his
instructions: Whatsoever was sold in the market they should eat without
question of conscience. If any man said, "This was sacrificed to idols,"
it was a proof that he had conscience of an idol. They should then not
eat of it, because of his conscience. For as to him who was free, his
liberty could not be judged by the conscience of the other; for, as to
doctrine, and where there was knowledge, the apostle recognises it as a
truth that the idol was nothing. The creature was simply the creature of
God. Communion with that which was false I ought to avoid for myself,
especially in that which relates to communion with God Himself. I should
deny myself the liberty which the truth gave me, rather than wound the
weak conscience of others.

Moreover in all things, even in eating or drinking, we ought to see the
glory of God, and do all to His glory; giving no offence by using our
liberty, either to Jew or Gentile, or the assembly of God; following the
apostle's example, who, denying himself, sought to please all for their
edification.

Having given these rules in answer to questions of detail, he turns to
that which regarded the presence and action of the Holy Ghost; which
also introduces the subject of the conduct proper for them in their
assemblies.

Note \#9

It is here the apostle comes to the inner circle of the body of Christ,
the true assembly of God united together by the Holy Ghost, of which the
Lord's supper is the expression.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 11](co1011)

</div>
