<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](rom016)  [Next](co1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to I Corinthians

The Epistle to the Corinthians presents very different subjects from
those which occupied us in the one addressed to the Romans. We find in
it moral details, and the interior order of an assembly, with regard to
which the Spirit of God here displays His wisdom in a direct way. There
is no mention of elders or of other functionaries of the assembly.
Through the labours of the apostle, a numerous assembly had been formed
(for God had much people in that city) in the midst of a very corrupt
population, where riches and luxury were united with a moral disorder
which had made the city a proverb. At the same time, here as elsewhere,
false teachers (in general, Jews) sought to undermine the influence of
the apostle. The spirit of philosophy did not fail also to exercise its
baneful influence, although Corinth was not, like Athens, its principal
seat. Morality and the authority of the apostle were compromised
together; and the state of things was most critical. The Epistle was
written from Ephesus, where the tidings of the sad state of the flock at
Corinth had reached the apostle, almost at the moment when he had
determined to visit them on his way into Macedonia (instead of passing
along the coast of Asia Minor as he did), then returning to pay them a
second visit on his way back. These tidings prevented his doing so, and,
instead of visiting them to pour out his heart among them, he wrote this
letter. The second epistle was written in Macedonia, when Titus had
brought him word of the happy effect of the first.

The subjects of this first epistle are very easily divided into their
natural order. In the first place, before he blames the Christians at
Corinth to whom he writes, the apostle acknowledges all the grace which
God had already bestowed on them, and would still impart. [Co1
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001). From verse 10 to chapter 4:21,
the subject of divisions, schools of doctrine and human wisdom, is
spoken of in contrast with revelation and divine wisdom. Chapter 5, the
corruption of morals, and discipline, whether by power, or in the
responsibility of the assembly. Chapter 6, temporal affairs, law-suits;
and again the subject of fornication, which was of primary importance
for the Christians of this city. Chapter 7, marriage is considered.
Ought people to marry? The obligation of those who had already married;
and the case of a converted husband or of a converted wife, whose wife
or whose husband was not converted. Chapter 8, should they eat things
offered to idols? chapter 9, his apostleship. Chapter 10, their
condition in general, their danger of being seduced, whether by
fornication, or by idolatry, and idolatrous feasts, with the principles
relating thereto, which introduces the Lord's supper. Chapter 11,
questions connected with their behaviour in religious matters
individually or ([Co1 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017)) in the
assembly. Afterwards, chapter 12, the exercise of gifts, and their true
value, and the object of their use, magnifying (chapter 13) the
comparative value of charity; to the end of chapter 14, ordering the
exercise of gifts also, with which it is compared. Chapter 15, the
resurrection, which some denied, and specially that of the saints; and
chapter 16, the collections for the poor in Judea, with some
salutations, and the principles of subordination to those whom God has
raised up for service, even where there were no elders. It is of great
value to have these directions immediately from the Lord, independent of
a formal organisation, so that individual conscience and that of the
body as a whole should be engaged.

But there are some other considerations as to the character and
structure of the epistle which I must not pass by.

The reader may remark a difference in the address in the Corinthians and
Ephesians. In the Corinthians, "To the church of God," etc., "with all
that in every place call on the name of the Lord Jesus." It is the
professing church, the members being assumed to be faithful, at any rate
in character such till put out, and with that, every one that owned
Jesus as Lord, the house; hence [Co1
10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001). In Ephesians, it is "Holy and
faithful brethren," and we have the proper privileges of the body. This
character of the epistle, as embracing the professing church, and
recognising a local assembly as representing it in the locality, gives
the epistle great importance. Further, I think it will be found that the
outward professing assembly is dealt with to the middle of chapter 10
(and there the nature of the Lord's supper introduces the one body of
Christ, which is treated of as to the gifts of the Spirit in chapter
12); comeliness in woman's activities in the first verses of chapter 11;
and, afterwards, from [Co1 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017), what
befits the coming together in the assembly, and the Lord's supper, with
the government of God. [Co1 11:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001) do
not apply to the assembly. Still, order in the local assembly is
everywhere the subject; only, from chapter 1 to chapter 10:14, the
professing multitude is in view, supposed however sincere, but possibly
not so. From chapter 10:15 to the end of chapter 12, the body is in
view.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 1](co1001)

</div>
