<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1007)  [Next](co1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)

After this the apostle answers the question respecting meats offered to
idols, which gives occasion to a few words on the value of knowledge.
Simply as knowledge, it is worth nothing. If we look at it as knowledge
that we possess, it does but puffs us up; it is something in me, my
knowledge. True christian knowledge unfolded something in God. By means
of that which is revealed, God, better known, became greater to the
soul. It was in Him the thing known, and not a knowledge in me by which
I made myself greater. He who loves God is known of Him. As to the
question itself, love decided it. Since such a question had arisen, it
was evident that all consciences were not brought into full light by
spiritual intelligence. Now undoubtedly the idol was nothing: there was
but one God, the Father; and one Lord, Jesus Christ. But if he who was
strong sat at meat in the idol's temple, another who had not full light
would be encouraged to do the same, and his conscience would be
unfaithful and defiled. Thus I lead into sin,and, as far as depends on
me, I ruin a brother for whom Christ died. I sin against Christ Himself
in so doing. Thus, if meat causes a brother to stumble, let me
altogether abstain from it rather than be a snare to him. Here the
apostle treats the question as arising among the brethren, so as that
which regards the conscience of each, choosing to maintain in all its
force that in fact an idol was nothing but a piece of wood or stone. It
was important to set the question on this ground. The prophets had done
so before. But this was not all that there was to say. There was the
working of Satan and of wicked spirits to explain, and this he does
further on.

We may remark in passing the expression, "To us there is but one God,
the Father, and one Lord, Jesus Christ." The apostle does not here treat
the abstract question of the Lord's divinity, but the connection of men
with that which was above them in certain relationships. Pagans had many
gods, and many lords, intermediate beings. Not so Christians. For them
is the Father abiding in the absoluteness of the divinity, and Christ
who, become man, has taken the place and the relationship of Lord
towards us. The position, and not the nature, is the subject. It is the
same thing in [Co1 12:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#002), where the
contrast is with the multitude of spirits whom the Pagans knew, and the
number of gods and lords. Nevertheless every one was not, in fact, thus
delivered from the influence of false gods on his imagination. They were
still perhaps, in spite of himself, something to him. He had conscience
of the idol, and if he ate that which had been offered to it, it was not
to him simply that which God had given for food. The idea of the
existence of a real and powerful being had a place in his heart, and
thus his conscience was defiled. Now they were not better in God's sight
for having eaten, and by eating they had put a stumbling block in their
brother's way, and, so far as the act of those who had full light was
concerned, had ruined him by defiling his conscience and estranging him
from God in unfaithfulness. This was sinning against Christ, who had
died for that precious soul. If God intervened to shield him from the
result of this unfaithfulness, that in nowise diminished the sin of him
who led the weak one to act against his conscience. In itself that which
separates us from God ruins us in that which regards our responsibility.
Thus he who has the love of Christ in his heart would rather never eat
meat than do that which would make a brother unfaithful, and tend to
ruin a soul which Christ has redeemed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 9](co1009)

</div>
