<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](eze048)  [Next](dan001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Daniel

In the Book of Ezekiel we have seen the government of God on earth fully
developed in connection with Israel; whether in condemning the sin which
occasioned the judgment of that people, or in their restoration under
the authority of Christ, the Branch that should spring from the house of
David, and who, in the book of that prophet, bears even the name of
David, as the true "beloved" of God, the description of the temple, with
its whole organisation, being given at the end. In this development we
have found Nebuchadnezzar, the head of the Gentiles, introduced as
Jehovah's servant ([Dan 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan029.htm#020); [Dan
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan030.htm#024)) for the judgment of sinful
Israel, who were rebellious and even apostate, worshipping false gods.
God had made Israel the centre of a system of nations, peoples, and
languages, that had arisen in consequence of the judgment on Babel, and
existed before God independently of each other. The nation of Israel was
doubtless very distinct from all that surrounded it, whether as a people
to whom the true God was known, or as having in their midst the temple
and the throne of God; but, whatever the contrast might be between the
condition of Israel as a nation, and that of the other nations, still
Israel formed a part of that system of nations before God ([Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)).

In executing the judgment of God on Israel Nebuchadnezzar set aside this
whole system at once, and took its place in the absolute and universal
dominion which he had received from God. It is of this order of things
and of its consequences-of this dominion of the head of the Gentiles,
and of the Gentile kings, in the successive phases that characterised
their history-that the Book of Daniel treats, bringing into notice a
remnant of Israel, in the midst of this system, and subject to this
dominion. The king of Judah having been given up into the hands of the
head of the Gentiles, the royal seed is found in the same position. The
remnant becomes the especial object of the thoughts of God revealed by
His Spirit in this book.

Besides the testimony rendered to Jehovah by the fact of the
faithfulness of the remnant in the midst of the idolatrous Gentiles, two
important things characterise their history as developed in this book.
The first is that the Spirit of prophecy and of understanding in the
ways of God is found in this remnant. We have seen this raised up in
Samuel, when all Israel had failed, and subsist through their whole
history under the shadow of royalty. The Spirit of prophecy now again
becomes the link of the people with God, and the only resting-place for
their faith, amid the ruin which the just judgment of God had brought
upon them. The second circumstance that characterises the dealings of
God with regard to this remnant is, that, preserved by God through all
the misfortunes into which the sins of the people had cast them, this
remnant will assuredly share the portion which God bestows on His people
according to His government and according to the faithfulness of His
promises. We find these in the first and last chapters of the Book we
are considering.

This Book is divided into two parts, which are easily distinguished. The
first ends with chapter 6, and the second with the close of the Book,
the first and last chapters having nevertheless a separate character, as
an introduction and a conclusion, respectively making known the position
of the remnant, to whom, as we have said, the testimony of God was
confided at the beginning and at the end.

The two great divisions have also a distinct character. The first sets
before us the picture of the dominion of the Gentiles, and the different
positions it would assume before God according to the human pride which
would be its animating principle. This picture contains historical
features which plainly indicate the spirit that will animate the ruling
power in its different phases; and then the judgment of God. This
division is not composed of direct revelations to Daniel, except for the
purpose of recalling Nebuchadnezzar's dream. It is the heads of the
Gentiles that are presented. It is the external and general history of
the monarchies that were to succeed each other, or the different and
successive features that would characterise them, and their final
judgment, and the substitution of the kingdom of Christ; and especially,
the course and judgment of the one which God had Himself established,
and which represents all the others, as being invested with this
character of divine appointment. The others did but inherit
providentially the throne which God had committed to the first. It was a
question between God and Israel that gave this monarchy its supremacy.
It is the spirit of presumptuous idolatry, and of blasphemy against the
God of Israel that leads to its destruction. Chapter 6 does not give the
iniquity of the king, except as submitting to the influence of others.
It is the princes of the people who will have none but the king
acknowledged as God, and who undergo the same punishment that they
sought to inflict on those who were faithful to the Lord.

The second part of the Book, which consists of communications made by
God to Daniel himself, exhibits the character of the heads of the
Gentiles in relation to the earth, and their conduct towards those who
shall acknowledge God; and at last the establishment of the divine
kingdom in the Person of the Son of man-a kingdom possessed by the
saints. The details of God's dealings with His people at the end are
given in the last chapter. We may also remark that chapter 7 gives
essentially the history of the western power, chapter 8 that of the
eastern-the two horns. Chapter 9, although especially regarding
Jerusalem and the people-the moral centre of these questions, is
connected on that very account with the western power that invaded them.
From chapter 10 to the end of chapter 11 we are again in the east,
closing in with the judgment of the nations there, and the establishment
of the remnant of Israel in blessing.

Let us now examine these chapters consecutively.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 1](dan001)

</div>
