<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu011)  [Next](deu013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 12 and 13.

The second division begins with chapter 12, and contains the statutes
and ordinances they were bound to observe. It is not a repetition of the
old ordinances, but what specially referred to their conduct in the
land, that they might keep it and be blessed in it. It is a covenant, or
the conditions of their relationship with God, and of the enjoyment of
His promises, added to what had been said before (see [Deu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)).

The ordinances tended in general to this, that they were a people
belonging to Jehovah, and that they were to give up every other
relationship in order to be His; and keep themselves from all that could
seduce them to form such relationships, or defile them in those which
they had with Jehovah. At the same time, directions are given as to the
details of the maintenance of those relationships. One thing specially
characterises this part: a fixed place where Jehovah would put His name
to which they were to go up to worship. But in all this, and in the
whole book, this point is treated as a question of a direct relationship
of the people itself with God. The priests are, in general, mentioned,
more as being the objects of the care of the people when in the land,
according to ordinances already given. The people were to behave in
such-and-such a way towards them; but the relationship is immediate
between the people and God.

The first principle laid down to confirm these relationships is the
choice of a place as the centre of their exercise. They were to go
thither with all their offerings; they might eat flesh elsewhere-without
the blood; but the consecrated things could only be eaten in the place
chosen of God. They were not to forget the Levites. They were not even
to inquire about the ways of those who had been driven out of the land.
If the signs of a prophet, who would entice them to serve other gods,
came to pass, or if a relative, or the beloved of their souls, enticed
them, such were to be put to death; if any of a city, the whole city was
to be reduced to a heap of stones. No relationship with any but with the
true God was to be allowed-no forbearance toward that which ensnared
them to follow another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 13](deu013)

</div>
