<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu033)  [Next](jos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

We have now to consider a little the prohibition to which Moses was
subjected, not to enter the land of promise. Moses, the man of God,
might pronounce the blessings on Israel as in the land; but he himself,
as servant of God, belonged to the wilderness. There are more things
than one to be weighed here. As to the position of Moses, it was that of
the government of a people, placed under the principles of Sinai; that
is, while under the government of God, it was in the flesh that His
people were subjected to that government (compare [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005), where the subject is fully
discussed).

Now, man in the flesh, under the government of God, cannot come into the
enjoyment of the promise. This is true even of a Christian. Risen with
Christ, he is seated in the heavenly places, he enjoys the promise in
the presence of God; or, at least, his affections look up there, his
life is hid there with Christ; \[See Note \#1\] but, as a man upon
earth, he is under the government of God, who acts towards him according
to the manifestation of the spiritual life here below; and Christ is
between him and God, exercising priesthood and advocacy, which do not
establish righteousness (that is done once for all), but which maintain
the relationship of weak men with God in the light-to the fellowship of
which they are called in Christ who is in it-by obtaining mercy and
grace to help in time of need so that they should not fall, or to
restore them if they do, through the advocacy by the operation of the
Spirit upon earth. Crossing Jordan was our death and resurrection with
Christ in a figure. Joshua always represents Christ, Head of His people,
according to the power of the Spirit. But the wilderness is this world.
Moses directs and governs the people there according to God;
consequently he does not enter into Canaan.

The difference (we shall dwell on that more at length when we study the
Book of Joshua) between the Red Sea and Jordan is, that the Red Sea was
the efficacy of redemption through the death and resurrection of Christ
Himself, and we are viewed, withal, in Him; Jordan was the application
of it to the soul, as having died with Him in order to the enjoyment of
the promises. The passage of the Red Sea was followed by songs of joy;
that of Jordan, by conflict and the realisation of the promises.

As to Moses himself, personally, the fault which precluded his entrance
into the land is well known. Provoked by the rebellion of Israel, and
wearied with caring for the people, instead of exalting God in the eyes
of Israel, he exalted himself. He made use of the gift of God for that
purpose; he did not sanctify Jehovah in the eyes of the people; he did
not give Him His place. God does not become weary in His goodness; and
thus acting in discipline, for the good of His people, according to His
majesty, He can always fall back upon those ways of direct blessing
which flow from His unfailing grace. Man wearied with the evil that
vexes him, tries to exalt himself, to put himself above the evil, and to
shelter himself from it, because he is not above it. He no longer
glorifies God; he exalts himself and he is abased. If Moses, instead of
acting according to the flesh, had remembered that it was not he or his
glory which was in question (and how often had he himself told them so!)
but God, he would have felt that the people could not touch the glory of
God; and this unfailing glory would have sustained him, looking only at
that glory which ever maintains itself; so that if we only seek to
maintain it, we may rest upon it. But he lacked faith, and was forbidden
to enter into that which only the perfection of glory could open to men;
and, indeed, what could lead Israel safely through the desert and into
the land of Canaan? Pure grace alone. Moses was not able to apprehend
the height of the grace that conquers everything. It was according to
that grace, as we have seen, that God acted at Meribah.

Now, the law could not lead into life; and, therefore, the flesh, the
world, and the law, ever correlative in the ways of God, were found in
the journey through the wilderness; and Moses remains there. He might,
as a man of God and a prophet, tell of grace, as making sure the
blessing of Israel ([Deu 33:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)).
Faithful in all his house, as a servant, he remains on this side Jordan;
a proof, in these touching circumstances, that an absolutely new
creation is needed to enjoy the promises of God, according to that grace
which can alone, after all, bring one in safety even through the
wilderness-the unfailing grace of our God.

Moses dies, and, buried by Jehovah, does not serve as an object of
carnal veneration to a people at all times ready to fall into this sin,
when his name gave them honour according to the flesh; just as they
continually opposed him, when his presence according to God thwarted the
flesh. He was a man honoured of God, who scarcely had his equal (He of
course excepted who had none); but nevertheless he was man, and man is
but vanity.

Note \#1

The former is the teaching of the Ephesians, the second, of the
Colossians. In the former, dead in sin, he is raised up and set in
Christ in heavenly places. It is a new creation. In the latter, he has
died to sin and is risen, with Christ, and his affections are to be set
on heavenly things. In this last epistle he is viewed also as dead in
sins and quickened together with Christ, but not as sitting in heavenly
places.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Introduction](jos000)

</div>
