<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu010)  [Next](deu012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 8, 9, 10, and 11.

In chapter 8, in the most instructive and touching language as to the
care God had taken of them, while keeping them in dependence, and His
object in doing so, he also brings to mind the dealings of God with them
by the way, \[See Note \#1\] as a motive; and how God had humbled and
had exercised them, lest, through the enjoyment of the blessings of the
good land into which He was bringing them, they should be puffed up (for
it was God who gave them the needed strength); that otherwise God would
destroy them, as He had destroyed the nations. On the other hand (chap.
9), He reminds them of their continual perverseness, in order to shew
them that it was not on account of their righteousness, but because of
the wickedness of the nations, that God drove them out before them.
\[See Note \#2\] This he applies to them (chap 10), reminding them that
God had renewed the tables of the law, urging them to circumcise their
hearts, to care for the stranger, remembering how God had enlarged them
since they went down as strangers to Egypt.

Then, in chapter 11, he brings to their remembrance the judgments upon
the Egyptians, and those upon Dathan and Abiram; and declares to them
the beauty and excellency of the land into which they are about to
enter, a land upon which the eyes of Jehovah ever rested; \[See Note
\#3\] and, lastly, he puts before them the blessing and the curse which
there awaited them, according to their conduct, when brought in;
charging them to keep carefully the commandments of the Lord, and to
teach them to their children. And it is added, that, by keeping the
commandments of God, they would be able to take possession, according to
the full extent of the promise. But here all depends on their obedience
to this conditional covenant which made them Jehovah's, whose
exclusively they were to be; sovereign restoring grace does not come
till chapter 30.

Note \#1

See particularly [Deu 8:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002); [Deu
8:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015).

Note \#2

It is important to keep this in mind. Israel was the rod in God's hand
to get rid of intolerable evil. Therefore also they were not to spare.

Note \#3

The terms in which this is expressed present a perfectly beautiful
contrast between the carefulness of man in seeking for blessing, and the
grace from above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 12](deu012)

</div>
