<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est005)  [Next](est007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 through 10.

The Book of Nehemiah has shewn us Judah reinstated in the land, but
deprived of the presence of God, except as to general blessing, and
unacknowledged by God as His people; so that, whatever length of time
may elapse, their condition leads us morally up to the moment when the
Messiah should be presented to seal up prophecy, to finish the
transgression, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. That book gave
us the last word-until the coming of Christ-of the history of Israel;
and that, in grace and patience on God's part.

The Book of Esther shews us the position of Israel, or, to speak more
accurately, the position of the Jews, out of their own land, and looked
at as under the hand of God, and as the object of His care. That He
still cared for them (which this book proves to us), when they no longer
held any position owned by God, and had, on their part, lost all title
to His protection, is an extremely touching and important fact in the
dealings of God. If, when His people are in such a state as this, God
cannot reveal Himself to them-which is manifest-He yet continues to
think of them. God reveals to us here, not an open interposition on His
part in favour of His people, which could no longer take place, but that
providential care which secured their existence and their preservation
in the midst of their enemies. Those who were in danger were of the
captivity of Judah ([Est 2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#005)), and
of those who had not returned to the land of Canaan. If this betrays a
want of faith and energy on their part, and of affection for the house
and city of God, we must see in it so much the greater proof of the
absolute and sovereign goodness, absolute and sovereign faithfulness, of
that God Himself.

We see then in this history, the secret and providential care that God
takes of the Jews, when, although maintaining their position, as Jews,
they have entirely fallen from all outward relation to Him, are deprived
of all the rights of God's people, and are stripped of the promises, in
the fulfilment of which, as offered them by the mercy of God at that
time in Jerusalem, they take no interest. Even in this condition God
watches over and takes care of them-a people beloved and blessed in
spite of all their unfaithfulness; for the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance. This, when well weighed, gives this book a very
touching and instructive character. It is the sovereign unfailing care
of God, come what will, and shews the place which this people hold in
His mind. It has been often remarked that the name of God is not found
in the Book of Esther. This is characteristic. God does not shew
Himself. But, behind the power and the mistakes of that throne to which
the government of the world had fallen, God holds the reins by His
providence; He watches over the accomplishment of His purposes and over
everything necessary to their fulfilment; and He cares for His people,
whatever may be their condition or the power of their enemies. Happy
people! (compare, as to Israel, [Jer
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)).

It is to be noticed that faith in the protection of God, and an
acknowledgment of it, are to be found even when the dealings of God,
with respect to His promises, are not owned. We are speaking of God's
government, and not of salvation. Salvation is not the question here.
The Gentile reigns and does according to his will, taking at his
pleasure one of the daughters of Benjamin for his wife. Sad condition,
indeed, for the people of God! a position contrary to all divine law, to
all faithfulness under other circumstances, but here not leading even to
expostulation. The people of Israel are lost here as to their own state.
But God acts in His sovereignty, and makes use of this sorrowful
evidence of their position to preserve them from the destruction with
which they were threatened. Nehemiah unfolds the last relationship of
God with the people before the coming of the Messiah; a relationship of
longsuffering, in which God does not own them as His people; a
provisional and imperfect relationship. Esther teaches us that God
watches in sovereignty over the dispersed Jews, and preserves them even
without any outward relationship, and that, without revoking any part of
the judgment passed upon them, God shelters them without displaying
Himself, and consequently by hidden means. It was this that, as a matter
of history, had yet to be made known before the public interposition of
God at the end, in the Person of Messiah, which prophecy alone could
reveal.

This interposition appears to me to be pointed out in the circumstances
of this history; vaguely, indeed, yet clearly enough for one who has
traced the ways of God, as revealed in the word. We see the Gentile wife
set aside on account of her disobedience, and her having failed in
displaying her beauty to the world; and she is succeeded by a Jewish
wife, who possesses the king's affections. We see the audacious power of
Haman, the Gentile, the oppressor of the Jews, destroyed; and the Jew,
the protector of Esther, Mordecai, formerly despised and disgraced,
raised to glory and honour in place of the Gentile. All this, be it
remembered, is in connection with the earth.

Finally, in the details of this book there is a very interesting point,
namely, the providential means which God employed, the opportuneness of
the moment at which everything happens-even to the king's wakefulness,
shewing, in the most interesting manner, how the hidden hand of God
prepares and directs everything, and how those who seek His will may
rely upon Him at all times and under all circumstances, even when
deliverance appears impossible, and in spite of all the machinations of
the enemy and their apparent success.

The close of the book presents, historically, the great characteristic
facts of the dominion of the Gentiles; but one can hardly fail to see in
it typically, in the position of Mordecai, the Lord Himself as head of
the Jews, in closest connection with the throne that rules over all.

The very circumstances into which this book enters are appropriate. When
an acknowledged relationship subsists, the dealings of God are according
to the conduct of those who stand in this relationship; but here there
is no such relationship subsisting. The scene is filled, and rightly
filled, with heathen circumstances and heathen manners. Israel is as
lost among them, their conduct does not come forward; but their
preservation, where to the eye of man heathenism is everything, and
their enemies seemingly all powerful. This is all in place. Any other
picture would not have been the truth, nor given the true representation
of the state of things, nor brought out into their true light the
dealings of God. It will be easily understood that this book concludes
the deeply interesting series of the historical books, which, through
the goodness of God, we have been considering, exhibiting-as far as
there has been ability-their leading features. May the Spirit, who has
enabled us to enjoy that which God has deigned to reveal in them,
continue to instruct us while meditating on those books which we have
still to examine!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 7](est007)

</div>
