<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo034)  [Next](exo036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 35 through 40.

Besides the separation of Israel from the inhabitants of the land
wherein they were to dwell, which is found in chapter 34, there is in
chapter 35 another part of the instructions of Moses which he gave when
he came down. It is not now the certainty of entering, and the conduct
suited to those who have found grace, abstaining from all that might
tend to bring sin back when they were enjoying the privileges of grace;
Moses speaks to them of the portion of the people under the influence of
that communication which the mediator, as head of grace, had
established. The sabbath \[See Note \#1\] is appointed; and, moreover,
His people (grace thus manifested) are encouraged to shew their goodwill
and their liberality in everything that concerned the service of God.
Consequently we find the manifestation of the spirit of wisdom and of
gift in service; God calling specially by name those He designed more
particularly for the work. This was done liberally: they brought more
than was sufficient; and every wise-hearted man worked, each the things
for which he was gifted; and Moses blessed them.

Thus was the tabernacle set up, and everything put into its place,
according to the commandment of God. Thereupon (which we might have
remarked before), the whole is anointed with oil. Christ was thus
consecrated, anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power; and, moreover,
Christ having made peace by His blood, having all things to reconcile
(being the One who first descended, and afterwards ascended, to fill all
things with His presence, according to the power of redemption in
righteousness and love divine), the unction of the Holy Ghost must carry
the efficacy of this power in redemption everywhere. Therefore had the
tabernacle been sprinkled with blood. It is the power of the presence of
the Holy Ghost which is spoken of, not being born again. God takes
possession of the tabernacle by His glory, and the cloud of His presence
and of His protection becomes the guide of the people (now forgiven),
happy, and so greatly blessed, in being under the government and
guidance of God, and at the same time His habitation and His
inheritance. But all still depended on human obedience, the people's
obedience, nor was atonement, though revealed in figure, accomplished in
fact.

Note \#1

The sabbath is always found whenever there is any principle whatever of
relationship established between the people and God; it is the result
proposed in every relation between God and His people, that they enter
into His rest. It is to be noted that, while the people are distinctly
put under law, the principle of the second tables was law after present
forgiveness and mercy. This is exactly the ground Christians want to be
upon now-to bring in law after grace and mercy. But this it is Paul
calls the ministration of death and condemnation. For, the first time he
went up, his face did not shine; and it is to that the apostle refers in
2 Corinthians 3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 36](exo036)

</div>
