<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo025)  [Next](exo027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001)

Next we have the tabernacle itself, which was one, though separated into
two parts. There were (as the word teaches us) two meanings in the
tabernacle and in its form. In general it was where God dwelt and
revealed Himself, hence, the heavens, God's tabernacle; and the Person
of Christ, God's dwelling \[See Note \#1\]. The heavenly places
themselves, says the apostle, had to be purified with better sacrifices
([Heb 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)). So Christ has passed
through the heavens, as Aaron up to the mercy-seat ([Heb
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)). Again, it is used in the same
sense as a figure of the created universe ([Heb
3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#003)), where it is also used as a
whole as a figure of the saints, as the house over which Christ is as
Son. The veil was, we know on the same divine authority, the flesh of
Christ, which concealed God in His holiness of judgment-in His
perfectness as sovereign justice itself, but manifested Him in perfect
grace to those to whom His presence revealed itself.

The tabernacle \[See Note \#2\] itself was formed of the same things as
the veil; figurative, I doubt not, of the essential purity of Christ as
a man, and of all the divine graces embroidered, as it were, thereon. To
this was also added cherubim, the figure, as we have seen, of judicial
power \[See Note \#3\], conferred, as we know, on Christ as man: God
"will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath
ordained:" and again, "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all
judgment unto the Son . . . and hath given him authority to execute
judgment also, because he is the Son of man."

It seems to me that the other coverings point to Him also: that of the
goat-skins to His positive purity, or rather to that severity of
separation from the evil that was around Him, which gave Him the
character of prophet-severity, not in His ways towards poor sinners, but
in separation from sinners, the uncompromisingness as to Himself, which
kept Him apart, and gave Him His moral authority, that moral cloth of
hair which distinguished the prophet; that of the ram-skins dyed red
points to His perfect devotedness to God \[See Note \#4\], His
consecration to God (may God enable us to imitate Him!); and that of the
badger-skin to the vigilant holiness, both of walk and in external
relationship, which preserved Him, and perfectly so, from the evil that
surrounded Him. "By the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths
of the destroyer." "He that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that
wicked one toucheth him not." Besides what may be called His Person,
these things correspond to the new nature in us, the new man, and of
Him, so far as born of the Holy Ghost at His incarnation-His birth in
the flesh in which He was the perfect expression of it; but I speak of
the thing itself in practice, or what is produced by the Spirit in us,
and by the word.

Note \#1

We may add, as Christians, "whose house are we." The body is never the
subject in Hebrews: we are pilgrims walking by faith. Nor is the Father.

Note \#2

If we examine the details more closely, it will be found that in the
tent and veil there was no gold, but there were cherubim; in the ephod
gold, but no cherubim; in the hangings before the holy place neither
Within, in both holy place and holy of holies, all was gold. So Christ
as man (and the veil we know was His flesh) had the judicial authority
and will have it as man, not only in government, but in final divine
judgment; but He was man, and walked as man; within all was divine The
priesthood in its Aaronic character could not have the cherubim that is
judicial authority in heaven, but His presence there is identified with
divine righteousness. As He appeared outside down here all was perfect
grace, but in outward appearance He took neither.

Note \#3

When fully depicted, the cherubim shewed the powers of creation and
God's attributes as displayed in the throne, in the four heads of the
earthly creation: man, cattle, wild beasts, and birds; intelligence,
stability, power, and rapidity of judgment. Man had made gods and idols
of them; they formed the throne on which God sat.

Note \#4

This is drawn from the occasions on which the ram was used in the
sacrifices.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 27](exo027)

</div>
