<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo026)  [Next](exo028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)

In the court God meets the world (I do not speak of the world itself
through which we walk: \[See Note \#1\] this was the desert); but it is
where those coming up out of the world draw near to God, where His
people (not as priests or as saints, but as sinful men) draw near to
Him. But in coming out of the world, it is an enclosure of God's, who is
known only to those who enter therein. There the altar of
burnt-offerings was first found; God manifested in justice as to sin,
but in grace to the sinner, in His relationship with men, in the midst
of them, such as they were. True, it was the judgment of sin, for
without this God could not be in relationship with men; but yet it was
Christ in the perfection of the Spirit of God who offered Himself a
sacrifice, according to that justice, for sin, to put sinners in
relationship with God. He has been lifted up from the earth. Upon earth
the question was as to the possibility of men's relationship with Him
who is holy and living: that could not be. On the cross He is lifted up
from the earth, rejected by the world; nevertheless He does not enter
into heaven. Upon the cross Christ has been raised from this world-has
left it; but He still remains presented to it, the object of faith as a
full satisfaction to the justice of God, as well as the witness of His
love, of the love withal of Him who has glorified all that God is in
this act. He is the object still, I say, to the eyes of the world,
though no longer on it, if, through grace, one goes there and separates
from this world, while God in justice (for where has this been glorified
as in the cross of Jesus?) can receive according to His glory, and even
be glorified there, by the most wretched of sinners. As regards the
approaching sinner, it was for his guilt and positive sins. In itself
the sacrifice went much further, a sweet savour to God, glorifying Him.

It is here then that the altar of burnt-offerings is found, the brazen
altar: God manifested in righteous judgment of sin (meeting however the
sinner in love by the sacrifice of Christ) not in His being (spiritual
and sovereign object of the adoration of saints), but in His relation
with sinners according to His righteousness, measured \[See Note \#2\]
by what their sins were in His sight but where withal sinners present
themselves to Him by that work in which, by the mighty operation of the
Holy Ghost Christ has offered Himself without spot unto Him, has
satisfied all the demands of His righteousness, and more, has glorified
Him in all that He is, and has become that sweet-smelling savour \[See
Note \#3\] (of sacrifice) in which, in coming out of the world, we draw
near to God, and to God in relation with those, sinners in themselves
and owning it, who draw near to Him, but find their sins gone through
the cross on their way; and, besides that, come in this savour of His
sacrifice who made Himself a whole burnt-offering. It was not the
sacrifice for sin burnt outside the camp: there no one approached.
Christ was made sin by God, and all passed between God and Him; but here
we draw near unto God.

All the manifestations of God thus arranged, we come now to the services
that were rendered to Him in the courts, and in the places where He
manifested Himself ([Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)). The
priests were to take care that the light of the candlestick should be
always shining outside the veil which hid the testimony inside, and
during the night; it was the light of the grace and of the power of God
by the Spirit that manifested God spiritually. It was not Himself upon
the throne, where His sovereign being was keeping the treasure of His
righteousness: that treasure Christ alone, in His Person and in His
nature, could be Himself; nor was it righteousness in His relationship
with sinful man outside the holy place, of which man's duty was the
measure, and for which the law of God gave the rule; but it was a light,
through which He manifested Himself in the power of His grace, but which
applied itself to His relationship with man viewed as holy or set apart
for service to Him, all the while that it was the manifestation of God.
Essentially it was the Holy Ghost. This we see in the Apocalypse; but it
might rest upon Christ as man, and that without measure; or it might act
as from Him, and by His grace in others, either as the Spirit of
prophecy, exclusively so before He came, or in some other way more
abundant and complete, as was the case after His resurrection and
glorifying, when the Holy Ghost Himself came down. But whatever these
manifestations in men may have been in action, the thing itself was
there before God, to manifest Him in the energy of the Spirit Himself;
but the priesthood was essential here for us \[See Note \#4\], in order
to maintain this relation between the energy of the Holy Ghost and the
service of men in whom He manifested Himself, in order that the light
might shine ([Exo 27:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)). We find,
therefore, immediately afterwards, the ordinance for the establishment
of the priesthood.

Note \#1

This would be the grace of Christianity, the seeking and saving what is
lost. The figures of the tabernacle have to say to our coming to God,
not to His coming to us. This is proper to Christianity. Hebrews takes
up the figures we are speaking of, only with the changes introduced by
Christianity even in these.

Note \#2

Here we must remark that while final judgment refers to, and is measured
by, out responsibility, forgiveness cannot be separated from our
entrance into the presence of God (though in experience there may be
progress as to this), because it is by a work of Christ in which the
veil was rent and God fully revealed. This the great day of atonement
shewed, for there the blood was brought in to God, and yet it was for
sins, but sins as defiling God's presence, as well as their being all
carried away. But at the brazen altar there was both the love that gave
and the value of the sacrifice, so that divine favour and complacency
were brought in; "therefore doth my Father love me." Here sin-offerings
and burnt offerings were offered, but they both referred to acceptance,
negatively and positively, not simply to the holiness of God as the
blood on the day of atonement. We have redemption by His blood, the
forgiveness of sins, but according to the riches of His grace.

Note \#3

It is interesting to know that the word burn is not at all the same in
Hebrew for the sacrifice for sin, and for the burnt-offering: in the
case of the latter, it is the same as for the burning of incense. I add
here a word upon the sacrifices. In the sacrifice for sin burned outside
the camp, God came out of His place to punish, to take vengeance for
sin. Christ has put Himself in our place, has borne our sins, and died
to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself. In the sacrifice for sin
His blood was shed, our sins washed away. But this blood, infinitely
precious, has been carried by the high priest inside the holiest, and
put upon the mercy-seat; and thus the sure foundation of all our
relationship with God has been laid; since, as to him that comes, sin
exists no longer in the sight of God. But it is not only that God has
fully reached sin in judgment in the death of Christ, but the work which
Christ has accomplished has been perfectly agreeable to God. "I have
glorified thee on the earth." God was glorified in Him; and God owed it,
in justice to Christ, to glorify Him with His own self. The very being
of God, in righteousness and in love, had been fully glorified (publicly
before the universe) though the eye of faith alone is open to see it,
and hence it was the part of this very righteousness to place Christ in
a position that corresponded to the work. The love of the Father towards
Him surely did not turn from this. Thus it was not only that the
holiness which takes vengeance on sin, had already dealt with that sin
in the death of Jesus, and had nothing more to do as to the putting of
it away, but (for him who knows that in his Adam-nature there is no
resource, and still less in the law) there is, by grace, through the
faith of Jesus, the righteousness of God Himself, a justifying
righteousness-not merely the putting away of sins, but the positive
value of all that Christ has done as glorifying God in this. We are
accepted in the Beloved. God must raise Christ in consideration of that
which He had done, and place Him at His right hand; and we are cleared
from our sins according to the perfectness of God, between whom and
Christ alone this work was accomplished, and, He being entered in as man
in virtue of that work, since He has carried His blood there, we
also-objects of that work-are in virtue of it accepted as He is. Thus
then the sinner, believing in God, draws near to the brazen altar where
the sacrifice is offered (the way being open to him by the blood), and
(now we can add, the veil being rent) draws near unto God manifested in
holiness, but according to the sweet-smelling savour of the sacrifice of
Christ, an expression inapplicable to the sacrifice for sin burnt
outside the camp (there He was made sin), according to all the
sweet-smelling savour of the devotedness and obedience of Christ upon
the cross, that is to say, unto death. Notice that, besides this, the
priests draw near as priests, and even into the holy place. But of this
more hereafter.

Note \#4

For the full manifestation of it, in His personal and free manifestation
down here, the glorifying of man (Christ) according to divine
righteousness was needed, but this would take us out of our present
subject. I must again recall that we have only the shadow, not the very
image of the things. What is in the text refers to man under God's
government down here as vessel of the Spirit. The priesthood supposes
man in weakness here, and Christ, another Person for us on high.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 28](exo028)

</div>
