<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze038)  [Next](eze040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 38 and 39.

Gog, not fearing Jehovah, seeks to take possession of the land. He has
no thought that Jehovah is there. His pride blinds him.

It is very important to remark that Ezekiel speaks neither of the first
nor the second coming of Christ, nor of the circumstances of the Jews in
connection with the empire of the Gentiles. The latter only appear as
instruments performing the will of God. The prophet brings Jehovah and
Israel into the scene. He presents Christ indeed, but as being there
already and in the character of David. Jehovah raises up for them a
plant of renown. His coming is not the question. The judgments of
Jehovah upon the earth make Him known to the nations and to Israel (to
the latter His blessings also). The nations learn through these, a point
of capital importance in God's ways, that Israel went into captivity
because of their sins, and not because their God was like the idols of
the heathen. But in all the ways of God thus presented, not only is the
coming of Christ not mentioned, but it has even no place. It belongs to
another series of thoughts and revelations of the Spirit of God-another
order of events.

It is well also to observe that chapters 36 and 37, and the two
following ones taken together, are not consecutive; but each of the
first two by itself, and the last two, taken together as a whole, treat
of distinct subjects, each subject being complete, and presenting the
introduction of Israel's blessing in connection with the subject
treated, and closing with the assurance that it will be final and
perpetual. The subject of all these prophecies is the land, and the
blessings of God upon the land of Israel. This land, which belonged to
Jehovah, He would not have defiled. He drives out Israel from it in
judgment; and when He has cleansed the people, He makes the nations, as
well as Israel, understand His ways in this respect. He acts in full
grace towards His people He makes it known that they are His people,
that He will be sanctified, and that He is sanctified, in their midst.

I think, then, that Gog is the end of all the dealings of God with
respect to Israel, and that God brings up this haughty power in order to
manifest on earth, by a final judgment, His dealings with Israel and
with the Gentiles, and to plant His blessing, His sanctuary, and His
glory in the midst of Israel (none of the people being henceforth left
in exile afar from their land).

Besides the numerous Verses in which it is said, "And they shall know
that I am Jehovah," the following passages may be referred to, which
will shew the leading thought in those declarations and judgments of
God, namely, the manifestation of His government on the earth-a
government making manifest the true character of God in His rule, and
securing its demonstration in the world, in spite of the unfaithfulness
of His people; and that, in grace as well as in holiness, [Eze
36:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#019); [Eze
36:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#036); [Eze
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#007); [Eze
39:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#023); [Eze
39:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#028). With respect to Israel, see
[Eze 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#030); to the enemy, [Eze
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012) and [Eze
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#028).

That which I have just said of Gog supposes that all the events which
relate to the coming of the Son of man are omitted in the writings of
this prophet-which I believe to be the case. The Book treats only of the
governmental ways of God on the earth, of Jehovah in Israel. The power
designated by "Gog" is that of the north, outside of the territory of
the beasts in Daniel. I doubt not that the right translation would be
"Prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal," as learned men have remarked. Cush
and Phut were on the Euphrates, as well as on the Nile. Persia is known.
Togarmah is the north-east of Asia Minor. The audaciousness of this king
causes the wrath of Jehovah to break forth.

I will add, in order to facilitate the establishment of the connection
of this with other passages, that I doubt not Jesus will reign in the
character of David before assuming that of Solomon. He suffered as
David, driven away by the jealousy of Saul. The remnant will pass
through this in principle. This is the key to the Book of Psalms. He
will reign as David, Israel being blessed and accepted, but all their
enemies not yet destroyed. And, finally, He will reign as Solomon, that
is to say, as Prince of peace. Many passages, such as Micah 5, several
chapters in Zechariah, [Jer 51:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#020);
[Eze 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014), speak of this time, in
which Israel, already reconciled and acknowledged and at peace within,
shall be the instrument for executing Jehovah's judgments without
(compare [Isa 11:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)).

All, then, that related to the destruction of the empires which are the
subject of Daniel's prophecies has no place in the prophecies of
Ezekiel; nor that which takes place in order to put Israel again in
relation with God; nor the consequences to the Jews of their rejection
of Christ. These subjects will be found elsewhere, as in Daniel,
Zechariah, and more generally in Isaiah. Here God makes Himself known in
Israel. Gog, the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, falls upon the
mountains of Israel, and Jehovah makes Himself known in the eyes of many
nations ([Eze 38:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021)). The judgment
shall reach the land of Gog, and the isles ([Eze
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#006)). The name of Jehovah shall be
known in Israel, and the heathen shall know that Jehovah, the Holy One,
is in Israel ([Eze 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#007)). And, the
glory of Jehovah being thus manifested in the midst of the nations,
Israel from this day forth shall know that it is Jehovah Himself who is
their God, and the nations shall know that it was the iniquity of Israel
that brought judgment upon them, and not that Jehovah had failed either
in power or in the stability of His counsels ([Eze
39:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#022)). In a word, Jehovah and His
government should be fully known in Israel, and by means of this people
in the world; and from that time God would no more hide His face from
them. His Spirit should be poured out upon His people. Verses 25-29
([Eze 39:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#025)) recapitulate the
dealings of God towards them for the establishment of His government,
and to make Himself known among them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 40](eze040)

</div>
