<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze029)  [Next](eze031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 29, 30, 31, and 32.

Chapters 29-32 contain the judgment of Egypt. Egypt sought, in the
self-will of man, to take the place which God had in fact given to
Nebuchadnezzar. All must submit. The mighty empire of Asshur had already
fallen. Pharaoh, whatever his pretensions and his ambition might be, was
no better. We see this judgment of the Assyrian, the chief of all the
nations as to his power, in [Eze
31:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#010); where the "mighty one of the
heathen" is distinctly brought out-falling before this decree of God.
Pharaoh would be consoled by seeing all the great ones of the earth
overthrown like himself. Already fallen like the uncircumcised (that is,
like people who were not owned of God, nor consequently upheld by Him),
all must give place to this new power in the hands of Nebuchadnezzar.
That which characterised Egypt was the pride of nature, which would
follow its own will, and owned no God ([Eze
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#009)). Such a principle shall no
longer be the confidence of God's people ([Eze
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#016)). Egypt should have her place,
but should no longer rule. The judgment of Egypt should be the occasion
of Israel's blessing. This reaches to the end. In the destruction of the
Assyrian, God had shewn that He would not allow a nation to exalt itself
in this manner. The will of man in Pharaoh did not alter His judgment.
In Nebuchadnezzar, as we have seen, a new principle was introduced by
God Himself into the world. Observe that in [Eze
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027) Meshech and Tubal are
distinguished from the rest of the nations.

This prophecy concerning Egypt has particular importance. It is composed
of three distinct prophecies. The first (chaps. 29, 30) is subdivided;
the second, chapter 31; the third, chapter 32. But this last extends to
the end of chapter 39, and embraces several subjects in connection with
the fate of Israel in the last days. Observe that [Eze
29:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#017) is a prophecy of a very
different date, introduced here on account of its relation to that which
precedes it in the same chapter. [Eze
30:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#020) is also a distinct prophecy
as to its date.

Until chapter 25 we principally found moral arguments with respect to
the state of Israel; from thence to the end of chapter 32 it is rather
the execution of the judgment. But the prophecy that announces this
execution is remarkable in more than one respect. Nebuchadnezzar is
looked at as executing the judgment of God, whose servant he is for the
purpose of doing so on Jerusalem, now become pre-eminently the seat of
iniquity although the sanctuary of God. At the same time God sets His
land free, by these very judgments from all the nations that wrongfully
possessed it. He brings to nought the haughty power of man in which
Israel had trusted, that is, Egypt, which shall never rise again as a
ruling nation. But it was the day of all nations. The result of these
judgments, whether on rebellious Jerusalem or on the nations, should be
at the same time the re-establishment of Israel according to promise and
by the power of God in grace. The snares which had led them into evil
were taken away (see [Eze 26:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#016);
[Eze 27:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#034)). Thus, although these
events have had their historical accomplishment by the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, the ways of God in view of the re-establishment of
Israel have been manifested, as far as regards the judgments to be
executed -judgment, through which all the nations, as well as Israel,
who was their centre, disappear from the scene as nations. The Spirit,
while recounting the execution of the judgments that were to fall on
Asshur, Elam, and Meshech, gives details of those that had invaded the
land or been snares to Israel. So that the prophetic recital of these
very judgments contains in itself the assured hope granted to Israel by
the efficacious grace of the Lord. I cannot doubt that all this prophecy
of judgment relates-in a perspective brought nigh by the energy of the
Spirit-to the events of the last days, which will be the complete
fulfilment of these purposes and intentions of God. In [Eze
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#003), we see that it is universal
\[See Note \#1\]. I have already quoted the passages which shew that for
Israel it is the deliverance from their former snares. The pretensions
of man are overthrown ([Eze 29:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003)),
the spirit of dominion ([Eze
31:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#010)). The nothingness of the
glory of man is shewn at the end of chapter 31, and of each judgment of
chapter 32. We have already seen that the fate of Meshech is mentioned
separately, perhaps in view of that which will happen to it in the last
days, and which is announced farther on ([Eze
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#005)).

It is important to remark one point in this series of prophecies, which
commences with the judgment of Jerusalem, the centre of the former
system of nations. They are executed with the object of making them all
know Jehovah: only in Israel's case there is, besides this, the
understanding and the special verification of prophecy. See [Eze
24:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#024), Israel; [Eze
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#005); [Eze
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#007); [Eze
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#011), Ammon and Moab; [Eze
25:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#015), especial vengeance on the
Philistines; chapter 26, Tyre; [Eze
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#022), Sidon; [Eze
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#019), Egypt; as also [Eze
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#026); [Eze
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#015). With respect to Edom ([Eze
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014)), it is only said that Edom
shall know the vengeance of Jehovah by means of Israel-a further proof
that in certain respects this prophecy extends to the last days. These
prophecies, then, furnish us in general with the manifestation of
Jehovah's power, so as to make Him known to all by the judgments which
He executed; already partially realised in the conquests of
Nebuchadnezzar, but to be fully accomplished by-and-by in favour of
Israel. It will be remarked that, in Verse 12 of chapter 35 ([Eze
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012)) when Edom is again judged, it
is only said, "Thou shalt know that I Jehovah have heard all thy
blasphemies." But in Verses 4, 9 ([Eze
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#004); [Eze
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009)), it is said of Edom, "Thou shalt
know" or "Ye shall know that I am Jehovah." So that this knowledge of
Jehovah is by the judgment itself, not by any resulting spiritual
knowledge of Him; for, when all the earth shall rejoice, Edom shall be
made desolate. It will be through judgment that all the nations shall
know that Jehovah is God. But when the judgment has been executed and
all the earth shall rejoice in blessing, Edom will have only judgment.
Compare Obadiah. Edom undergoes judgment by means of the mighty among
the nations, but Israel himself shall strike the final blow. We may see
the two means of making Jehovah known in the case of Israel ([Eze
24:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#024); [Eze
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#026); [Eze
34:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#027); [Eze
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#011)). In the other cases it is by
judgment.

We have yet to observe that in the case of Tyre, commercial glory, and
in the case of Egypt, governmental pride founded on power, are
absolutely judged, cast down and destroyed without remedy ([Eze
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021); [Eze
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036); [Eze
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#018)). Compare [Eze
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#032). This has been literally
fulfilled with respect to the continental Tyre, and the Egypt of the
Pharaohs. We have seen a total destruction of Edom announced by Jehovah.
That which characterised Edom was its implacable hatred to the people of
God.

Note \#1

It will be remembered that with Nebuchadnezzar God set aside the order
He had previously established in the world, revealed in Deuteronomy 32
(namely, of nations and peoples arranged around Israel as a centre). He
owns Israel no longer as His people. Thus order then falls of itself,
and Babel of old, the place of dispersion, becomes the centre of one
absorbing empire. In connection with the fact that Israel is no longer
owned as a people, being judged as such, God addresses Himself to
individual conscience in the midst of the nation. But this was the
judgment of the nations, and the call of a remnant. And this is why the
prophecy reaches in its full bearing to the final judgment of the earth,
when that judgment and call are to be fully accomplished. God
consequently Himself delivers and saves His people, judging between
sheep and sheep, and executing wrath against all those who have trodden
them under foot. The judgment of the one absorbing empire does not form
part of the prophecies of Ezekiel (this is found in Daniel), save so far
as every oppressor and evil shepherd is judged (chap. 34). The
connection of this empire with Israel in the last days will not be
immediate. It will politically favour the Jews who do not own the Lord.
What I here notice forms the key of the prophecy. Ezekiel speaks from
the midst of Israel captive, and does not occupy himself with Judah,
owned by itself in the land under the power of the Gentiles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 31](eze031)

</div>
