<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze046)  [Next](eze048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 47 and 48.

The last two chapters do not require any lengthened remarks. The waters
that issue from the sanctuary represent the life-giving power that
proceeds from the throne of God, flowing through His temple, and healing
the Dead Sea, the abiding token of judgment. The waters abound in fish,
the trees that grow beside them are filled with fruit, the marshes alone
remain under the curse-they are "given to salt." The blessing of that
day is real and abundant, but not complete. The land is divided between
the tribes in a new manner, by straight lines drawn from east to west.
The portion for the sanctuary and for the city, or the 25,000 square
reeds, are situated next to the seventh tribe, beginning from the north.
The name of the city thenceforth shall be "Jehovah is there." Compare,
for the waters that flow from the temple, [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018); [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008) - passages that refer to the same
period.

It appears that the two places pointed out to the fishermen as a
boundary were the two extremities of the Dead Sea (we may compare [Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007); [Ch2
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002); and [Isa
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#008)). The main features in the whole
passage are the re-establishment of Israel, but on new grounds and
blessing, analogous to that of paradise (an image borrowed from this
prophecy in the Apocalypse) \[See Note \#1\]; but, after all, with the
reserve that this blessing did not absolutely remove all evil, as will
be the case in the eternal ages.

There is a powerful and abiding source of blessing which greatly
surmounts the evil, and almost effaces it; nevertheless it is not
entirely taken away. Still the name of the city, of the seat of power,
that which characterises it, is "Jehovah is there"-Jehovah, that great
King, the Creator of all things, and the Head of His people Israel.

Note \#1

When I say "borrowed," it is not that the Spirit of God has not given us
an original image in the Apocalypse: one has but to read it to be
convinced of the contrary. But Old Testament imagery is constantly
employed in the descriptions there given-only in such a manner as to
apply it to heavenly things, a circumstance that makes it much easier to
understand the book by helping us to enter into its real character
through its analogy with the Old Testament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 48](eze048)

</div>
