<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr004)  [Next](ezr006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001)

Whatever happens, they have to go through that which puts faith to the
proof; but their path is ordered by the will of God, and their faith
relies upon Him. In this case they had to wait; but God's time would
come; and that, not by means of a mere decree from the Gentile king: God
raises up a much more precious encouragement for them from another
quarter. Although the people had been subject to the Gentiles, God was
still supreme; His word is still of supreme authority to His people,
whenever He condescends to speak to them. If necessary, He can dispose
the hearts of kings to uphold it. In every case His people are to follow
it, without seeking other motive, or other help. Haggai and Zechariah
are sent of God, and prophesy among the people. These immediate
communications from God were of infinite value, as His word ever is; and
although they did not change the position of the people with respect to
the Gentiles, they were a touching proof that God was interested in His
people, and that, whatever might be their afflictions, the God of Israel
was above all that had power to oppress them.

I have said that the people were obliged to wait. This was the case as
soon as they received the decree that forbade their continuing to build.
But many years had elapsed before this prohibition came; and it seems
evident to me, from examining the prophecies which throw so much light
on the contemporary history, and from comparing their dates, that it was
want of faith in the remnant which was the true hindrance. There were
adversaries in the land who made them afraid, and who thus prevented
their building. It appears that the Jews did not dare continue. Their
adversaries hired counsellors in the Persian court to frustrate the
purpose of the Jews. But the first thing was that the adversaries
weakened the hands of the people. It was not until two reigns later that
the prohibition was obtained; but the Jews had left off building through
fear of their adversaries (compare [Ezr
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004); [Ezr
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021), and [Ezr
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001), with [Hag
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001); [Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004); [Hag
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#015)). Neither was it because the
king's decree was brought them that they began again to build, but
because they feared Jehovah, and feared not the king's command, as
seeing Him who is invisible ([Hag
1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012)). God was not any more to be
feared in the reign of Darius than in that of Cyrus or of Artaxerxes;
but the source of their weakness was their having forgotten God. This
makes manifest the great grace of God in awakening them by the mouth of
Haggai. God had until then also chastened the people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 6](ezr006)

</div>
