<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen012)  [Next](gen014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 13 and 14.

After this (chap. 13) we have, in the conduct of Abram and Lot, the
disinterestedness and self-renunciation of true faith on the one hand,
and, on the other, him, who, though a believer, had, as regards the walk
of faith, only followed that of another, and was now put to the test by
circumstances which arise: and this, remark, is when they have together
left their unbelieving connection with the world as an outward refuge.
Lot had done so with Abram, but his inward heart and will clung to the
ease of it. Abram had returned in spirit genuinely, perhaps with a
deeper experience, to his pilgrim portion in Canaan. Yet the advantages
he possessed in it led to the difficulty, for treasure here is not
heaven, even if the possessor of it be heavenly-minded: an important
lesson. Still Abram behaves beautifully. Lot chooses the world, fair in
appearance, not as Egypt, the world as such, but as self-ease, and what
did not seem, was not outwardly, separated from, Canaan; but which was
soon after the scene and object of what did not appear the sure
judgments of God. The renunciation of a present portion down here, and
of self in it, by Abram, is the occasion for him of a much clearer
knowledge of the extent, and a still firmer assurance of the certainty,
of the promise. It is when he gives up all to Lot as he might choose it,
that the Lord says to Abram to look north, south, east, west, from where
he was, adding he would give if to him and to his seed for ever. In a
word, we have the believer acting in the spirit of the heavenly calling
the faithful believer, and the worldly-minded believer.

Abram maintains now his own proper portion; he dwells in Canaan, goes
here and there as a pilgrim with his tent, and builds his altar. All
this was the path of the heavenly man; his characteristic portion here,
a pilgrim and a worshipper. Lot had lifted up his eyes, moved by his own
will and lust, and sees the plain of Jordan well watered: why should he
not enjoy it? God makes Abram lift up his, and shews him all the extent
of the promise, and with the promise tells him to walk through it all,
to realise, in his experience and knowledge, all the extent of the
promise made. The scene soon changes. What is linked with the world must
suffer its vicissitudes. Nor can the godly man, though ensnared oft, be
content with its evil. Lot ([Pe2
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007)) suffers from the iniquity by
which he is surrounded, and undergoes the ravages of the power of the
world, of which Abram is victor, and of which he will receive nothing to
enrich himself. Such are the just discipline and faithful ways of God.
Nor was it yet all.

These last circumstances are the occasion of the manifestation of the
kingly Priest, King of righteousness, and King of peace; that is,
Christ, millennial King of the world, blessing victorious Abram, and, on
Abram's behalf, the Most High God, who had delivered his enemies into
his hand.

In this picture, then, we have the final triumph of the Lord and the
family of faith over the power of the world, realised in spirit by the
church (and finally in glory) for a heavenly hope and association with
Christ; and literally by the Jews on the earth, for whom Christ will be
Melchisedec priest in full accomplished position; Priest on His throne,
Mediator in this character, blessing them, and blessing God for them;
God Himself then taking, fully and indeed, the character of possessor of
heaven and earth. The Most High God is His proper millennial name;
Almighty with the patriarchs, Jehovah with Israel, and Most High for the
millennium. The discussion of where the Most High is found, in
connection with the promises to Abraham and the Messiah, is beautifully
brought out in Psalm 91, and Jehovah the God of the Jews is recognised
as He who is. It is a kind of dialogue. These are connected with the
earth. Our place, and the divine name we are in relationship with God
by, are outside all these and properly heavenly. It is the Son who has
revealed the Father, and now the Holy Ghost, who gives us the
consciousness of sonship, and shews a man, the heavenly Christ, at the
Father's right hand in glory, when He had by Himself accomplished the
purification of our sins.

But the contrast of the heavenly-minded who do not settle on the earth,
and of those who do, with the world's power over the latter, and the
entire victory of the former over the power of the world, and then
Christ's reign, King and Priest, and God's taking all into His hand by
Him, are clearly and wonderfully brought out \[See Note \#1\] \[See Note
\#1\] This closes the general history of these great elements of God's
ways. Heavenly things are, no doubt, out of sight, save we look behind
the scene, where Abram's faith went. Still the path of faith, the snare
of the world, the moral victory of unselfish faith, which has God and
His promises for its portion, and its actual final victory, and God's
possession of heaven and earth under the Melchisedec priesthood of
Christ, Priest on His throne, are fully brought out, and the whole scene
completed This makes chapters 12-14 a section by itself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 14](gen014)

</div>
