<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen017)  [Next](gen019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

Chapter 18 is again a new unfolding of God's ways, here especially in
connection with the seed, already in a general way, as part of God's
purpose that it should be Abraham's seed according to grace and promise
when Hesh had no hope, and not according to the flesh, but now
specifically revealed as a present thing to Abraham. This seed of
promise is here the main object in view, and the present immediate
object of hope. This is so on to the end of chapter 21. But I apprehend,
he\* is here seen as heir of the world and judge; while Abraham's
personal relationship with God is in grace, by promise, where he is not
seen; and, so far, has the ground of faith, and, in figure, a christian
position. Hence, God Himself being known (not merely His gifts), Abraham
rises higher than in chapter 15, and, instead of asking gifts for
himself, intercedes for others. All is the effect of the gift of the
heir being known. After chapter 22 the proper figures of the church as
yet unrevealed come in, because the seed is raised: we get, however,
great individual principles here.

Abraham is accustomed to the divine presence, and it is quickly felt by
him; and although he says nothing referring to the divine glory till the
Lord is pleased to discover Himself, yet from the first he acts with an
instinctive deference which was as fully accepted by Him who came. In
[Gen 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#003) Abraham addresses himself to
One, yet speaks in his hospitality to all, and to this they all answer,
and inquire withal for Sarai; but in Verse 10 ([Gen
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010)) it is again individual, the
effectual promise of the Lord. In the rebuke of Sarah's unbelief Jehovah
reveals Himself. He judges flesh and its unbelief, as He promises.
Abraham accompanies the three on their way; two go on, and Abraham is
left alone with Jehovah. In this respect it is a lovely scene of holy
consciousness and yet deferential waiting on the good pleasure of God.
The immediate promise of the arrival of the seed is given. Abraham
enjoys the most intimate communion with Jehovah, who reveals His
counsels to him as to His friend. Intercession is the fruit of this
revelation (compare Isaiah 6). Judgment falls on the world; and whilst
Abraham, on the top of the mountain, communes with God of the judgment
which was to fall upon the world below, where he was not, Lot, who had
taken his place in it, is saved so as by fire. Righteousness which walks
with the world puts itself in the position of judge, and is at the same
time useless and intolerable. Abraham escapes all judgment, and sees it
from on high. Lot is saved from the judgment which falls upon the world
in which he found himself. The place where Abraham enjoyed God is for
him a place of 3 sterility and fear: he is forced to take refuge there
in the end, because he is afraid to be anywhere else.

In general, Abraham has the character here of communion with God, which
faith, without sight, gives not by an indwelling Holy Ghost, no doubt,
according to the privilege of the saints now (that was reserved for the
time of fuller blessing, when the church's Head should be glorified),
but in the general character of the blessing. The promised seed is
announced as to come, but not yet brought into the world, that is, in
the way of manifested glory. Meanwhile, Abraham knows and believes it.
God then treats him, as we have seen, as a friend, and tells him, not
what concerns himself, but the world, (with a friend I speak of what I
have on my heart, not merely of my business with him); and then, as he
has received these communications from God, so he intercedes with God a
stranger in the place of promise, on high in communion with Him. And
this is still more the place of the saints now through the Holy Ghost:
the full communication of the mind and ways of God in the word, and the
Lord's coming to take them up, so that this is the scene they live in by
faith, and founded on that comes intercession. Abraham had the promise
of the heir for himself already; here he is the vessel of divine
knowledge of what concerns the world too. This puts him in the place of
full grace, and so of intercession. His faith associates him with the
mind and character of God. It brings out, withal, the patience and
perfectness of judgment with God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 19](gen019)

</div>
