<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 42 through 47.

At the same time another scene presents itself. His brethren, who had
rejected him, forced by famine, are brought, by the path of repentance
and humiliation, to own him at length in glory, whom they had once
rejected when connected with themselves. Benjamin, type of the power of
the Lord upon earth among the Jews, is united to him who, unknown, had
the power of the throne among the Gentiles; that is, Christ unites these
two characters. But this brings all the brethren into connection with
Joseph. Finally, Jacob and his family are placed, as a people apart, in
the most favoured country of all that was under the power of the throne
of the great king. Nothing can be more touching than the conduct of
Joseph towards his brethren; but I must leave these reflections to the
hearts of my readers, placing them as far as my hearty desires can,
under the precious influence of the Spirit of God. The rapid survey I
have given, gives the type a clearer application than more detail would,
and that is what is of the deepest interest here.

Only remark that here the repentance is immediately in connection with
the rejection of Joseph; this is brought on the conscience of Joseph's
brethren. So in the end will it be with Israel. It is not here in
reference to the law that we shall have after Sinai but in typical
connection with the Messiah Their consciences are fully convinced, and
they go back to all the circumstances of his rejection. It is only
gradually that Joseph reveals himself, and with many exercises of heart,
which his dealings work in his brethren. In the end Judah is brought
into prominence in connection with Benjamin. It is when Judah takes the
sorrow of Israel to heart, in connection with Benjamin, and the loss of
Joseph, and puts himself into it, that Joseph, in his glory, is revealed
to them as their brother it is a lovely scene. The perfect grace of
Joseph at the end is a wonderful picture of Christ's revelation of
Himself ([Gen 45:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#004), et seq.).

It is touching to remark, when Jacob is presented to Pharaoh, though
acknowledging that, compared with those of his fathers, his life had
been a sad one, he can bless the monarch of all the country, himself a
despised shepherd; and "without contradiction the less is blessed of the
greater." The least and most faltering of God's children has the
superiority, and is conscious of it, in presence of the most elevated
men of the world.

The coming down to Egypt was according to God. so we have here Israel
viewed as abiding God's time, even when oppressed, not as cast out and
wandering as the effect of disobedience. Both are true. God, remark,
appears to him as the God of Isaac his father, not of Abraham: his
blessing comes under the risen Christ. What hangs on promises Israel has
lost by the rejection of Christ; but God can appear for him in pure
grace, in connection with a risen Saviour, and fulfil them according to
His own faithfulness \[See Note \#1\]; and so it is in figure here.
Therefore is Israel blessed in spite of all, though long oppressed and a
stranger. When he is in connection with Joseph, the scene changes; that
is, in his connection, in the world, with a glorified Christ revealed to
him there, he has the best of the land, which is brought into universal
order and subjection as belonging to Pharaoh, whom Joseph represented,
and whose authority he exercised over it. Beersheba, the border of
Israel from henceforward he was a stranger is the place of this
revelation of God. One cannot fail to see in the history of Joseph one
of the most remarkable types of the Lord Jesus, and that, in many
details of the ways of God in regard to the Jews and Gentiles.

Note \#1

This is the subject of [Rom 11:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028).
In [Rom 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#031) read "even so have these
not now believed in your mercy that they also might be objects of
mercy." They had forfeited the promises, and take them now on no higher
ground than a Gentile; that is, pure mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045)

</div>
