<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen006)  [Next](gen008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 6, 7, and 8.

Finally we find power and force here below, the result, of the sons of
God not keeping their first estate, of apostasy; and God executes
judgment instead of any longer pleading with men by the testimony of His
Spirit in grace, which has its allotted term. The obedience of faith is
the security of the warned remnant; but the principle of degeneracy
worked on in spite of the testimony, and worked on the accomplishment of
the testimony it despised. Man grew worse and worse, and God's creation
was utterly defiled and filled with violence, the two universal
characters of active will out of God. As regards man, it was now brought
out, when he was left to himself (for before the flood, save gracious
testimony, he was so left), that every thought of his heart was only
evil continually. God creates and destroys; He calls and repents not.
Creation was utterly corrupted, and God destroys it wherever the breath
of life is. The testimony of these things is gone out everywhere among
the heathen. We have here the exact though brief account of them, so far
as needed to shew what man was and is, and God's ways with him.

In the midst of the ruin and judgment God points out the way of
salvation through the judgment. The remnant taught of God profit by it.
The flood is brought upon the world of the ungodly. Up to this, though
the seed of the woman had been promised, sacrifice brought in, and
testimony given, there were no special dealings of God with man. It was
man walking before God in wickedness, no calling out, no law, no
judgment. The world, man, was judged (save Noah and his family) and its
deeds were hidden under an overwhelming flood. The judgment of God is
accomplished; but He remembers His mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 8](gen008)

</div>
