<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab000)  [Next](hab002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

[Habakkuk 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 1:1</span></span>

First of all, the prophet complains that the evil which exists among the
people is insupportable. This is the natural effect of the working of
the Spirit of God in a heart jealous for His glory and detesting evil.
The heart of the prophet, formed in the school of the law, speaks
perhaps of the evil in the spirit of the law. The Spirit of God does not
bring him out of this position, which was properly that of a prophet
before God, and he judges the evil in a holy manner, according to a
heart that was faithful to the blessings of Jehovah.

Thereupon Jehovah reveals to him the terrible judgment by which He will
chastise the people who thus gave themselves up to evil. He would raise
up against them the Chaldeans, those types of pride and energy, who,
successful in all their enterprises, sought glory only in the opinion
they had of themselves. Their head, forsaking the true God who had given
them their strength, would worship a god of his own. \[See Note \#1\]

But all this awakens in the prophet a different sentiment from that
which he before experienced. Here was his God denied by the instrument
of vengeance, and the beloved people trodden down by one more wicked
than themselves. But faith knows that its God, the true God, is the one
and only Lord, \[See Note \#2\] and (already a profound consolation
assuring the heart of salvation) that it is Jehovah who has established
the wicked in power for the correction of His people. But shall they
continue to fill their net with men, as though they were but fish?

Note \#1

Sad effect of pride, which, unknown to itself, is the parent of
weakness! Man cannot sustain himself; and the pride which rejects the
true God must and does make one for itself, or adopts what its fathers
have made, for pride cannot stand in the presence of the supreme God.
Man makes a god: this, too, is pride. But he cannot do without one; and
after all, the natural heart is the slave of that which it cannot do
without.

Note \#2

To Habakkuk of course Jehovah; to us the Father is revealed in the Son,
and so one Lord, Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 2](hab002)

</div>
