<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb005)  [Next](heb007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)

Now the Spirit will not stop at this point with Christians, but will go
on to that full revelation of His glory which belongs to them that are
of full age and indeed forms us for that state.

We easily perceive that the inspired writer tries to make the Hebrews
feel that he was ;acing them on higher and more excellent ground, by
connecting them with a heavenly and invisible Christ; and that Judaism
kept them back in the position of children. This moreover characterises
the whole epistle.

Nevertheless we shall find two things here: on the one hand, the
elements and the character of doctrine that belonged to infancy, to "the
beginning of the word of Christ," in contrast with the strength and
heavenly savour that accompanied the Christian revelation; and, on the
other hand, what the revelation of Christ Himself is in connection with
this last spiritual and Christian system.

But the epistle distinguishes between this system and the doctrine of
the Person of Christ, even looked at as man \[See Note \#12\] , although
the present position of Christ gives its character to the Christian
system. The distinction is made not that the condition of souls does not
depend on the measure of the revelation of Christ and of the position He
has taken, but because the doctrine of His Person and glory goes much
farther than the present state of our relationship with God.

The things spoken of in [Heb 6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001) had
their place, because the Messiah was then yet to come: all was in a
state of infancy. The things spoken of in Verses 4, 5 ([Heb
6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)) are the privileges that
Christians enjoyed in virtue of the work and the glorification of the
Messiah. But they are not in themselves the 'perfection" mentioned in
Verse 1 ([Heb 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)), and which relates
rather to the knowledge of the Person of Christ Himself. The privileges
in question were the effect of the glorious position of His Person in
heaven.

It is important to attend to this, in order to understand these
passages. In the infancy spoken of in Verses 1, 2 ([Heb
6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)), the obscurity of the
revelations of the Messiah, announced at most by promises and
prophecies, left worshipers under the yoke of ceremonies and figures,
although in possession of some fundamental truths. His exaltation made
way for the power of the Holy Ghost here below: and on this the
responsibility of souls which had tasted it depended.

The doctrine of the Person and the glory of Jesus forms the subject of
revelation in the epistle, and was the means of deliverance for the Jews
from the whole system which had been such a heavy burden on their
hearts; it should prevent their forsaking the state described in Verses
4 and 5 ([Heb 6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)), in order to
return into the weakness and (Christ having come) the carnal state of
Verse 1 and 2 ([Heb 6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)).

The epistle then does not desire to establish again the true but
elementary doctrines which belonged to the times when Christ was not
manifested, but to go forward to the full revelation of His glory and
position according to the counsels of God revealed in the word.

The Holy Ghost would not go back again to these former things, because
new things had been brought in in connection with the heavenly glory of
the Messiah, namely, Christianity characterised by the power of the Holy
Ghost.

But if any one who had been brought under that power, who had known it,
should afterwards abandon it, he could not be renewed again to
repentance. The former things of Judaism must be, and were, left behind
by that into which he had entered. Christians could not deal with souls
by them; and, as for the new things, he had given them up. All God's
means had been employed for him and had produced nothing.

Such a one of his own will crucified for himself the Son of God.
Associated with the people who had done so, he had acknowledged the sin
which his people had committed, and owned Jesus to be the Messiah. But
now he committed the crime, \[See Note \#13\] knowingly and of his own
will. The judgment, the resurrection of the dead, repentance from dead
works, had been taught. Under that order of things the nation had
crucified their Messiah. Now power had come; which testified of the
glorification of the crucified Messiah, the Son of God, in heaven; and
which by miracles destroyed (at least in detail) the power of the enemy
who was still reigning over the world. These miracles were a partial
anticipation of the full and glorious deliverance which should take
place in the world to come, when the triumphant Messiah, the Son of God,
should entirely destroy all the power of the enemy. Hence they are
called the "powers of the world to come."

The power of the Holy Ghost, the miracles wrought in the bosom of
Christianity, were testimonies that the power which was to accomplish
that deliverance although still hidden in heaven existed nevertheless in
the glorious Person of the Son of God. The power did not yet accomplish
the deliverance of this world oppressed by Satan, because another thing
was being done meanwhile. The light of God was shining, the good word of
grace was being preached, the heavenly gift (a better thing than the
deliverance of the world) was being tasted; and the sensible power of
the Holy Ghost made itself known, while waiting for the return in glory
of the Messiah to bind Satan, and thus accomplish the deliverance of the
world under His dominion.

Speaking generally, the power of the Holy Ghost, the consequence of the
Messiah's being glorified above, was exercised on earth as a present
manifestation and anticipation of the great deliverance to come. The
revelation of grace, the good word of God, was preached; and the
Christian lived in the sphere where these things displayed themselves,
and was subjected to the influence exercised in it. This made itself to
be felt by those who were brought in among Christians. Even where there
was no spiritual life, these influences were felt.

But, after having been the subject of this influence of the presence of
the Holy Ghost, after having tasted the revelation thus made of the
goodness of God, and experienced the proofs of His power, if any one
then forsook Christ, there remained no other means for restoring the
soul, for leading it to repentance. The heavenly treasures were already
expended: he had given them up as worthless; he had rejected the full
revelation of grace and power, after having known it. What means could
now be used? To return to Judaism, and the first principles of the
doctrine of Christ in it, when the truth had been revealed, was
impossible: and the new light had been known and rejected. In a case
like this there was only the flesh; there was no new life. Thorns and
briars were being produced as before. There was no real change in the
man's state.

When once we have understood that this passage is a comparison of the
power of the spiritual system with Judaism, and that it speaks of giving
up the former, after having known it, its difficulty disappears. The
possession of life is not supposed, nor is that question touched. The
passage speaks, not of life, but of the Holy Ghost as a power present in
Christianity. To "taste the good word" is to have understood how
precious that word is; and not the having been quickened by its means.
\[See Note \#14\] Hence in speaking to the Jewish Christians he hopes
better things and things which accompany salvation, so that these things
could be there and yet no salvation. Fruit there could not be. That
supposes life.

The apostle does not however apply what he says to the Hebrew
Christians: for, however low their state might be, there had been
fruits, proofs of life, which in itself no mere power is; and he
continues his discourse by giving them encouragement, and motives for
perseverance.

It will be observed, then, that this passage is a comparison between
that which was possessed before and after Christ was glorified the state
and privileges of professors, at these two periods, without any question
as to personal conversion. When the power of the Holy Ghost was present,
and there was the full revelation of grace, if any forsook the assembly,
fell away from Christ, and turned back again, there was no means of
renewing them to repentance. The inspired writer therefore would not
again lay the foundation of former things with regard to Christ things
already grown old but would go on, for the profit of those who remained
steadfast in the faith.

We may also remark how the epistle, in speaking of Christian privileges,
does not lose sight of the future earthly state, the glory and the
privileges of the millennial world. The miracles are the miracles of the
world to come; they belong to that period. The deliverance and the
destruction of Satan's power should then be complete; those miracles
were deliverances, samples of that power. We saw this point brought into
notice ([Heb 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005)) at the beginning of
the doctrine of the epistle; and in Chapter 4 the rest of God left vague
in its character, in order to embrace both the heavenly part and the
earthly part of our Lord's millennial reign. Here the present power of
the Holy Ghost characterises the ways of God, Christianity; but the
miracles are a foretaste of the coming age, in which the whole world
will be blessed.

In the encouragements that it gives them, the epistle already calls to
mind the principles by which the father of the faithful and of the
Jewish nation had walked, and the way in which God had strengthened him
in his faith. Abraham had to rest on promises, without possessing that
which was promised; and this, with regard to rest and glory, was the
state in which the Hebrew Christians then were. But at the same time, in
order to give full assurance to the heart, God had confirmed His word by
an oath, in order that they who build upon this hope of promised glory
might have strong and satisfying consolation. And this assurance has
received a still greater confirmation. It entered into that within the
veil, it found its sanction in the sanctuary itself, whither a
forerunner had entered, giving not only a word, and oath, but a personal
guarantee for the fulfillment of these promises, and the sanctuary of
God as a refuge for the heart; thus giving, for those who had spiritual
understanding, a heavenly character to the hope which they cherished;
while shewing, by the character of Him who had entered into heaven, the
certain fulfillment of all the Old Testament promises, in connection
with a heavenly Mediator, who, by His position, assured that
fulfillment; establishing the earthly blessing upon the firm foundation
of heaven itself, and giving at the same time a higher and more
excellent character to that blessing by uniting it to heaven, and making
it flow from thence.

We have thus the double character of blessing which this book again
presents to our mind, in connection with the Person of the Messiah, and
the whole linked by faith with Jesus.

Jesus has entered into heaven as a Forerunner. He is there. We belong to
that heaven. He is there as High Priest. During the present time
therefore His priesthood has a heavenly character; nevertheless He is
priest, personally, after the order of Melchizedec. It sets aside then
the whole Aaronic order, though the priesthood be exercised now after
the analogy of Aaron's but, by its nature points out in the future a
royalty which is not yet manifested. Now the very fact that this future
royalty was connected with the Person of Him who was seated at the right
hand of the Majesty on high, according to Psalm 110 fixed the attention
of the Hebrew Christian, when tempted to turn back, on Him who was in
the heavens, and made him understand the priesthood which the Lord is
now exercising; it delivered him from Judaism, and strengthened him in
the heavenly character of the Christianity which he had embraced.

Note \#12

The Sonship of Christ however, here below, cannot be separated from His
eternal Sonship, for this lends its character to the relationship in
which He stands as Son on earth in time. The passage in the text refers
to Verses 5 and 8 ([Heb 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#005); [Heb
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008)), compared with 6 and 10 of
Chapter 5 ([Heb 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006); [Heb
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#010)). Compare also the beginning of
John 17.

Note \#13

I do not think "afresh" ought to be inserted: the emphasis is on doing
it for himself.

Note \#14

So in Matthew 13 some with joy receive it, but there was no root.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 7](heb007)

</div>
