<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos012)  [Next](hos014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)

Chapter 13 is the perpetual conflict of the affections and the judgment
of God. The thought of their sin calls forth the announcement of the
necessary and inevitable judgment. As soon as the judgment is
pronounced, the heart of God returns to His own thoughts of grace (see ;
; ; ; ; and the last two of the chapter ). Nothing can be finer than
this intermingling of the moral necessity for judgment, the just
indignation of God at such sin, pleading to induce Israel to forsake
their evil ways and seek Jehovah, who would assuredly have compassion;
then God's recurrence to the eternal counsels of His own grace, to
secure unto the people whom He loved that of which their iniquity
deprived them; and, at the same time, the touching remembrance of former
relationship with His beloved people. What condescension, and what
grace, on the part of their God! Well had Israel deserved the sentence,
"I will no more have mercy," painful and terrible as it was, in exact
proportion to all that God had shewn Himself to be for Israel. Well can
the Lord Jesus say, "How often would I have gathered thy children, as a
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and thou wouldest not." The
manner also in which God deduces the history of Israel's iniquity, ever
since they came into the wilderness, and presents the means they had
enjoyed for returning to Him; the way in which He sets forth His
dealings when He had to resist the unfaithful Jacob, yet had blessed him
when he wrestled in faith-He who never changes, and who was still the
same for Israel; the whole behaviour of Israel being marked by God,
borne in mind, and brought forward for the instruction of the people, if
by any means it might be possible to spare them:-the whole of this
picture, in a word, drawn by God Himself, ministers profound instruction
to us, teaching us to cleave closely to Him who, however great His
patience may be, takes knowledge of all our ways, and has ordained that
we should reap that which we have sown.

Nothing also exhibits more fully the prolonged and marvellous patience
of the love of God. It is the special object of this prophecy to set
forth the moral condition of the people which led to the sentence of
Lo-ruhamah, and then to that of Lo-ammi, unfolded in the summary of
God's ways with the people given in chapters 1 to 3-the relationship
that exists between the moral dealings of God and His unchangeable
counsels-the connection between these counsels and the affections
according to which God accomplishes them-the ingratitude of man in his
behaviour with respect to these affections-the longsuffering which the
love of God causes Him to exercise towards His ungrateful people-at
last, that withdrawal on God's part which left His people a prey to
their own corruption, and to the snares of the enemy. The result is,
that the condition of His people obliges God to bring the Judgment upon
them which their sin called for, when all the warnings of God by His
messengers had been unavailing. But this gives place to the
accomplishment of the counsels of God, who brings His people to
repentance, after having long given them up to the fruits of their own
doings, and thus enables them to enjoy the effects of His counsels.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 14](hos014)

</div>
