<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa025)  [Next](isa027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 25 and 26.

Chapters 25 and 26 take the form of a song, in which the effect of God's
intervention is celebrated. Let us observe its principal subjects. God
is faithful. He accomplishes His purposes. He has brought the city of
human pride to nought through His power. All the strong organisation of
man's pride is destroyed. God has been the strength of the poor among
His people in the day of their distress, and the power of the enemy has
been brought low. He will execute justice in Zion for all people. He
will take away the veil that is upon their heart. The resurrection of
the faithful will have taken place. I say "the faithful," for it is
death swallowed up in victory. Moreover, 1 Corinthians is applies it
thus. The rebuke of His people (Israel) shall be entirely taken away.
The remnant ([Isa 25:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)) celebrate
their deliverance; they had waited for God, and the power of Jehovah
shall be displayed on their behalf. Moab, their haughty neighbour, shall
be subdued. \[See Note \#1\]

In chapter 26 the remnant sing in praise of the character of this
deliverance. They have a strong city, but its bulwarks are the salvation
of God. The strength of man has no place here; it is the foot of the
poor that treads down the lofty city. It is the judgment that the
righteous God executes Himself. The remnant had waited for Him in the
way of His judgments. The long-suffering of grace was in vain; it is
only when the judgments of God are in the earth \[See Note \#2\] that
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. Even when the
hand of Jehovah was lifted up to strike, they did not see. But they
shall see, in spite of themselves, and they shall be ashamed. The fire
of Jehovah's jealousy shall devour them; they shall not rise. But Israel
shall be raised, as from the dead, by the power of Jehovah.

Note \#1

Note, you have here all the results then of this judgment of God and
what is connected with it. The saints are raised, the power of evil cast
down from the heavens, the rebuke of Israel taken away, and the veil of
the covering taken off the face of all peoples.

Note \#2

I apprehend "the earth" is a more contracted sphere than "the world,"
the distinction especially lying in this, that it is the sphere in which
the revealed ways and government of God have been brought before men.
When this has been the case with the whole world, it becomes the earth.
The word "earth" is used for the land of Israel and for the earth in the
sense explained, and for the whole earth as a scene ordered of God.
Hence, when the scene with which God has already dealt is judged, then
it is that the wide world at large will learn righteousness; not, though
it ought to have been carried there, while the present system of grace
prevails.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 27](isa027)

</div>
