<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa004)  [Next](isa006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)

After this the Spirit of God begins to plead with the people, taking two
distinct grounds-namely, that which God had done for His people, and the
coming of Jehovah in the Person of Christ in glory. Had the people made
a suitable return to the care which Jehovah had lavished upon them? Were
they in a condition to receive Jehovah in their midst? Chapter 5 takes
up the first question, which addresses itself to the responsibility of
the people, in view of the care and the government of God. What could He
have done for His vine that He had not done? It has produced Him but
wild grapes. He makes known the consequences of this according to His
righteous government. His hedge, the protection with which He had
surrounded it, shall be taken away, and it shall be left a prey to the
ravages of the heathen. God, in pleading with Israel, shews them their
sins in detail. Then His hand is stretched forth against His people, and
terrible judgments fall upon them. Nevertheless, "His anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still." He will bring mighty
strangers against them, whose progress nothing can arrest, who will
carry the people into captivity. There shall be sorrow and mourning in
the land, and the light of their heavens shall be darkened. In the first
instance this will be Nebuchadnezzar, and even Sennacherib but still
more fully will it be the nations that come against Jerusalem in the
last days, and capture it, after having overrun and invaded all the
land. We shall have the details of this farther on.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 6](isa006)

</div>
