<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa061)  [Next](isa063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 62](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 61 and 62.

As chapters 50-53 presented Christ in His sufferings, chapter 61
exhibits Him in the full grace of His Person concerned in the blessing
of Israel. The three preceding chapters had revealed the judgment and
the intervention of Jehovah, at the same time pointing out the Redeemer.
We have seen the same principle in the structure of the prophecy from
chapter 40 to the end of chapter 48, as in the last series. Then in
chapter 49 the Messiah is specially introduced. So He is here from the
beginning of chapter 61 to Verse 6 of chapter 63. But there is a
progress necessarily accompanying the introduction, in the last series
of chapters, of the Person of Christ as the principal subject of
Jehovah's pleadings. We see that it is Jehovah Himself who is Christ,
and Christ who is Jehovah. "Wherefore, when I came," is the inquiry,
"was there no man?" Hence also there is the difference between the moral
sins of Israel against Jehovah, and the rejection of Himself in the
Person of the Messiah, which we have seen so clearly pointed out in
chapter 50. So also with respect to the repentance of the Jews. In the
former chapters the law is written in their hearts; they turn away from
iniquity, they trust in Jehovah; they hearken to the Spirit of prophecy,
to the servant of Jehovah; they are delivered. But when they shall see
their Redeemer in glory, then it is that the true repentance, the deep
affliction, shall take place at the sight of Him whom they have despised
and rejected, and who in His grace has borne their iniquities. Chapters
61, 62 appear to me too plain to need much remark. The manner in which
the Lord stopped in the middle of Verse 2 ([Isa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002)) will be observed, the time for
the fulfilment of the last part of the Verse not being yet come. But He
could set before them that which applied to His own Person in grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 63](isa063)

</div>
