<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa039)  [Next](isa041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)

The first part of that which might be called the second book of Isaiah
extends from chapter 40 to the end of chapter 48. The Messiah is,
comparatively speaking, but little introduced here. It is rather the
great question between Jehovah and idols, answered first by the success
of Cyrus and the capture of Babylon. For, though their glory cannot be
separated, there is Jehovah and His anointed. This is evidently
connected in grace with the deliverance of Israel, God's witness on the
earth, unworthy, as the nation was, to be so. At the same time these
ways of God shewed that there was no peace at all for the wicked in
Israel. This great truth is repeated twice over, being applied to the
two great controversies which God had with Israel. We will point out
some details to make all this evident. The first eight Verses of chapter
40 ([Isa 40:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001)) express in a very
remarkable manner the principles on which God acts: the grace flowing
from His own heart, when His chastisements had been fully inflicted. God
would comfort His people; and He speaks to the heart of Jerusalem, by
telling her that her warfare is accomplished. The herald proclaims the
coming of Jehovah. And here it is the fact, as deliverance: His
rejection is not mentioned. It is spoken of later in chapters 51, 53.
But with respect to the people, what must the prophet say? "All flesh is
grass." If all flesh is to see the glory of Jehovah, if He pleads in
vengeance with all flesh, this is where the testimony must begin. All
flesh is grass: Jehovah bloweth upon it. Is it thus with the Gentiles
only? No; "the people is grass." Comfort must begin with this. The grass
withereth; who, then, can be trusted in? God has spoken. "The word of
our God" (says the faith of the remnant-says the Spirit of prophecy)
"shall stand for ever." Then comes the prophetic testimony to the
blessedness of ransomed Zion, who proclaims to the cities of Judah the
presence of Jehovah-the Saviour, whose tender care is then described in
a touching manner. The glory of His divine Majesty is contrasted with
idols to Verse 26 ([Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)). He
then challenges Israel for their unbelief. He who is Jehovah fainteth
not, neither is weary. The depths of His wisdom are unsearchable; but
they that wait on Him renew their strength, and shall not grow weary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 41](isa041)

</div>
