<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg020)  [Next](rut000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 17 through 21.

The chapters that follow (17-21) are not comprised in the historical
order of this book. They lift the veil to disclose some incidents of the
inner life of this people whom the patience of God bore with so long,
touched with the afflictions of His people in the sufferings occasioned
by their sins. Had they been obedient when Jehovah was their King, their
prosperity had been secure. Self-willed as they were, the absence of
restraint-when they had no king-gave room to all kinds of licence. The
last event, related in this book, shews to what a height disorder had
risen in Israel and how they fell away immediately from God. But it
affords a very important lesson. If the state of God's people
collectively gives rise to iniquities which require discipline, the
whole people are involved in the chastisement that follows; the effect
of which is to make them take their condition to heart. That condition
had prevented the repression of iniquity, or its immediate punishment
when committed. But the people are set in the presence of God, who
judges the whole matter, and all the people must have to do with it.

Israel at first did not even take counsel with Jehovah to learn how the
sin should be dealt with. They acted from natural indignation (which was
nevertheless quite righteous). Jehovah allowed all this in order that
the people might learn where they were. The evil which required
chastening had so blunted their spiritual state that they had not the
thought of waiting in the first place on Jehovah to know what was to be
done. Their course of action is determined before they consult Him, for
they were far from Him. They merely ask who is to go up first. Jehovah
points out Judah, but Judah is defeated. Twice beaten when they expected
an easy victory, the people humbled and in tears have recourse again to
Jehovah, and inquire if they shall go up. Jehovah then gives them the
victory. Gibeah well deserved this discipline; but, to execute it,
Israel itself needed discipline, and God allowed all to take part in it
in order to make it take effect upon all.

But what a state were they all in, when the whole tribe of Benjamin
joined the men of Gibeah, when guilty of such enormities! And observe,
that Phinehas was still high priest, although he had already grown to
manhood in the wilderness. How patiently God dealt with this people,
delivering them when they had so quickly fallen into sin and into such
depths of sin! What does God not see in this world, and even in His
people? It is important to note this bringing to light of that inward
state which, in the general history, is not done. It sheds a much fuller
light on the ways of God. But it must be remarked that this is disaster
and shame within, and from within, and under God's hand, but not
judgment by enemies without through departure from God Himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Introduction](rut000)

</div>
