<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg000)  [Next](jdg002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

[Judges 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 1:1</span></span>

Thus, in the beginning of the book, we see evil and failure, and also
simple and blessed deliverances. But alas! the picture darkens more and
more. There are grievous features even in the conduct of the judges, and
the state of Israel becomes worse and worse; until weary of the results
of their own unfaithfulness, in spite of the presence of the prophet,
and the express word of God, they reject the kingship of the Almighty to
adopt human forms of government, and establish themselves on the same
footing as the world, when they had God for their king!

This unfaithfulness, indeed, foreseen of God, was the reason why God
left some of the nations in the midst of His people to prove them. The
presence of these nations was in itself a proof of Israel's lack of
energy and confidence in the power of God, who nevertheless would have
preserved them from their subsequent disasters. But in the wisdom of His
counsels, God, who knew His people, left these nations in their midst,
as a means of proving them. Israel will be fully blest only under
Messiah, who by His might will bring in their blessing, and by His might
will preserve it to them.

Alas! this history of Israel in Canaan is also that of the assembly. Set
up in heavenly blessing on the earth, it has failed from the beginning
in realising that which was given to it; and evil developed itself in it
as soon as the first and mighty instruments of blessing which had been
granted it were removed. Things have gone from bad to worse. There have
been revivals, but still the same principle of unbelief; and the decay
of each revival has marked increasing progress in evil and unbelief in
proportion to the good which has been thus forsaken. The revival never
reaches to the extent of laying hold of what God is, what He revealed
Himself as at first for His people, what the first power of revelation
and action of the Spirit. When departed from, God is more and more lost.
The part of His blessing afresh brought forward is neglected and
abandoned, so that there is a more entire forgetfulness of Him, and
nature and the world resume their place, but now not merely without, but
to the exclusion of, God, and setting up of man and nature, by departing
from the primitive source of blessing and strength \[See Note \#1\].

Nevertheless God has always had His own people, and His faithfulness has
never failed them, whether in secret, or manifesting openly, in His
kindness, His grace towards His assembly in public power-a power that it
ought always to have enjoyed. This sad succession of falls will have an
end at the coming of Jesus, who will accomplish His purposes respecting
the assembly in its heavenly glory; purposes, of which it should have
always been the faithful witness here below.

The power and the presence of God did not forsake Israel at the time of
Joshua's departure. It was always to be found wherever there was faith
to make use of it. This is the first truth which this book presents. It
is what Paul said to the Philippians, "Work out your own salvation with
fear and trembling, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my
absence; for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do."

This presence of God with them in blessing to faith makes itself known
at one time by victory over most powerful enemies ([Jdg
1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)); at another by the obtaining of
special blessing, "springs of water" ([Jdg
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#013)), and in all the detail of
their realisation of the promises. The Philistines even were driven out
([Jdg 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018)). But at the same time, the
faith of Judah and Simeon, of Ephraim and Manasseh, and of all the
tribes failed; and consequently their energy, and their sense of the
value of God's presence, and of their own consecration to Him, failed
also, together with their perception of the evil existing among their
adversaries-a perception which would have rendered their presence in the
midst of them insupportable.

What dishonour to God, what sin, to spare, to tolerate, such people!
What unfaithfulness towards God was this indifference; and what an
infallible source of evil and corruption in Israel! But they were
insensible to all this. They were wanting in spiritual discernment as
well as in faith; and the sources of evil and misery dwelt beside the
people, even in the land, the land of God and of Israel.

Note \#1

It is a striking fact in man's history that the first thing that he has
always done when God has set up something of His own on the earth has
been to spoil it. Man himself eats the forbidden fruit; Noah gets drunk;
Aaron's sons offer strange fire; Israel makes the golden calf; Solomon
falls into idolatry; Nebuchadnezzar sets up his idol and persecutes.
God's patience has gone on dealing with souls, all through, in spite of
it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 2](jdg002)

</div>
