<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg008)  [Next](jdg010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 9, 10, 11, and 12.

After Gideon's death we see the results of this distance from God in the
internal struggles which took place between the children of Israel. They
are ungrateful to the house of Gideon, and war breaks out amongst them
through the leader whom they set up, and who, instead of fighting with
the enemies of God, only seeks dominion over the people who are now at
peace (Judges 9).

The overthrow of the men of Shechem and of Abimelech is followed by
temporary peace, after which the people fall again into their idolatrous
iniquity, and Jehovah sells them into the hands of the nations whose
gods they serve. Sorely distressed by their enemies, the children of
Israel cry unto Jehovah, who reproaches them for their past conduct, and
sends them back to the gods they had been worshipping. Then the people
put away the strange gods from among them. Jehovah is moved with
compassion (Judges 10).

Israel, without a leader, have recourse to the captain of a troop of
"vain men," and promise to obey him if he will put himself at their
head. Jephthah consents. But although this was a deliverance, yet we see
in it all how deeply Israel had fallen. Jephthah himself suffers cruelly
from his rash vow; and, moreover, when the pride of the Ephraimites led
them to complain that they had not been treated with due respect, the
calmness and wisdom of one who knew Jehovah as Gideon did, were not
found in Jephthah. What a difference between these days and those of
Joshua! God multiplies His deliverances; but this has no effect on the
unbelief of the people, and their condition continues to grow worse and
worse (Judges 11, 12).

After Jephthah, Israel again enjoys an interval of peace under the
guidance of several judges whom God raises up. But they soon return to
their former course of sin, and Jehovah delivers them into the hand of
the Philistines. Samson's history gives us the commencement of Israel's
relationship with these bitter enemies, which only ceased when David had
subdued them. The Philistines at this period were at the height of their
power. But the important thing here is the history of Samson (Judges
13-16).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 10](jdg010)

</div>
