<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer051)  [Next](lam000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001)

The last chapter forms no part of the book of Jeremiah, properly so
called. We find in it events relative to the destruction of Jerusalem
and of the temple. After the remarks we have made, that which is said in
it of Babylon will be easily understood.

I recapitulate here the principles of this book on account of their
importance. The empire of Babylon, in consequence of the unfaithfulness
of the house of David, was established by God Himself, and entrusted
with the government of the world. But Babylon not only oppressed Israel,
but set up idolatry, and corrupted the world. He who should have been a
worshipper of the true God, and an instrument of His power, established,
as far as he could, the influence of the enemy. God has judged him. The
empire which God Himself established has been entirely overthrown. This
judgment was executed against the pride of man, and against idolatry. At
the same time it was the deliverance of Israel. This last consideration
gave rise to a declaration on God's part of what Israel was to Him, and
what it shall be in the last days. But the subject treated of is the
Babylon of that day. Since then God has permitted other powers to exist,
governing the world with universal dominion, until the final
accomplishment of all His purposes. These empires have subsisted
according to His will, have been raised up or cast down as He saw good.
But neither of them has held precisely the same place as Babylon. None
of them have been formally established in the place of Israel, nor has
the destruction of any of them been the occasion of Israel's
restoration. The word of prophecy assures us that at the end of the
days, the judgment of the last empire will have this effect. The
judgment of Babylon has, in a manner, foreshadowed it; as its moral
character commenced the sad history of these monarchies, and served as a
model to them in many respects as to the evil that should be developed
until the end. But to understand the fundamental principles of this
history, and the dealings of God, the place which this first empire held
in these dealings must be clearly and distinctly kept in mind. Besides
the immense fact of the substitution of empire in man's hand, for the
immediate exercise of God's government on the earth, the diligent
testimony which God sent, and the warnings to king after king, to people
and to priests, is very striking in this book, the patience of God's
love and interest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Introduction](lam000)

</div>
