<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](isa066)  [Next](jer001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Jeremaih

The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah has a different character from that of
Isaiah. It does not contain the same development of the counsels of God
respecting this earth that Isaiah does. It is we, that we are told many
things in it concerning the nations; but it is principally composed of
testimony addressed immediately to the conscience of the people, on the
subject of their moral condition at the time the prophet speaks, and
with an eye to the judgment with which they were threatened. Judah had
forsaken Jehovah; for their repentance under Josiah was but a fair
appearance, and under the kings that succeeded him their degradation was
complete. The prophet's heart was overwhelmed with grief, because of his
love for the people; at the same time that he was filled with a deep
sense of their relationship with the Lord. The sense of this produced a
continual conflict in his soul between the thought of the value of the
people as the people of God, and a holy jealousy for the glory of God
and His rights over His people-rights which they were trampling under
foot. This was an incurable wound to his heart. He had pleaded for the
people, he had stood in the breach for them before Jehovah; but he saw
that it was all in vain: the people rejected God and the testimony that
He sent them. God Himself would no longer hearken to prayer made for
Israel. Jeremiah prophesies under this impression: a sorrowful task,
indeed, and one which made the prophet truly a man of sorrow. And
although he could always say that, if the people repented, they would be
received in grace, he well knew that the people had even no thought of
repenting. Two things sustained him in this painful service: (for what
could be more painful than to announce judgment for their iniquities, to
a people beloved of God?) first of all, the energy of the Spirit of God,
which filled his heart and compelled him to announce the judgment of
God, in spite of contradiction and persecution; and then the revelation
of the people's final blessing according to the unchangeable counsels of
God. After this brief notice of the spirit of the Book of Jeremiah, the
proofs and details of which we shall find in going through his
prophecies, let us now examine these in succession.

It is well known that the order of the prophecies in the Septuagint is
different from that in the Hebrew Bible. But I see no reason for not
receiving the latter. There is no doubt that it does not preserve the
chronological order. The names of the kings \[See Note \#1\] in the
successive chapters clearly prove this. But it appears to me that, where
there is chronological confusion, the subjects are classed, and that
according to the mind of the Spirit.

The first twenty-four chapters have rather a different character from
those that follow. To the end of chapter 24 it is a reasoning, a moral
pleading with the people. In chapter 25 there is a formal prophecy of
judgment on divers nations by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar. And afterwards
we find prophecies much more distinct from each other, and connected
with historical details.

Chapters 30-33 contain promises of assured blessing for the last days.
From chapter 39 it is the history of that which followed the taking of
Jerusalem, and the judgment of Egypt and Babylon.

We will now state the different distinct prophecies; chapter 1, chapters
2-6, chapters 7-10, chapters 11-13, chapters 14, 15, chapters 16, 17,
chapters 18-20, chapters 21-24, chapter 25, chapter 26, chapter 27 ([Jer
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#001), read Zedekiah instead of
"Jehoiakim"), chapter 28, chapter 29, chapters 30, 31, chapter 32,
chapter 33 (this last, however, is connected with the preceding one),
chapter 34, chapter 35, chapter 36, chapters 37, 38, chapter 39,
chapters 40-44, chapter 45, chapter 46, chapter 47, chapter 48, chapter
49, [Jer 49:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001), [Jer
49:7-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007), [Jer
49:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023), [Jer
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028), [Jer
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029), [Jer
49:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#030), ; chapters 50, 51. Chapter
52 was not written by Jeremiah.

\]There can be nothing more striking in the way of deep affliction than
that of the prophet. He is distressed; his heart is broken. One sees too
that God has made choice of a naturally feeble heart, easily cast down
and discouraged (even while filling it with His own strength), in order
that the anguish, the complaints, the distress of soul, the indignation
of a weak heart that resents oppression while unable to throw it off or
overcome it, being all poured out before Him, should bear testimony
against the people whose inveterate wickedness called for His vengeance.
The affliction of Christ, whose Spirit wrought that of Jeremiah, was
infinitely deeper; but His perfect communion with His Father caused all
the anguish, that in Jeremiah's case broke out into complaints, to be in
secret between Jesus and His Father. It is very rarely expressed in the
Gospels. He is entirely for others in grace. \[See Note \#2\] In the
Psalms we see more of His feelings. In Jeremiah's case, it was proper
that the anguish of the faithful remnant should be expressed before God.
The absolute perfection of the Lord Jesus, and the calmness which,
through the presence of God, accompanies His perfection in all His ways,
allowed of no complaint, whatever might be the inward anguish of His
heart. He thanks in the same hour that He can justly upbraid. Sympathy
for others became the position of Jesus. We see that our precious Lord
never failed in this.

But it was equally becoming that the outpouring of heart of the
faithful, who needed this sympathy, should be expressed by the Holy
Ghost. It is not that there was no weakness in the heart that poured
itself out; but if the Spirit lays it open, it is evident that He must
express it as it is; otherwise it were useless and false. Consequently
Jeremiah enters much more personally into his prophecies than any other
prophet. \[See Note \#3\] He represents the people in their true
position before God-such as God could recognise, as being before Him in
this character-in order to see whether, receiving from God that which
applied to this position, and expressing the sentiments inspired by such
a position, it was possible to reach the conscience and win the heart of
the people; always remembering that these sentiments were expressed
according to the Spirit, and accompanied by the most direct and positive
prophecies of that which God would bring upon the people. It is to be
observed also, that a great part of that which was written was not
addressed in the first instance to the people, but to God. This position
of Jeremiah's, as the representative before God of the true interests of
the people, or of the remnant, causes him to be looked at sometimes as
though he were Jerusalem itself, and, at other times, as a remnant
separated from it and set apart for God.

But these points will be better understood by examining the passages
which bring them into notice. The period during which Jeremiah
prophesied was of considerable length, and embraced the whole time of
Israel's decline, from the year after that in which Josiah began to
cleanse Jerusalem and all the land, until the final destruction of
Jerusalem by the army of the Chaldeans; and even a little while after in
Egypt, a period of more than forty years-a period throughout of distress
and anguish. For although Josiah was a godly king, the reformation of
the people was only an outward one, as we shall see. So that the anguish
of one who saw with God was so much the greater on account of this
appearance of piety. "And Jehovah was not turned away from his fierce
anger, because of the sins of Manasseh." Nevertheless the prophet
distinguishes between the two periods, that is, the reign of Josiah, and
that of his successors.

Excepting in chapters 21-24 there are no dates for the first twenty-four
chapters. It is probable that they were mostly given under Josiah's
reign. They contain moral arguments, the expression of the prophet's
sorrow of heart, and solemn warnings of the coming invasion from the
north. The four chapters I have specified have no chronological order,
and are probably composed of prophecies given at different periods. They
contain the judgment of the different branches of the house of David
successively, as well as that of the false prophets who deceived the
people. They end by declaring the fate of the captives in Babylon, and
of those that remained with Zedekiah in Jerusalem-the two very different
from each other.

Note \#1:

In chapter 27 "Jehoiakim" should be "Zedekiah" ([Jer
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#012) and [Jer
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#001))

Note \#2:

Compare Matthew 26 where this is brought out in the most striking way.
It is very precious to see both this perfect result in Christ and at the
same time all that He felt in His heart as man, both as sensible to
circumstances without and so deeply exercised within. Perfect exercises
within produce perfect quietness in walk without, for in both God is
fully brought in. If we avoid the full dealing with the matter with God,
the heart cannot act for Him as if all were disposed of: and that is
peace in action. Yet how precious to see the reality of Christ's human
nature in all the intimate exercises of His spirit.

Note \#3:

There is something analogous in Jonah. But there the circumstances of
the prophet are an episode, and are not connected with the testimony he
bore, unless by the single principle of grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 1](jer001)

</div>
