<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer019)  [Next](jer021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 19 and 20.

Chapters 19 and 20 shew us the judgment of Jerusalem announced in terms
that require little explanation; and we have in chapter 20 a sample of
the opposition of the priests, and of Jeremiah's sufferings. But this
does not prevent Jeremiah's denouncing the priest himself, and repeating
that which he had said of Jerusalem. Nevertheless we see the effect of
these sufferings on his heart. He was compelled, as it were, by the Lord
to bear this testimony. He has not (and it is the same with the remnant)
the willing spirit that rejoices in tribulation by the power of the Holy
Ghost. He was the subject of constant mockery. They watched for his
halting, so that he would gladly have been silent; but the word of
Jehovah was like fire in his bones. Alas! we understand all this-the
deep iniquity of the men who are called the people of God; the way in
which the feeble heart recoils before this iniquity, that has neither
heart nor conscience; and how on these occasions the word is too strong
in us to be shut up in our heart. Nevertheless with all this fear he had
also the consciousness that Jehovah was with him, and he again asks for
vengeance (which, in fact, is deliverance, and the only deliverance of
those who have the testimony of Christ in such a position). This
deliverance is celebrated in Verse 13 ([Jer
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#013)); but in Verses 14-18 ([Jer
20:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#014)), we see to what a point
personal grief may drive those who are subjected to such a trial as
this. See the same thing in Job-a picture of the same condition, that is
to say, of a soul tried by all the malice of Satan, without the full
knowledge of grace, in the sense of its own nothingness, and in the
forgetfulness of self. This will be precisely the state of the remnant
in the last days. Christ is the model of perfection in what answered to
these circumstances of trial, the reality of which He thoroughly
experienced and felt, when He had yet to undergo for others what laid
the foundation of grace for them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 21](jer021)

</div>
