<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1004)  [Next](jo2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001)

But a danger exists on the other side. It may be, that we love the
brethren because they are pleasant to us; they furnish us with agreeable
society, in which our conscience is not wounded. A counter-proof is
therefore given us. "Hereby we know that we love the children of God, if
we love God and keep his commandments." It is not as children of God
that I love the brethren, unless I love God of whom they are born. I may
love them individually as companions, or I may love some among them, but
not as the children of God, if I do not love God Himself. If God Himself
has not His true place in my heart, that which bears the name of love to
the brethren shuts out God; and that in so much the more complete and
subtle manner, because our link with them bears the sacred name of
brotherly love.

Now there is a touchstone even for this love of God namely, obedience to
His commands. If I walk with the brethren themselves in disobedience to
their Father, it is certainly not because they are His children that I
love them. If it were because I loved the Father and because they were
His children, I should assuredly like them to obey Him. To walk then in
disobedience with the children of God, under the pretext of brotherly
love, is not to love them as the children of God. If I loved them as
such, I should love their Father and my Father, and I could not walk in
disobedience to Him and call it a proof that I loved them because they
were His.

If I also loved them because they were His children, I should love all
who are such, because the same motive engages me to love them all.

The universality of this love with regard to all the children of God;
its exercise in practical obedience to His will: these are the marks of
true brotherly love. That which has not these marks is a mere carnal
party spirit, clothing itself with the name and the form of brotherly
love. Most certainly I do not love the Father if I encourage His
children in disobedience to Him.

Now there is an obstacle to this obedience, and that is the world. The
world has its forms, which are very far from obedience to God When we
are occupied only with Him and His will, the world's enmity soon breaks
out. It also acts, by its comforts and its delights, on the heart of man
as walking after the flesh. In short, the world and the commandments of
God are in opposition to each other; but the commandments of God are not
grievous to those who are born of Him, for he who is born of God
overcomes the world. He possesses a nature and a principle that surmount
the difficulties that the world opposes to his walk. His nature is the
divine nature, for he is born of God; his principle is that of faith.
His nature is insensible to the attractions which this world offers to
the flesh, and that because it has, altogether apart from this world, a
spirit independent of it, and an object of its own which governs it.
Faith directs its steps, but faith does not see the world, nor that
which is present. Faith believes that Jesus, whom the world rejected, is
the Son of God. The world therefore has lost its power over it. Its
affections and its trust are fixed on Jesus, who was crucified, owning
Him as the Son of God. Thus the believer, detached from the world, has
the boldness of obedience, and does the will of God which abides for
ever.

The apostle sums up, in a few words, the testimony of God respecting the
life eternal which He has given us.

This life is not in the first Adam, it is in the Second in the Son of
God. Man, as born of Adam, does not possess it, does not acquire it. He
ought indeed to have gained life under the law. This characterised it,
"Do this and live." But man did not and could not.

God gives him eternal life, and this life is in His Son. He who has the
Son has life, and he who has not the Son has not life.

Now what is the testimony rendered to this gift of life eternal ? The
witnesses are three: the Spirit, the water, and the blood. This Jesus,
the Son of God, is He who came by water and by blood; not by water only,
but by water and by blood. The Spirit also bears witness because He is
truth. That to which they bear witness is that God has given us eternal
life, and that this life is in His Son. But whence did this water and
the blood flow ? It was from the pierced side of Jesus. It is the
judgment of death pronounced and executed (compare [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)) on the flesh, on all that is of
the old man, on the first Adam. Not that the sin of the first Adam was
in the flesh of Christ, but that Jesus died in it as a sacrifice for
sin. "In that he died he died unto sin once." Sin in the flesh was
condemned in the death of Christ in the flesh. There was no other
remedy. The flesh could not be modified nor subjected to the law. The
life of the first Adam was nothing but sin in the principle of its will;
it could not be subject to the law. Our purification as to the old man
is its death. He who is dead is justified from sin. We are therefore
baptised to have part in the death of Jesus. We are crucified with
Christ; nevertheless we live, but not we it is Christ who lives in us.
Participating in the life of Christ risen, we reckon ourselves as dead
with Him; for why live of this new life, this life of the second Adam,
if we could live before God in the life of the first Adam? No; by living
in Christ we have accepted by faith the sentence of death, passed by God
on the first Adam. This is christian purification: even the death of the
old man, because we are made partakers of life in Christ Jesus. "We are
dead " crucified with Him We need a perfect purification before God; we
have it; for that which was impure no longer exists: what exists, as
born of God, is perfectly pure.

He came by water a powerful testimony, as flowing from the side of a
dead Christ, that life is not to be sought for in the first Adam; for
Christ, as coming for man, taking up his cause, the Christ come in the
flesh, had to die: else He had remained alone in His own purity. Life is
to be sought for in the Son of God risen from among the dead.
Purification is by death.

But it was not by water only that He came; it was also by blood. The
expiation of our sins was as necessary as the moral purification of our
soul. We possess it in the blood of a slain Christ. Death alone could
expiate them and blot them out. And Jesus died for us. The guilt of the
believer no longer exists before God; Christ has put Himself in his
place. The life is on high, and we are raised up together with Him, God
having forgiven us all our trespasses. Expiation is by death.

The third witness is the Spirit: put first in the order of their
testimony on earth, as He alone gives witness in power so that we know
the other two; last, in their historic order, for such in fact was that
order, death first and only thereafter the Holy Ghost. \[See Note \#22\]
In effect it is the testimony of the Spirit, His presence in us, which
enables us to appreciate the value of the water and the blood. We should
never have understood the practical bearing of the death of Christ, if
the Holy Ghost were not to the new man a revealing power of its import
and its efficacy. Now the Holy Ghost came down from a risen and ascended
Christ; and thus we know that eternal life is given us in the Son of
God.

The testimony of these three witnesses meets together in this same
truth, namely, that grace that God Himself-has given us eternal life;
and that this life is in the Son. Man had nothing to do in it, except by
his sins. It is the gift of God. And the life that He gives is in the
Son. The testimony is the testimony of God. How blessed to have such a
testimony, and that from God Himself, and in perfect grace!

We have then the three things: the cleansing, the expiation, and the
presence of the Holy Ghost as the witness that eternal life is given us
in the Son, who was slain for man when in relationship with man here
below. He could but die for man s he is. Life is elsewhere, namely, in
Himself.

Here the doctrine of the epistle ends. The apostle wrote these things in
order that they who believed in the Son might know that they had eternal
life. He does not give means of examination to make the faithful doubt
whether they had eternal life; but seeing that there were seducers who
endeavoured to turn them aside as deficient in something important, and
who presented themselves as possessing some superior light he points out
to them the marks of life, in order to re-assure them; developing the
excellence of that life, and of their position as enjoying it; and in
order that they might understand that God had given it to them, and that
they might be in no wise shaken in mind.

He then speaks of the practical confidence in God which flows from all
this confidence exercised with a view to all our wants here below, all
that our hearts desire to ask of God. We know that He always listens to
everything that we ask in accordance with His will. Precious privilege!
The Christian himself would not desire anything to be granted him that
was contrary to the will of God. But for everything that is according to
His will, His ear is ever open to us, ever attentive. He always
hearkens; He is not like man, often occupied so that he cannot listen,
or careless so that he will not. God always hears us, and assuredly He
does not fail in power: the attention He pays us is a proof of His
good-will. We receive therefore the things that we ask of Him. He grants
our requests. What a sweet relationship! What a high privilege! And it
is one also of which we may avail ourselves in charity for others.

If a brother sins and God chastises him, we may petition for that
brother, and life shall be restored him. Chastisement tends to the death
of the body (compare Job 33, 34; [Jam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014), [Jam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)); we pray for the offender and he
is healed. Otherwise the sickness takes its course. All unrighteousness
is sin, and there is such sin as is unto death. This does not seem to me
to be some particular sin, but all sin which has such a character that,
instead of awakening christian charity, it awakens christian
indignation. Thus Ananias and Sapphira committed a sin unto death. It
was a lie, but a lie under such circumstances that it excited horror
rather than compassion. We can easily understand this in other cases.

Thus far as to sin and its chastisement. But the positive side is also
brought before us. As born of God, we do not commit sin at all, we keep
ourselves, and "the wicked one toucheth us not." He has nothing
wherewith to entice the new man. The enemy has no objects of attraction
to the divine nature in us, which is occupied, by the action of the Holy
Ghost, with divine and heavenly things, or with the will of God. Our
part therefore is so to live the new man occupied with the things of God
and of the Spirit.

The apostle ends his epistle by specifying these two things: our nature,
our mode of being, as Christians; and the object that has been
communicated to us in order to produce and nourish faith.

We know that we are of God; and that not in a vague way, but in contrast
with all that is not us a principle of immense importance, which makes
christian position exclusive by.its very nature. It is not merely good,
or bad, or better; but it is of God. And nothing which is not of God
(that is to say, which has not its origin in Him) could have this
character and this place. The whole world lies in the wicked one.

The Christian has the certainty of these two things by virtue of his
nature. which discerns and knows that which is of God, and thereby
judges all that is opposed to it. The two are not merely good and bad,
but of God and of the enemy. This as to the nature.

With regard to the object of this nature, we know that the Son of God is
come a truth of immense importance also. It is not merely that there is
good and that there is evil; but the Son of God has Himself come into
this scene of misery, to present an object to our hearts. But there is
more than this. He has given us an understanding that in the midst of
.all the falsehood of this world, of which Satan is the prince, we may
know Him that is true the true One. Immense privilege which alters our
whole position! The power of the world by which Satan blinded us is
completely broken, and we are brought into the true light; and in that
light we see and know Him who is true, who is in Himself perfection;
that by which all things can be perfectly discerned and judged according
to truth. But this is not all. We are in this true One, partakers of His
nature, and abiding in Him, and in order that we may enjoy the source of
truth. \[See Note \#23\] Now it is in Jesus that we are. It is thus, it
is in Him, that we are in connection with the perfections of God.

We may again remark here that which gives a character to the whole
Epistle the manner in which God and Christ are united in the apostle's
mind. It is on account of this that he so frequently says, "He," when we
must understand "Christ," although he had previously spoken of God: for
instance, [Jo1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020). And here, "We are
in him that is true \[that is to say\] , in his Son Jesus Christ. This
is the true God and eternal life."

Behold then the divine links of our position! We are in Him who is true;
this is the nature of Him in whom we are. Now, in reality as to the
nature, it is God Himself; as to the Person, and as to the manner of
being in Him, it is His Son Jesus Christ. It is in the Son, in the Son
as man, that we are in fact as to His Person; but He is the true God,
the veritable God. Nor is this all; but we have life in Him. He is also
the eternal life, so that we possess it in Him. We know the true God, we
have eternal life.

All that is outside this is an idol. May God preserve us from it, and
teach us by His grace to preserve ourselves from it! This gives occasion
to the Spirit of God to speak of "the truth" in the two short Epistles
that follow.

Note \#22

Even the orderly reception of the Holy Ghost was so. (see [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)).

Note \#22

I have already noticed this passage as being a kind of key to the way we
really know God, and dwell in Him. It speaks of God as Him we know, in
whom we are, explaining it by saying, that it is in His Son Jesus Christ
our Lord; only here, as follows in the text, it is truth and not love.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John Chapter 1](jo2001)

</div>
