<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 John Index](jo2)  
  [Previous](jo1005)  [Next](jo3001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001)

[2 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo2 1:1</span></span>

The Second and Third Epistles of John insist on the truth. The Second
warns the faithful against the reception of those who do not teach the
doctrine of Christ, especially the truth respecting the Person of
Christ. The Third encourages believers to receive and help those who
teach it. Accordingly they both (and the Second especially) lay stress
on "the truth."

The apostle loved this elect lady, "in the truth;" as did also all those
who had known the truth, and that for the truth's sake. He wished her
blessing in truth and in love. He rejoiced that he had found some who
were her children walking in the truth. He desired that there should be
mutual love among Christians, but this was love, that they should keep
the commandments; for many deceivers were come into the world. Now
whosoever transgressed, and did not abide in the doctrine of Christ, had
not God. He ends his epistle, of which we have given an almost complete
summary, by exhorting this lady, in case any one should come and not
bring this doctrine, not to receive him into her house, nor say to him,
"God bless you, or be with you," or "I salute you." For to do so would
be to make herself a partaker in the evil he was doing.

The false doctrine which was abroad at that moment was the denial of the
truth of Christ come in the flesh; but the apostle says in a general way
that, if any one transgressed and did not abide in the doctrine of
Christ, he had not God.

We learn several important things in this little epistle. The mission of
a man who went about preaching was never brought into question, but the
doctrine which he brought; if he brought sound doctrine he was welcome.

A woman having the word as this epistle, for example was capable of
judging his doctrine, and responsible to do so. Inexorable rigour was to
be maintained, if the doctrine as to the Person of Christ was touched.
The door was to be shut against whoever falsified it. They were not even
to say to him, "I salute you;" for they who did so became partakers of
his evil work. It would be to help on the deceits of Satan.

Moreover the semblance of love which does not maintain the truth, but
accommodates itself to that which is not the truth, is not love
according to God. It is the taking advantage of the name of love in
order to help on the seductions of Satan. In the last days the test of
true love is the maintenance of the truth. God would have us love one
another; but the Holy Ghost, by whose power we receive this divine
nature, and who pours the love of God into our hearts is the Spirit of
truth; and His office is to glorify Christ. Therefore it is impossible
that a love which can put up with a doctrine that falsifies Christ, and
which is indifferent to it, can be of the Holy Ghost still less so, it
such indifference be set up as the proof of that love.

The doctrine of the reward and crown of glory, which the labourer
possesses in the fruits of his ministry, is presented in a very strong
light in Verse 8 ([Jo2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008)) This
Second Epistle puts Christians on their guard against all that is
equivocal with respect to the person of Christ; and exhorts to an
unwavering firmness on this point.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 John Chapter 1](jo3001)

</div>
