<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job034)  [Next](job036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 32 through 37.

But these spiritual affections of Job did not prevent his turning this
consciousness of integrity into a robe of self-righteousness which hid
God from him, and even hid him from himself. He declares himself to be
more righteous than God ([Job 10:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007);
[Job 16:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#014); [Job
23:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#011); [Job
27:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#002)). Elihu reproves him for this,
and on the other hand explains the ways of God. He shews that God visits
man and chastises him, in order that when subdued and broken down-if
there is one who can shew him the point of moral contact between his
soul and God, in which his soul would stand in truth before Him \[See
Note \#1\] -God may act in grace and blessing, and deliver him from the
evil that oppresses him. Elihu goes on to shew him that, if God
chastises, it is becoming in man to set himself before God to learn
wherein he has done wrong: in short, that the ways of God are right,
that He withdraweth not His eyes from the righteous, but if they are in
affliction He shews them their transgressions, and if they return to Him
in obedience when He openeth their ear to discipline, He will give them
prosperity; but that the hypocrite shall perish. The first case which
Elihu brings forward (chap. 33) is God's dealings with men. He awakens
their consciences to their state, and puts His bridle on the pride and
self-will of man. God chastises and humbles him. The second is specially
with the righteous (chap. 36), the case of positive transgression but in
one righteous in God's sight, from whom He withdraws not His eyes, in
whom He allowed not iniquity; but in the first case he was in the path
of destruction. It was this case2\] which needed the interpreter to
place him in uprightness before God. Finally, he insists upon the
incomprehensible power of God Almighty.

Note \#1

This is a very important point. God can bless in a direct manner with
the light of His grace, when the soul is brought into its true place, to
what it really is in His sight. Then, whatever its state may be, He can
bless it, in respect of that state, with increased light and grace. If I
have got far from Him, and careless in walk, when I have the
consciousness how far I am, He can fully and directly bless. But the
soul must be brought into the recognition of its state, or there would
be no real blessing; I should not see God in unison with it. For its
sensible state did not answer to its real state in God's sight.

Note \#2

In this case it may be a first conviction of sin, or the knowledge of
self where self has never been really judged, as was Job's case.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 36](job036)

</div>
