<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon002)  [Next](jon004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001)

And now the second testimony begins. All that Israel could have been,
all that belonged to man as responsible in himself, as far as testimony
was concerned, has failed for ever. Christ Himself, the faithful One,
has been rejected. Israel, consequently as the vessel of God's testimony
in the flesh, is set aside. It is the risen One only, who can now bear
testimony; and, we may add, bear it even to Israel, who is now become
the object of mercy, instead of becoming the vessel of promise and of
testimony. But this makes God return, so to speak, into His own
character of lovingkindness. If Israel cannot, as a righteous one, be
the vessel of the testimony of righteousness (and even, as a sinner, has
rejected it), God returns to His own gracious character, as a faithful
Creator; from which, moreover, in the depth of His own being, He never
departed, although He put man to the proof, by bringing him into
relationship with Himself, under every possible advantage, to see
whether he could be a witness of righteousness-of God on the earth.
Jonah knew at heart that there was grace in God. Assuredly he and his
nation had experienced it. But in this case, unless righteousness were
apart from mercy, so that he who stood as witness of this righteousness
might be honoured-unless it were vindictive, so that he as its witness
might be exalted-he would have nothing to do with it. Thenceforward he
became incapable of it. For, in truth, God was gracious; and such a
witness of Him as Jonah would have had was impossible-would not have
been true. It is on this account that grace (that is, the revelation of
grace) is identified with mercy towards the Gentiles. Is He the God of
the Jews only? Nay, verily, but of the Gentiles also. And the
casting-off of the Jews, as Jews, becomes the reconciling of the world.
The same Lord is rich unto all that call upon Him, that the Gentiles may
glorify God for His mercy. \[See Note \#1\]

This is God's controversy with Jonah at the end. He would refuse God the
right of shewing mercy to His helpless creatures, and insist upon His
rigorous execution of the sentence upon the Gentile world without even
leaving space for repentance. God answers him, not at first by unfolding
the counsels of His grace, but by appealing to the rights of His
sovereign goodness, to His nature, to His own character. Nineveh has
hearkened to God. Now, if God threatens, it is in order that man may
turn from his iniquity and be spared. Why else should He warn the
sinner? Why not leave him to ripen unwarned for judgment? But these are
not the ways of God.

And we may remark here that, in the case of Nineveh, it is not faith in
Jehovah, as in the case of the terrified mariners. The effect of the
dreadful troubles that will fall upon Israel in the last days, as
judgment upon the unfaithful witness of Jehovah, will be to make this
God of judgment known, and to cause the great name of Jehovah to be
glorified in all the earth ([Jon 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#014);
[Jon 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#016)). With respect to the last
days, we have seen that this is the testimony of all the prophets \[See
Note \#2\], as well as that of the Psalms. \[See Note \#3\] Here it is
simply God. The inhabitants of Nineveh believed God. It is the effect of
the word of God on their conscience. They confess, and turn away from
their sin. They acknowledge the judgment of God to be just and His word
true; and God pardons them and does not execute His judgment. Moreover,
this is in accordance with His ways as revealed by Jeremiah.

Note \#1

Hence, also, we may add, it is connected with resurrection in its
accomplishment. This indeed, has a deeper cause-the state of man by
nature; but this was brought out, in dispensation, by the failure of the
Jews in connection with Christ after the flesh.

Note \#2

See Isaiah 66; [Eze 36:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#036); [Eze
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#028); [Eze
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#007), [Eze
39:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#022); [Zac
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011); ; and a multitude of other
passages.

Note \#3

See [Psa 9:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015); [Psa
83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018); and all the Psalms at the end
of the book.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 4](jon004)

</div>
