<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

Chapter 7 lays open the principles of God's government, or His ways in
the midst of His people who are in conflict. Victory leads to
negligence. The work is thought easy. After a manifestation of God's
power there is a kind of confidence which in reality is only
self-confidence, for it neglects God. What proves this is that God is
not consulted. Ai was but a small city. Two or three thousand men could
easily take it. They went up and viewed the country, but God was
forgotten. The consequence of this will be seen. If they had taken
counsel of Jehovah, either He would have given no answer on account of
the accursed thing, or He would have made its presence known. But they
did not seek His counsel; they went forward, and they were defeated. The
people of God surrounded by the enemy, have lost their strength, and
flee before the least city in the land. What Will they do now? This is
more than they know. Engaged in battle, and unable to conquer, what can
they do there, where victory alone is their safety? "The hearts of the
people melted and became as water." Joshua cries unto Jehovah, for in
such a case even he who has the Spirit is taken by surprise, not having
acted according to the Spirit. He must fall on his face before Jehovah,
for their condition is not normal, not according to the Spirit who is
the only guide and wisdom of His people. Joshua however recalls the
power by which God had brought the people over Jordan, and contrasts it
with their present condition, so evidently inconsistent with it.
"Wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver
us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? Would to God we had
been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan, O Lord! what shall I
say?"

This was a perturbed state of mind, the effect of a mixture of unbelief
with the remembrance of the wonders which the power of God had wrought.
Joshua loves the people, and he sets before God the glory of His name;
yet with a timorous wish that they had remained on the other side of
Jordan (and what to do there? for unbelief ever reasons badly), away
from the conflict which led to such disasters-a wish that betrayed the
unbelief which disturbed his heart.

Such is the state of a believer's soul in the conflict which the Holy
Ghost brings him into, when the state of his soul does not inwardly
correspond with the presence of the Holy Ghost who is our only strength
for conflict. There is no escape. The position in which the saints find
themselves is one which absolutely requires strength; yet the very
nature of God prevents His bestowing it. We lament, we recognise His
power, we dread the enemy. We talk of God's glory: but we are thinking
of our own fears and our own condition. Yet the thing was very simple.
"Israel hath sinned." Man, even when spiritual, looks at results
(because he is in close contact with them), even while owning the power
of God, and the connection between Him and His people. But God looks at
the cause, and also at what He is Himself. It is true that He is love,
but He cannot sacrifice the very principles of His being, nor deny
Himself in those relationships which are founded upon what He is. His
glory is indeed connected through grace with the well-being of His
people. But He will vindicate His glory, and even bless His people in
the end, without compromising these principles. Faith must count on the
sure result of His faithfulness, but bring the heart (submitting to
God's ways) into accordance with those principles. It would not be
maintaining His glory in the midst of His people if He tolerated amongst
them anything contrary to His essential character, and made use of His
power to maintain them in a condition which would deny His nature. The
relationship would be broken, and God Himself compromised-a thing
absolutely impossible. They had sin amongst them, and the strength of
God is no longer with them; for God cannot identify Himself with sin.

And let us remember that there was sin also in the neglect which went
forward without seeking counsel from God. Joshua's cry did not at once
bring deliverance, but, first of all, discovery of the sin, with respect
to which God is very precise and exact. When the government of His
people is in question, He searches into everything, and takes cognisance
of the smallest details (see [Jos
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#011)). Further, God not only said,
"therefore Israel could not stand," but "Thou canst not stand." Their
weakness would continue. Sorrowful change! Before it was "No man shall
be able to stand before thee." Now they could not stand themselves.
Where there is not holiness, God allows the weakness of His people to be
practically seen; for there is no strength but in Him, and He will not
go out with them where holiness is wanting, nor thus sanction and
encourage sin. Only, let us remark here, that God does not always
withdraw His blessing at once from those who are unfaithful. He
frequently chastens them on one hand, and blesses them on the other. He
deals patiently, He instructs them, in His grace; He does not bless them
on the side where the evil is, but He acts with admirable tenderness and
perfect knowledge, taking the trouble, so to say, of following the soul
in detail according to its condition and for its good; for He is full of
grace. How often He thus waits for the repentance of His people! Alas!
how often He waits for it in vain. But we have here the great principle
on which He acts (as in the case of Jericho, that of His power exercised
on behalf of His people), proving that all is of God.

Another important principle is here set before us. The people of God are
viewed corporately, as to the effects of sin amongst them. God is in
their midst. sin is committed there. He is there. But since there is
only one God there, and the people are one, if God is displeased and
cannot act, the whole people suffer in consequence, for they have no
other strength but God. The only remedy is to put away the accursed
thing. We find the same thing at Corinth, modified according to the
principles of grace. The wicked person must be put away. If not, they
are all identified with the sin until they have put it away, and have
thus "approved themselves to be clear." In doing so, they take God's
part against the sin, and the relationship between God and the body
reassumes its normal state. Nevertheless all this cannot fail to produce
certain painful effects. If the accursed thing is there, although God
may have been glorified in the manifestation of the perfection of His
ways-of His jealousy of sin, and perfect knowledge of all that happens
(for Achan's confession justifies God, and the people have not a word to
say), still, though the sin is no longer concealed, discipline must be
carried out. The confession of Achan (whose sin had been brought to
light, through the obedience of the people, or of Joshua, to the Lord's
directions) does but ratify, in the eyes of all, the just judgment.

But it is well to remember here that christian discipline has always the
recovery of the soul for its object. Even if the offender should be
delivered unto Satan, it is for the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord-a most forcible reason for
exercising this discipline, according to the measure of our spiritual
power; for we cannot go beyond that. At the least we might always humble
ourselves before God, in order that the evil may be removed. To be
indifferent to the presence of evil in the church is to be guilty of
high treason against God; it is taking advantage of His love to deny his
holiness, despising and dishonouring Him before all. God acts in love in
the church; but He acts with holiness and for the maintenance of
holiness: otherwise it would not be the love of God which acted; it
would not be seeking the prosperity of souls.

It is interesting to see that this valley of Achor, the witness and the
memorial of the first sin committed by Israel after they had entered the
land, is given them "for a door of hope" ([Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)), when the sovereign grace of God
is in action. It is always thus. Fear sin, but do not fear the
bitterness of its discovery, nor that of its chastisement: for at this
point God resumes the course of blessing. Blessed be His gracious name
for it! Alas! Shinar (Babylon) and money soon begin to affect the ways
of the people of God. They find these things amongst their enemies, and
the carnal heart covets them. Observe also that, if there is
faithfulness and obedience, God never fails to manifest and take away
that which hinders the blessing of His people. Let us follow the history
of the people's restoration to God's favour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008)

</div>
