<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](deu034)  [Next](jos001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Joshua

We have gone through, by the goodness of God, the five books of Moses.
They have set before us, on the one side, the great principles on which
the relations of man with God, and of God with man, in their great
elements, are founded, such as redemption, sacrifice, and the like; and
on the other, the deliverance of a people set apart for Himself, and the
different conditions in which they were placed, whether under grace in
the form of promise, under law, or under God's government established
over them by the special mediation of Moses.

We have had occasion in them to examine the history of this people in
the wilderness; and the pattern presented, by the tabernacle, of things
to be afterwards revealed; sacrifices and priesthood, means of
relationship with God granted to sinners, wherein is indeed wanting the
image of our perfect liberty to approach God, the veil not being then
rent, but wherein the shadow of heavenly things is placed before our
eyes with most interesting detail.

Finally, we have seen that God-having at the end of the journey, in the
wilderness, pronounced the definitive justification of His people, and
caused His blessing to rest upon them in spite of the efforts of their
enemies-declares under what conditions the people should retain
possession of the land, and enjoy His blessing in it; in the liberty and
grace of God's free gift in immediate relationship with Himself; and
what would be the consequences of disobedience; revealing, at the same
tune, His purposes with respect to this people, purposes which He would
accomplish for His own glory. \[See Note \#1\] This brings us to the
taking possession of the land of promise by the people under the
guidance of Joshua.

As the Book of Numbers sets forth the spiritual journey through the
wilderness in which the flesh was tested and tried, so this book is full
of interest and instruction, as setting before us in type the conflicts
of the inheritors of heaven with spiritual wickedness in heavenly
places, when we have entered into them, with a sure title, but having to
take possession of them by the energy which overcomes the enemies who
would keep us out, which is the other part of the christian life.
Christians are blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places,
as Israel was to enjoy temporal blessings in earthly places. It is easy
to understand that, if we may rightly use (as I do not doubt) the name
of Canaan as a figurative expression of the rest of the people of God,
that which we have here to do with is not the rest itself, but the
spiritual conflict which secures the enjoyment of the promises of God to
true believers. The close of the Epistle to the Ephesians presents that
which precisely answers, indeed alludes, to the position of Israel in
this book. The saints in the assembly having been quickened and raised
up with Jesus, have their conflict in the heavenly places, as it is to
those who dwell there that the assembly is a testimony-the testimony of
the manifold wisdom of God.

It is worthy of notice, if Jordan represent death, and Canaan rest and
glory, how short common christian views must come of some intended
christian position; for the effect of the crossing of Jordan, and what
characterised what followed, was war. The angel of Jehovah comes with a
drawn sword as captain of Jehovah's host. It leads us to see that the
Christian is to learn that he is dead and risen while here, and has his
place in the heavenlies in Christ, and that it is in this position that
his true conflicts take place.

Joshua, then, represents Christ, not as coming down in person to take
possession of the earth, but as leading His people through the power of
the Holy Ghost, who acts and dwells in the midst of this people. Yet in
Joshua, as in all other typical persons, those errors and sins are found
which betray the weakness of the instrument, and the fragility of the
vessel in which, for the time, God has condescended to put His glory.

Note \#1:

Their typical revelations in these books, which though interwoven with
the history are their real subject, are invaluable to us; only the
special privileges of Christians and of the assembly of God, in
sovereign grace, are not communicated.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 1](jos001)

</div>
