<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1011)  [Next](kg1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 11 and 12.

Till now we have had the beautiful picture of God's blessing resting
upon the son of David, whose only desire it had been to possess wisdom
from God, that he might know how to govern His people. Jehovah had in
addition given him riches, magnificence, and glory. The reverse of this
picture, painful to the heart, serves nevertheless to instruct us in the
righteous dealings of God. In the event, foreseen by God, of Israel's
having a king, he was forbidden to multiply his wives or his riches, and
to go down into Egypt to multiply horses ([Deu
17:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)). Now with whatever blessings
we may be surrounded, we can never forsake the law of God with impunity,
nor the walk appointed in the word for His children. God had bestowed
the abundance of riches and honour on Solomon, who had only asked for
wisdom; but the study of the law, which was prescribed to the king ([Deu
17:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#019)), should have prevented his
using the means he did in acquiring his riches. These chapters teach us
that he did precisely that which the law forbade his doing. He
multiplied silver and gold, he multiplied the number of his wives, and
had a great number of horses brought from Egypt. God's promise was
fulfilled. Solomon was rich and glorious above all the kings of his day;
but the means he used to enrich himself shewed a heart at a distance
from God, and led to his ruin according to the just judgment and sure
word of God. How perfect His ways, how sure His testimony! Holiness
becometh His house. His judgments are unchangeable. Solomon enjoys the
sure promises of God. He sins in the means by which he seeks to satisfy
his own lusts; and although the result was the accomplishment of the
promise, yet he bears the consequences of so doing. Outwardly only the
fulfilment of the promise was seen; in fact there was something else.
Without sending for horses from Egypt, and gold from Ophir, Solomon
would have been rich and glorious, for God had promised it. By doing
this he enriched himself, but he departs from God and from His word.
Having given himself up to his desires after riches and glory, he had
multiplied the number of his wives, and in his old age they turned away
his heart. This neglect of the word, which at first appeared to have no
bad effect (for he grew rich, as though it had been but the fulfilment
of God's promise), soon led to a departure more serious in its nature
and in its consequences, to influence more powerful and more immediately
opposed to the commands of God's word, and at last to flagrant
disobedience of its most positive and essential requirements. The
slippery path of sin is always trodden with accelerated steps, because
the first sin tends to weaken in the soul the authority and power of
that which alone can prevent our committing still greater sins-that is,
the word of God, as well as the consciousness of His presence, which
imparts to the word all its practical power over us. God brings
chastening and trouble upon Solomon during his life, and takes from his
family the rule over the greater part of the tribes, declaring that He
will afflict the posterity of David, but not for ever.

According to the king's lamentation ([Ecc
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#019)), he to whom Solomon left all the
fruit of his labour was not wise. His folly brought the consequences
upon him which, in God's counsels, were attached to his father's sin.
Under the guidance of Jeroboam ten tribes shook off the authority of the
house of David. Looked at with an eye to its responsibility, the house
of David has entirely and for ever lost its glory. We have to follow the
history of the two kingdoms, and yet more particularly that of the
kingdom of the ten tribes, which retained the name of Israel, although
God still caused the lamp of David to shine at Jerusalem.

Now, the moral fall of the new king-of Jeroboam-was not long delayed.
Judging by human wisdom and forgetting the fear of Jehovah, he made two
golden calves, in order that the powerful links of a worship in common
might be broken, and no longer attach his subjects to Judah and
Jerusalem. A new priesthood had to be set up; everything, with respect
to worship, was devised of his own heart. Israel's sin was an
established rule, and the phrase, "Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin," became the sad designation of their first king.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](kg1013)

</div>
