<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

But the testimony and the judgment of God tarried not according to the
mercy of God towards His people. Prophecy immediately re-appears; for
the faithful love of God to His people never grows weary. His mercy
endureth for ever. The testimony of His word-prophecy-that is to say,
the intervention of God in testimony, when the people go astray and the
ordinary connections between God and His people are broken, does not
fail. Rehoboam himself is forbidden, by prophecy, to carry out his
intention of fighting against Israel, to bring them again under his
dominion; but, in the case of Jeroboam, Jehovah vindicates the rights of
His glory against the king himself and against his altar. The altar is
rent, the ashes poured out, the king's arm-put forth against the
prophet-is dried up, and only restored through the prophet's
intercession. Here too Jehovah makes known that He has not forgotten the
house of David in the midst of all this evil. From his house shall
proceed the repairer of the breach, and the judge of that iniquity which
caused the breach; for Judah is still recognised as the place of His
throne.

The prophet, charged with such a testimony as this, is forbidden even to
drink water among a people who call themselves Israel, but who are
rebellious and defiled. No participation in such guilty confusion is
allowed; and the prophet himself suffers the consequences of God's just
judgment upon his disobedience. Such was the severity of God with
respect to an action that countenanced a state of unfaithfulness, which
the light He had given was sufficient to judge. The details of this case
deserve some notice. By the word of God the prophet had knowledge of the
judgment of God. His heart should have recognised, morally as well as
prophetically, the dreadful evil of Israel's position; and the moral
sense of this evil should have given the prophetic testimony its full
power over his own heart. At any rate the word of God was imperative: he
was neither to eat nor to drink there. He knew it, and he remembered it;
but there was in appearance another testimony, a motive for neglecting
the Lord's command. The old prophet (and he was a prophet) told him that
Jehovah had said unto him, "Bring him back into thine house that he may
eat bread"; so the prophet from Judah went back with him. It was very
desirable for the unfaithful old prophet, that a man whom God was using
for testimony (and whose testimony he himself also believed) should
sanction his unfaithfulness by association with it. Outwardly he
appeared to honour the testimony of God, and the man who bore it. In
fact the prophet from Judah, by returning with the old prophet,
destroyed the power of his own testimony. The old prophet-although truly
such-bore with the evil around him. The testimony of God, on the
contrary, declared that the evil was not to be borne with. It was with
this testimony that the other prophet was charged; and the refusal to
eat or drink in the place was the moral and personal testimony of his
own faithfulness, of his conviction, and of his obedience. This refusal
was the testimony that, in this matter, he took God's part. But, by
returning with the old prophet, he nullified his testimony, and
countenanced the old prophet in his unfaithfulness. God did not reverse
His word, if the prophet was disobedient to it. The old prophet was
punished, in that God made use of his mouth to announce the consequences
of his fault to the prophet from Judah. It is also a lesson which
teaches us, that, whenever God has made His will known to us, we are not
to allow any after influence whatever to call it in question, even
although the latter may take the form of the word of God. If we were
morally nearer to the Lord, we should feel that the only true and right
position is to follow that which He told us at first.

In every case our part is to obey what He has said. His word will put us
in a true position-in position apart from evil, and from the power of
evil, even when we have not spiritual intelligence to appreciate it. If
we fail in this obedience, we lose our sense of the falseness of our
position, because the moral sentiment is weakened. At best there is
uneasiness, but no liberty. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty. Unfaithfulness to the simple and primary testimony of God's
word never sets us at liberty, whatever may be the reasons which
apparently justify our putting it aside.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
