<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1014)  [Next](kg1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 14, 15, and 16.

In spite of this testimony, Jeroboam perseveres in his sin. The only one
of his sons in whom any piety is seen dies; and the judgment of God is
pronounced upon his house.

Judah having walked in all sorts of iniquity also, during the reign of
Rehoboam, Jerusalem is taken, and all the riches which Solomon had
amassed became the prey of the Egyptians. Abijam, his son, follows no
better course. There was constant war between the two kingdoms-the sad
story, so often renewed, of man placed in the enjoyment of God's
blessing, and the effect of his fall. In what a condition do we see the
kingdom of God's people, and the house of David itself, recently so
glorious!

Asa, pious himself and faithful to Jehovah, pressed by the power of
Baasha, king of Israel, who had dethroned the house of Jeroboam, seeks
that help from the Syrians which he did not know how to find in God. The
family of Baasha falls, as that of Jeroboam had done, and the chief
captains contend together for the throne, which remains at last in the
hands of Ahab's father. Ahab added to the sin of his predecessors the
worship of Baal, the god of his idolatrous wife; and, in the enormity of
his transgressions against Jehovah, he went beyond all the kings of
Israel that were before him. But in the midst of all this moral ruin,
the word of God reaches those who violate it; and Joshua's prophetic
judgment upon whosoever should rebuild Jericho is fulfilled in the
family of Hiel, the Bethelite. Not only are the ways and government of
God manifested in full vigour, however great His patience with a
rebellious people, but the energy of the king's iniquity, in the
presence of God's long-suffering, gives occasion for a testimony
remarkable in proportion to the evil which made it necessary. The reign
of Ahab was the occasion of the testimony of the prophet Elijah. Israel,
at that time, was hastening to its doom. But, whatever their iniquity
may be, God does not smite a people who have forsaken His ways, until He
has sent them a testimony. He may chastise them previously, but will not
definitively execute His judgment upon them.

The character of the testimony deserves particular attention here. In
Judah the prophets, who bore testimony in the midst of an order of
things which God Himself had established, performed no miracles. They
dwell upon the people's sin, and put them in mind of the law of Jehovah,
His ordinances, and the obedience due to Him. They proclaim the advent
of the Messiah, and the future blessing of Israel; but, the system in
the midst of which they give this testimony being still owned of God,
they perform no miracles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 16](kg1016)

</div>
