<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2005)  [Next](kg2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001)

The sons of the prophets must enlarge their dwelling-place, and Elisha,
who consents to go with them, secures them from the results of their
negligence by reversing the laws of nature. I know not if we should seek
here for anything beyond the general character of the miracle, or find a
type in the fact that Jordan is in question. So far as Jordan has a
typical meaning, that meaning is abiding. It means death. The house
built with that which was taken thence, and the power of the stream
overcome and destroyed by the piece of wood cast into it, by means of
which that which was beyond hope and lost was rescued from it, easily
suggest a typical meaning. I dare not say positively that it is the mind
of the Spirit; and we must not give way to imagination.

Elisha preserves Israel after this from the attacks of their powerful
enemies. The king of Syria seeking to take Elisha prisoner, it is
Elisha, on the contrary, who captures the whole host that came to seize
him, thus teaching his blind servant, who had eyes and saw not, the
unfailing care with which the Almighty constantly surrounds His own
people. After having taught the enemy the power of Israel's God, and the
folly of attacking His people when the messenger of His covenant is with
them, Elisha lets the Syrians go; and these men come no more into the
land of Israel. All these miracles sufficiently characterise Elisha's
ministry. The poor comforted, the Gentiles healed, Israel delivered and
protected, the election blessed, Israel and their unfaithful king set
aside as regards the prophet's testimony-all this we find in it. These
miracles are more numerous than Elijah's. The burden which weighed upon
Elijah's heart had no place in Elisha's; and therefore he sought relief
neither in judgment upon the evil, nor in withdrawing from a useless
labour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 7](kg2007)

</div>
