<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2007)  [Next](kg2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#001)

The history of the woman \[See Note \#1\], whose son Elisha had raised
to life again, gives us a little picture of all God's dealings with
Israel. During long years, as determined by Jehovah, Israel is deprived
of everything; but God has preserved all for them, and in the day of
blessing all will be restored to them; and they shall receive double the
fruit of their years of affliction. It is the son restored to life that
brings blessing. Nevertheless the judgments of God are being
accomplished. Elisha goes to Damascus, and Hazael, the rod of Jehovah to
chastise His people, is placed on the throne of Syria. On the other
hand, Elisha is acknowledged by the Gentiles themselves. The Spirit of
God takes notice of the consequences of Judah's alliance with Israel;
but with this exception, Judah for the time is out of sight.

Note \#1

It seems to me that Gehazi stands here in a grievous position. Smitten
by the hand of God, because his heart clung to earth, even in the
presence of Jehovah's mighty and long-suffering testimony, he is now a
parasite in the king's court, relating the wonderful things in which he
no longer took part. This poor world grows weary enough of itself to
lead it to take some pleasure in hearing anything spoken of that has
reality and power. Provided that it does not reach the conscience, they
will listen to it for their amusement, taking credit to themselves
perhaps for an enlarged and a liberal mind, which is not enslaved by
that which they can yet recognise philosophically in its place. But that
is a sad position, which makes it evident that formerly we were
connected with a testimony, whilst now we only relate its marvels at
court. Nevertheless God makes use of it; and it does not follow that
there was no truth in Gehazi. But to rise in the world, and entertain
the world with the mighty works of God, is to fall very deeply.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 9](kg2009)

</div>
