<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev007)  [Next](lev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 8 and 9.

The sacrifices and the rules for partaking of them being thus appointed,
priesthood is established (chap. 8) according to the ordinance. Aaron
and his sons are washed; Aaron is then clothed, and the tabernacle, and
all that was therein, was anointed, and Aaron also, and this without
blood. In this we have, I apprehend, a bright inlet into the way in
which the universe is filled with glory. When Aaron alone is anointed
without blood, the tabernacle is also. The fulness of the divine power
and spiritual grace and glory which is in Christ, fills the whole scene
of created witness of the glory of God; that is, the energy of the Holy
Ghost fills it with the claim and witnesses of the excellency of Christ.
When the creature has had to do with it, then, indeed, as on the great
day of atonement, it has all to be purified and reconciled with blood.
But this does not undo the direct title in grace and divine excellency
in Jesus. It is His on this ground too. It is His as Creator of it all.
It may have contracted impurity. Redemption is the ground of the
restitution of all things, and the creature is delivered from the
bondage of corruption. But as His creation it all belonged to God. As
the normal order it was, as created-consecrated to God (see also [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016) and [Col
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021)).

When Aaron's sons are brought in, the altar is purified with blood,
because we have got out of the mere personal excellency and title of
Christ. When the sons of Aaron are clothed with the priestly garments,
sacrifices are offered, beginning with the bullock for a sin-offering,
and Aaron and his sons have its blood put upon ear and thumb and toe;
and then Aaron and his garments, his sons and their garments with him,
are sprinkled with oil and blood according to the directions given in
Exodus. The blood of Christ and the Spirit are the ground on which we,
associated with Him, have our place with God.

On the eighth day Jehovah was to appear and manifest the acceptance of
the sacrifices offered on that day, and His presence in the glory in the
midst of the people. This manifestation took place accordingly: first
Aaron, standing by the sacrifice, blesses the people; and then Moses and
Aaron go into the tabernacle, and come out and bless the people. That
is, there is first Christ, as Priest, blessing them, in virtue of the
offered sacrifice; and then Christ, as King and Priest, going in and
hiding Himself for a little in the tabernacle, and then coming out and
blessing the people in this twofold character. When this takes place, as
it will at the coming of Jesus, the acceptance of the sacrifice will be
publicly manifested, and the glory of Jehovah will appear to the people,
then become true worshippers through that means.

This is a scene of the deepest interest; but there is a remark to be
made here. The church is not found in this place (though there are
general principles which apply to any case of connection with God),
unless it be in the persons of Moses and Aaron. The blessing comes and
is made manifest; that is, the acceptance of the victim is made manifest
when Moses and Aaron appear at their coming out of the tabernacle. It
will be thus with Israel. When the Lord Jesus appears, and they
recognise Him whom they pierced, the efficacy of this sacrifice will be
manifested in favour of that nation. It will be public by the
manifestation of Christ. Our knowledge of that efficacy is during the
stay of Christ within the veil, or rather in heaven itself, for the veil
is now rent. Israel will not know the acceptance of the sacrifice until
Christ comes forth as King; for us the Holy Ghost is come forth while He
is yet within, so that we have the anticipatory certitude of that
reception, and are connected with Him there. And it is this which gives
to the Christian his proper character.

Here the manifestation takes place in the court where the sacrifice was
offered, and when Moses and Aaron have come to the place where God
talked with the people (not where He Communed with the mediator only,
that is, the ark of the testimony, where the veil was no longer on the
face of him who also communed with the Lord), and answering to this
figure the manifestation will be here. There is a very peculiar
circumstance connected with that. There had been no sacrifice whose
blood was carried into the holy place, though the body of the bullock
was burnt without the camp \[See Note \#1\]. A sin-offering was indeed
offered, but it was such as ought to have been eaten by the priest (see
[Lev 10:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017)). The relationships
which had been established were comparatively external. The sin and
defilement were carried clean out of the camp and done away; but there
was no entering in within the veil, or meeting God there.

Note \#1

It does not exactly appear whether the goat for the people ([Lev
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#003)) was burnt without the camp. It is
said in [Lev 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016) that it was burnt,
and that its blood was not brought into the holy place for sin, so that
they ought to have eaten it. So that if it was burnt outside the camp it
was an error; the bullock for Aaron was, though the blood was not
carried within the veil. Of the goat it is merely said, "offered it for
sin, as the first," ([Lev 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#015)).
Aaron's sacrifice seems to shew that the character of Christ's
priesthood does not bring Israel into fellowship with what is within the
veil, though Christ may have suffered on the cross for them. The blood
was put on the altar in the court. The sons should have eaten that for
the people, as for a particular fault of a people already in
relationship with God. They are the offerings after the consecration of
Aaron, not those of his consecration. Then there was naturally no
offering for the people there. Now his hands were filled. The reader may
remark, as regards the remnant of Israel (the one hundred and forty-four
thousand who are on Mount Sion with the Lamb, the Sufferer in Israel,
now King there), that they are on earth, but they learn the song sung in
heaven, though they are not there to sing it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 9](lev009)

</div>
