<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev022)  [Next](lev024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)

We have now come to the feasts (chap. 23). It is the full \[See Note
\#1\] year of the counsels of God towards His people, and the rest which
was the end of those counsels. There were consequently seven-a number
expressive of perfection well known in the word: the sabbath, the
passover and the feast of unleavened bread, the firstfruits of harvest,
Pentecost, the feast of trumpets in the seventh month, the day of
atonement, and the feast of tabernacles. If the sabbath be separated and
reckoned by itself, the passover would be distinguished from the feast
of unleavened bread, which would make the seven. I do not say this to
preserve the number, but because the chapter itself speaks thus: having
counted the sabbath amongst the others, it resumes and calls the others
(without the sabbath) the solemn feasts. For, in one sense, it was
indeed a feast; in another, it was the rest, when the whole was ended
\[See Note \#2\]. In general these feasts present us, then, with all the
bases on which God has entered into relationship with His people; the
principles on which He has gathered them around Him, in His ways with
this people, upon the earth. Their bearing was wider than that, in other
respects; but it is in this point of view that these circumstances, that
is, these facts, are here considered. They are seen in their
accomplishment upon the earth.

There is another way of dividing them, by taking the words, "And Jehovah
spake unto Moses" \[See Note \#3\] as the title of each part: the
sabbath, the passover, and the unleavened bread ([Lev
23:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)); the firstfruits and the
Pentecost ([Lev 23:9-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#009)); the feast of
trumpets ([Lev 23:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#023)); the day of
atonement ([Lev 23:26-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#026)); the feast
of tabernacles ([Lev 23:-44](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#000)). This
latter division gives us the moral distinction of the feasts; that is,
the ways of God therein. Let us examine them a little more in detail.

The very first thing presented is the sabbath, as being the end and the
result of all the ways of God. The promise is left us of entering into
God's rest. It is a feast to Jehovah; but the feasts, which present
rather the ways of God to lead us there, begin again at the fourth
verse, as we have already said ([Lev
23:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#037)). This distinction being
noticed, we can take the sabbath, \[See Note \#4\] the passover, and the
feast of unleavened bread as making a whole ([Lev
23:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)). Of the two latter, the
unleavened bread was the feast, properly speaking; the passover was the
sacrifice on which the feast was grounded. As the apostle says, "Christ
our passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the feast, not
with leaven," etc. What was indeed necessary for the sabbath, for the
rest of God, was the sacrifice of Christ, and purity; and though all
these feasts lead on to the rest of God, yet these two, the passover and
unleavened bread, are the basis of all, and of the rest itself for us.
Christ's sacrifice and the absence of all principle of sin, form the
basis of the part we have in the rest of God. God is glorified in
respect of sin; sin is put away for us, out of His sight, and out of our
hearts. The perfect absence of leaven marked Christ's path and nature
down here, and is accomplished in us, so far as we realise Christ as our
life, and recognise ourselves, though the flesh be still in us, as dead
and risen with Him \[See Note \#5\]. It is thus that we have seen the
manna connected with the sabbath in Exodus 16. To be without leaven was
the perfection of the Person of Christ living upon earth, and becomes in
principle the walk upon earth of him who is partaker of His life. In the
true and final sabbath, of course, all leaven will be absent from us.
The sacrifice of Christ and purity of life render one capable of
participating in God's rest.

After that comes power, the firstfruits; that is, the resurrection of
Christ on the morrow after the sabbath-the first day of the week. It was
the beginning of the true harvest-harvest gathered, by power, outside
and beyond the natural life of the world. According to the Jewish law
nothing of the harvest could be touched before: Christ was the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead. With this first of the
firstfruits were offered sacrifices for a sweet savour, but not for sin.
It is clear there was no need for it. It is Christ who has been offered
to God, quite pure, and waved before God-placed fully before His eyes
for us, as raised from the dead, the beginning of a new crop before
God-man in a condition which not even innocent Adam was in, the Man of
God's counsels, the second Man, the last Adam: not, all hanging on
obedience which might fail, and did, but after God had been perfectly
glorified in the place of sin, past death, past sin (for He died unto
sin?, past Satan's power, past judgment, and consequently by thus wholly
out of the scene where responsible man had stood, on a totally new
footing with God after His finished work, and God perfectly glorified;
such a work too as gave Him title to say, therefore doth my Father love
me because I lay down my life that I might take it again, and made it
God's righteousness to set Him at His right hand in glory.

Connected with that comes the meat-offering at the end of the seven
weeks. It is no longer Christ here, but those who are His, the
firstfruits of His creatures; they are considered as being upon earth,
and leaven is found in them. Therefore, though offered to God, they were
not burned as a sweet savour ([Lev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012)); but with the loaves was offered
a sin-offering, which answered by its efficacy to the leaven found in
them. They are the saints of which Pentecost commenced the ingathering.

This feast was followed by a long space of time, in which there was
nothing new in the ways of God. Only they were commanded, when they
reaped the harvest, not to make clean riddance of the comers of the
field. A part of the good grain was to be left in the field, after the
harvest was gathered into the garner, but not to be lost; it was for
those who were not enjoying the riches of God's people, but who would
participate exceptionally by grace in the provision which God had made
for them-in the abundance which God had granted them. This will take
place at the end of this age.

Pentecostal work being ended, another series of events begins ([Lev
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#023)) with the words referred to,
"And Jehovah spake unto Moses." They blow up the trumpet in the new moon
(compare Psalm 81; [Num 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#003); [Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)). It was the enewal of the
blessing and the splendour of the people-Israel gathered as an assembly
before Jehovah. It is not yet the restoration of joy and gladness, but
at least the renewal of the light and reflected glory which had
disappeared takes place, and enlightens their expectant eyes; and they
gather the assembly to re-establish the glory. But Israel must at least
feel their sin; and in the solemn feast which follows, the affliction of
the people is connected with the sacrifice of the day of atonement:
Israel shall look on Him whom they have pierced, and mourn. The nation
(at least the spared remnant who become the nation) will participate in
the efficacy of the sacrifice of Christ, and that in their state here
below, repenting, and recognised of God, so that the times of refreshing
will be come. This is then the repentance of the people, but in
connection with the atoning sacrifice. The efficacy is in the sacrifice;
their participation in it is connected with the affliction of their
souls (compare Zechariah 12). But Israel did nothing-it was a
sabbath-they were assembled in humiliation in the presence of God. They
accept the pierced One under the sense of the sin of which they have
been guilty in rejecting Him.

Then follows the feast of tabernacles. They offered, during seven days,
offerings made by fire unto Jehovah; and on the eighth day there was
again a holy convocation-an extraordinary day of a new week which went
beyond the full time-including, I doubt not, the resurrection; that is,
the participation of those who are raised in that joy. It was a solemn
assembly-that eighth day, the great day of the feast, on which the Lord
(having declared of the then time that His hour was not yet come to shew
Himself to the world-His brethren \[the Jews\] not believing in Him
either) announced that for him who believed in Him there would be, in
the meanwhile, rivers of living water which would flow from his belly;
that is, the Holy Spirit, who would be a living power working in, and
flowing forth from the heart, and in the expression of its intimate
affections. Israel had indeed drunk of the living water out of the rock
in the wilderness, the sojourn in which, now past when the feast of
tabernacles is celebrated, was celebrated with joy in the memorial of
that which was over, to enhance the joy of the rest into which they were
ushered. But believers now meanwhile were not only to drink, for blessed
are those who have not seen and yet have believed; the river itself
would flow from the heart; that is, the Holy Spirit in power, which they
would have received through Christ before He should be manifested to the
world, or they have their place in the heavenly Canaan.

Thus, the feast of tabernacles is the joy of the millennium, when Israel
have come out of the wilderness where their sins have placed them; but
to which will be added this first day of another week-the resurrection
joy of those who are raised with the Lord Jesus, to which the presence
of the Holy Ghost answers meanwhile.

Consequently, we find that the feast of tabernacles took place after the
increase of the earth had been gathered in, and, as we learn elsewhere,
not only after the harvest but after the vintage also; that is, after
separation by judgment, and the final execution of judgment on the
earth, when heavenly and earthly saints should be all gathered in.
Israel was to rejoice seven days before Jehovah. The passover has had
its antitype, Pentecost its also; but this day of joy is yet awaiting
Him who is to be the centre and spring of it all, the Lord Jesus, who
will rejoice in the great congregation, and whose praise will begin with
Jehovah in the great assembly (Psalm 22). He had already done it in the
midst of the assembly of His brethren; but now the whole race of Jacob
is called to glorify Him, and all the ends of the world shall remember
themselves.

The expression, solemn assembly, is not found applied to any of the
feasts but this, except to the seventh day of the passover (Deuteronomy
16), as it seems to me somewhat in the same sense. The feast of
tabernacles could not be kept in the wilderness. In order to observe it,
the people were to be in possession of the land, as is plain. It is also
to be observed, that it never was kept according to the prescriptions of
the law from Joshua till Nehemiah ([Neh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017)). Israel had forgotten that they
had been strangers in the wilderness. Joy, without the remembrance of
this, tends to ruin; the very enjoyment of the blessing leads to it. It
will be remarked that, properly speaking, all the feasts are types of
what is done on earth and in connection with Israel, unless we except
the eighth day of tabernacles. The church period, as such, is the lapse
of time from Pentecost to the seventh month. We may, and of course do,
get the benefit of, at any rate, the two first; but historically the
type refers to Israel.

Note \#1

I add, to give the intelligence of this expression, that the word
translated "feast" signifies an appointed or definite time, and which
returned consequently at the revolution of the year. The series of the
feasts embraced the whole year, inasmuch as they returned regularly each
consecutive year. This shews too the difference of the sabbath, God's
rest-only here of creation; and, I may add, of the new moon-figure I
doubt not of Israel's restoration. The great new moon was in the seventh
month.

Note \#2

The idea of these feasts is God gathering the people around Himself as a
holy convocation. The solemn feasts were, then, the gathering of God's
people around Him, and in detail the ways of God in gathering them thus.
Hence the distinction made in this chapter. It is evident that the
sabbath, the rest of God, will be the great gathering of the people of
God around Him, as the centre of peace and blessing. So that the sabbath
is truly a solemn feast, a holy convocation; but? also, it is evidently
apart and distinct from the means and the operations which gathered the
people. Hence we find it mentioned at the beginning, and reckoned
amongst the solemn feasts; then the Spirit of God begins afresh ([Lev
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004)) and gives the solemn feasts, as
embracing all the ways of God in the gathering of His people, leaving
out the sabbath. In reckoning the feasts, the passover and the feast of
unleavened bread may be considered as one, for both were at the same
time, and treated together; or, looking upon the sabbath as separate,
they may be estimated as two feasts. Both these things are found in the
word.

Note \#3

It is well to observe, in passing, that this formula gives, in the whole
Pentateuch, the true division of the subjects. Sometimes the directions
are addressed to Aaron, which supposes some internal relations based on
the existence of priesthood-sometimes to Moses and Aaron; and in that
case they are not purely communications and commandments to establish
relations, but also directions for the exercise of functions thus
established. Consequently we have in Leviticus 10, for the first time I
think, "Jehovah spake unto Aaron";-chapter 11 to "Moses and Aaron";
because that, whilst it treats of commandments and ordinances given for
the first time, it is also a question of the discernment consequent upon
relations existing between God and the people, and in which the exercise
of the priesthood came in. These general principles will assist in
apprehending the nature of the communications made by God to His people
(see chap. 13). Chapter 14, as far as Verse 32 ([Lev
14:1-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)), consists of ordinances to
settle simply what priesthood must do; Verse 33 ([Lev
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#033)), priestly discernment is again
in exercise.

Note \#4

I shall here add a few words on the subject of the sabbath, submitting
them to the spiritual thoughts of my brethren. It is well to be subject
to the word. First, the participation in God's rest is what
distinguishes His people-their distinctive privilege. The heart of the
believer holds that fast, whatever may be the sign that God has given of
it (Heb. 4). God had established it at the beginning; but there is no
appearance that man ever enjoyed in fact any share in it. He did not
work in the creation, nor was he set to labour or toil in the garden of
Eden; he was to dress and keep it, indeed, but he had nothing to do but
continually to enjoy However the day was hallowed from the beginning.
Afterwards the sabbath was given as a memorial of the deliverance out of
Egypt ([Deu 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015)), and the prophets
specially insist on that point-that the sabbath was given as a sign of
God's covenant (Ezekiel 20; [Exo
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013)). It was plain that it was but
the earnest of the word, "My presence shall go, and I will give thee
rest" ([Exo 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013); [Exo
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#014); [Lev
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#030)). It is a sign that the people
are sanctified to God ([Eze 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012);
[Eze 20:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013); [Eze
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#020); [Neh
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#014): compare [Isa
56:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002); [Isa
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013); [Jer
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#022); [Lam
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007); [Lam
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#006); [Eze
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#008); [Eze
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038); [Eze
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#024)). Besides these passages, we see
that, whenever God gives any new principle or form of relation with
Himself, the sabbath is added: thus in grace to Israel ([Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023)); as law ([Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010)). See also, besides the Verse we
are occupied with, [Exo 31:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013); [Exo
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#021); when they are restored afresh
by the patience of God through mediation ([Lev
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev035.htm#002)), and in the new covenant of
Deuteronomy already quoted in the passage. These remarks shew us what
was the radical and essential importance of the sabbath, as the thought
of God and the sign of the relation between His people and Himself,
though, being only a sign, a solemnity, and not in itself a moral
commandment; for the thing signified the association with God in His
rest, and is of the highest order of truth in connecting the heart with
God. But if that be of the utmost importance, it is of an equal and even
higher importance to remember that the covenant between God and the
Jewish people is entirely set aside for us, and that the sign of this
covenant does not belong to us, although God's rest be yet quite as
precious to us, and even more so; that our rest is not in this
creation-a rest of which the seventh day was the sign; and moreover
(which is more important still) that the Lord Jesus is Lord of the
sabbath, a remark of all importance as to His Person, and null if He was
to do nothing with regard to the sabbath; and that, as a fact, He has
omitted all mention of it in the sermon on the mount, where He has given
such a precious summary of the fundamental principles suited to the
kingdom, with the addition of the name of the Father and the fact of a
suffering Messiah, and the revelation of the heavenly reward, making a
whole of the principles of His kingdom, and that He uniformly thwarted
the thoughts of the Jews on this point; a circumstance which the
evangelists (that is, the Holy Ghost) have been careful to record. The
sabbath itself Jesus passed in a state of death, a terrible sign of the
position of the Jews as to their covenant-for us, of the birth of much
better things. It has been tried, with much trouble, to prove that the
seventh day was in fact the first. A single remark demolishes the whole
edifice thus reared; it is, that the word of God calls this last the
first in contrast with the seventh. What is, then, the first day? It is
for us the day of all days-the day of the resurrection of Jesus, by
which we are begotten again unto a lively hope, which is the source of
all our joy, our salvation, and that which characterises our life. Thus
we shall find the rest of God in the resurrection. Morally, in this
world, we begin our spiritual life by the rest, instead of finding it at
the end of our labours. Our rest is in the new creation; we are the
beginning, after Christ, who is the Head of it, of that new
dispensation. It is clear, then, that the rest of God cannot, in our
case, be connected with the sign of the rest of creation here below.
Have we any authority in the New Testament for distinguishing the first
day of the week from the others? For my part, I do not doubt it. It is
certain we have not commandments like those of the old law; they would
be quite contrary to the spirit of the gospel of grace. But the Spirit
of God has marked out, in divers manners, the first day of the week,
though that day is not made binding upon us in a way contrary to the
nature of the economy. The Lord, being raised on that day according to
His promise, appears in the midst of His disciples gathered according to
His word: the week following He does the same. In the Acts the first day
of the week is marked as the day on which they gathered together to
break bread. In 1 Corinthians 16 Christians are exhorted to lay by of
what they had earned, each first day of the week. In Revelation it is
positively called the Lord's day, that is, designated in a direct manner
by a distinctive name by the Holy Spirit. I am well aware that it has
been sought to persuade us that John speaks of being in spirit in the
millennium. But there are two fatal objections to that interpretation.
First, the Greek says quite another thing, and uses the same word that
is used for the Lord's supper, lordly or dominical-the dominical supper,
the dominical day. Who can doubt as to the meaning of such an
expression, or, consequently, can fail to admit that the first day of
the week was distinguished from others (as the Lord's supper was
distinguished from other suppers), not as an imposed sabbath, but as a
privileged day? But the reasoning to prove it refers to the millennium
is founded on a totally false idea, in that only a minimum portion of
the Revelation speaks of the millennium. The book is about the things
which precede it, and in the place where the expression is found, there
is decidedly no mention whatever of it, but of the existing churches,
whatever withal might be their prophetic character; so that, if we hold
to the word of God, we are forced to say that the first day of the week
is distinguished in the word of God as being the Lord's day. We are also
bound to say, if we desire to maintain the authority of the Son of man,
that He is superior to the sabbath-"Lord of the sabbath"; so that in
maintaining for us the authority of the Jewish sabbath as such, we are
in danger of denying the authority, the dignity, and the rights of the
Lord Jesus Himself, and of re-establishing the old covenant, of which it
was the appointed sign, of seeking rest as the result of labour under
the law. The more the true importance of the sabbath, the seventh day,
is felt, the more we shall feel the importance of the consideration that
it is no longer the seventh, but the first day which has privileges for
us. Let us take care, on the other hand, because we are no longer under
law but under grace, not to weaken the thought not only of man's rest
but of God's-a governing thought in the whole of the revelation of His
relationships with man. The final rest for us is rest from spiritual
labours in the midst of evil, not merely from sin; a rest which we, as
fellow-labourers, shall enjoy with Him who has said, "My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work."

Note \#5

There are three points which we may notice here as to this. First in
Colossians 3 God counts us dead with Christ (in Col. also risen); in
Romans 6 we reckon ourselves dead to sin, and alive not in Adam, but
through Him; in 2 Corinthians 4 it is practically carried out; always
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of
Jesus may be manifested in our flesh. Ephesians is on different ground:
we are not such as have died to sin, but were dead in sins, and then a
wholly new creation. Sovereign grace had put us into Christ with the
same power that raised Christ from the grave to the throne of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 24](lev024)

</div>
