<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk012)  [Next](luk014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#001)

Now, at this moment they reminded Him of a terrible judgment that had
fallen upon some among them. He declares to them that neither this case,
nor another which He recalls to their minds, is exceptional: that except
they repent, the same thing should happen to them all. And He adds a
parable in order to make them understand their position. Israel was the
fig tree in the vineyard of God. For three years He had been threatening
to cut it down; it did but spoil His vineyard did but encumber and
uselessly cover the ground. But Jesus was trying for the last time all
that could be done to make it bear fruit; if this did not succeed, grace
could but make way for the just judgment of the Master of the vineyard.
Why cultivate that which only did harm?

Nevertheless He acts in grace and in power towards the daughter of
Abraham, according to the promises made to that people, and demonstrates
that their resistance, pretending to oppose the law to grace, was but
hypocrisy.

However ([Luk 13:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#018)) the kingdom of
God was to take an unexpected form in consequence of His rejection. Sown
by the word, and not introduced in power, it would grow on the earth
until it became a worldly power; and, as an outward profession and
doctrine, would penetrate the whole sphere prepared for it in the
sovereign counsels of God. Now this was not the kingdom established in
power acting in righteousness, but as left to the responsibility of man,
although the counsels of God were being accomplished.

At last, the Lord takes up, in a direct manner, the question of the
position of the remnant and of the fate of Jerusalem ([Luk
13:22-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#022)).

As He went through the cities and villages, fulfilling the work of
grace, in spite of the contempt of the people, some one asked Him
whether the remnant, those that would escape the judgment of Israel,
should be many. He does not reply as to the number; but addresses
Himself to the conscience of the inquirer, urging him to put forth all
his energy that he might enter in at the strait gate. Not only would the
multitude not enter in, but many, neglecting that gate, would desire to
enter into the kingdom and not be able. And moreover, when once the
master of the house was risen up, and the door was shut, it would be too
late. He would say unto them, "I know you not, whence ye are." They
would plead that He had been in their city. He would declare that He
knew them not, workers of iniquity: there was "no peace for the wicked.'
The gate of the kingdom was moral, real before God-conversion. The
multitude of Israel would not go in at it; and outside, in tears and
anguish, they should see the Gentiles sitting with the depositaries of
the promises; while they, the children of the kingdom, according to the
flesh, were shut out, and so much the more miserable that they had been
nigh unto it. And those who had appeared to be first should be the last,
and the last first.

The Pharisees, under pretence of consideration for the Lord, advise Him
to go away. Thereupon He refers finally to the will of God as to the
fulfilment of His work. It was no question of the power of man over Him.
He should accomplish His work, and then go away; because Jerusalem had
not known the time of her visitation. Himself, her true Lord, Jehovah,
how often would He have gathered the children of this rebellious city
under His wings, and they would not! Now His last effort in grace was
accomplished, and their house left desolate, until they should repent,
and, returning to the Lord, say according to Psalm 111, "Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord." Then He would appear, and they
should see Him.

Nothing can be plainer than the connection and the force of these
conversations. For Israel it was the last message, the last visitation
of God. They rejected it. They were forsaken of God (though still
beloved) until they should call upon Him whom they had rejected. Then
this same Jesus would appear again, and Israel should see Him. This
would be the day that the Lord had made.

His rejection admitting the establishment of the kingdom as a tree and
as leaven, during His absence bore its fruit among the Jews until the
end; and the revival amid that nation in the last days, and the return
of Jesus on their repentance, will have reference to that great act of
sin and rebellion. But this gives rise to further important instructions
with regard to the kingdom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 14](luk014)

</div>
