<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk018)  [Next](luk020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)

The history of His last approach to Jerusalem and intercourse with it
now commences ([Luk 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#035)). Here then
He presents Himself anew as the Son of David, and for the last time;
laying on the conscience of the nation His pretensions to that title,
while displaying the consequences of His rejection. Near Jericho, \[See
Note \#39\] the place of malediction, He gives sight to a blind man who
believes in His title of Son of David. So indeed those who possessed
that faith did receive their sight to follow Him, and they saw yet
greater things than these. In Jericho (chapter 19) He sets forth grace,
in spite of the pharisaic spirit. Nevertheless it is as a son of Abraham
that He points out Zacchaeus, who in a false position indeed as such had
a tender conscience and a generous heart \[See Note \#40\] by grace. His
position did not, in the eyes of Jesus, take from him the character of
son of Abraham (if it had that effect, who could have been blessed?) and
did not bar the way to that salvation which was come to save the lost.
It entered with Jesus into the house of this son of Abraham. He brought
salvation, whoever might be heir to it.

Nevertheless He does not conceal from them His departure, and the
character which the kingdom would assume, owing to His absence. As for
them, Jerusalem, and the expectation of the coming kingdom, filled their
minds. The Lord therefore explains to them what would take place. He
goes away to receive a kingdom and to return. Meanwhile He commits some
of His goods (the gifts of the Spirit) to His servants to trade with
during His absence. The difference between this parable and that in the
Gospel by Matthew is this: Matthew presents the sovereignty and the
wisdom of the giver, who varies His gifts according to the aptitude of
His servants; in Luke it is more particularly the responsibility of the
servants, who each receive the same sum, and the one gains by it, in his
master's interest, more than the other. Accordingly it is not said, as
in Matthew, "Enter into the joy of your Lord," the same thing to all,
and the more excellent thing; but to the one it is authority over ten
cities that is given; to the other, over five (that is to say, a share
in the kingdom according to their labour). The servant does not lose
that which he has gained, although it was for his master. He enjoys it.
Not so with the servant who made no use of his talent; that which had
been committed to him is given to the one who had gained ten.

That which we gain spiritually here, in spiritual intelligence and in
the knowledge of God in power, is not lost in the other world. On the
contrary we receive more, and the glory of the inheritance is given us
in proportion to our work. All is grace.

But there was yet another element in the history of the kingdom. The
citizens (the Jews) not only reject the king, but, when he is gone away
to receive the kingdom, send a messenger after him to say that they will
not have him to reign over them. Thus the Jews, when Peter sets their
sin before them, and declares to them that if they repent, Jesus would
return, and with Him the times of refreshing, reject the testimony, and,
so to say, send Stephen after Jesus to testify that they would have
nothing to do with Him. When He returns in glory, the perverse nation is
judged before His eyes. The avowed enemies of Christ, they receive the
reward of their rebellion.

He had declared that which the kingdom was that which it should be. He
now comes to present it for the last time in His own Person to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem according to the prophecy of Zechariah. This
remarkable scene has been considered in its general aspect when studying
Matthew and Mark; but some particular circumstances require notice here.
All is gathered round His entrance. The disciples and the Pharisees are
in contrast. Jerusalem is in the day of her visitation, and she knows it
not.

Some remarkable expressions are uttered by His disciples, moved by the
Spirit of God, on this occasion. Had they been silent, the stones would
have broken out in proclamation of the glory of the rejected One. The
kingdom, in their triumphant acclamations, is not simply the kingdom in
its earthly aspect. In Matthew it was, "Hosanna to the Son of David,"
and "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the
highest." That was indeed true; but here we have something more. The Son
of David disappears. He is indeed the King, who comes in the name of the
Lord; but it is no longer the remnant of Israel who seek salvation in
the name of the Son of David, acknowledging His title. It is "peace in
heaven and glory in the highest." The kingdom depends on peace being
established in the heavenly places. The Son of man, exalted on high, and
victorious over Satan, has reconciled the heavens. The glory of grace in
His Person is established for the everlasting and supreme glory of the
God of love. The kingdom on earth is but a consequence of this glory
which grace has established. The power that cast out Satan has
established peace in heaven. At the beginning, in [Luk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014), we have, in the manifested
grace, Glory to God in the highest; peace on earth; the good pleasure
\[of God\] in men. To establish the kingdom, peace is made in heaven;
the glory of God is fully established in the highest.

Note \#39

In Luke the coming to Jericho is stated as a general fact, in contrast
with His general journey which is in view from [Luk
9:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#051). In point of fact it was on going
out of Jericho He saw the blind man. The general fact is all we have
here, to give the whole history, Zacchaeus and all, Its moral place.

Note \#40

I doubt not that Zacchaeus sets before Jesus that which he did
habitually, before the Lord came to him. Nevertheless salvation came
that day to his house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 20](luk020)

</div>
