<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk002)  [Next](luk004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001)

In chapter 3 we find the exercise of the ministry of the word towards
Israel, and that for the introduction of the Lord into this world. It is
not the promises to Israel and the privileges secured to them by God,
nor the birth of that child who was heir to all the promises; the
empire, itself a testimony to Israel's captivity, being an instrument
for the accomplishment of the word respecting the Lord. The years are
here reckoned according to the reign of the Gentiles. Judea is a
province in the hands of the Gentile empire, and the other parts of
Canaan are divided under different chiefs, subordinate to the empire.

The Jewish system continues nevertheless; and the high priests were
there to note the years of their subjection to the Gentiles by their
names, and at the same time to preserve the order, the doctrine, and the
ceremonies of the Jews, as far as could be done in their circumstances
at that period.

Now the word of God is ever sure, and it is when the relationships of
God with His people fail on the side of their faithfulness, that God in
sovereignty maintains His relationship by means of communications
through a prophet. His sovereign word maintains it when there are no
other means.

But in this case Jehovah's message to His people had a peculiar
character; for Israel was already ruined, having forsaken the Lord. The
goodness of God had still left the people outwardly in their land; but
the throne of the world was transferred to the Gentiles. Israel was now
called to repent, to be forgiven, and to take a new place through the
coming of the Messiah.

The testimony of God is therefore not in connection with His ordinances
at Jerusalem, although the righteous submit to them. Nor does the
prophet call them back to faithfulness on the ground on which they were.
It is His voice in the wilderness, making His paths straight, in order
that He may come, as from without, to those who repented and prepared
themselves for His coming. Moreover, since it was the Jehovah Himself
who came, His glory should not be confined within the narrow limits of
Israel. All flesh should see the salvation wrought by God. The condition
of the nation itself was that out of which God called them to come by
repentance, proclaiming the wrath that was about to fall upon a
rebellious people. Besides, if God came, He would have realities, the
true fruits of righteousness, and not the mere name of a people. And He
came in His sovereign power, which was able to raise up out of nothing
that which He would have before Him. God comes. He would have
righteousness as to man's responsibility, because He is righteous. He
could raise up a seed unto Abraham by His divine power, and that from
the very stones, if He saw fit. It is the presence, the coming of God
Himself, that here characterises everything.

Now, the axe was already at the root of the trees, and each was to be
judged according to its fruits. It was in vain to plead that they were
Jews; if they enjoyed that privilege, where were its fruits? But God did
not accept any according to man's estimate of righteousness and
privilege, nor the proud judgment the self-righteous might form of
others. He addressed Himself to the conscience of all.

Accordingly the publicans, objects of hatred to the Jews, as instruments
of the fiscal oppression of the Gentiles; and the soldiers, who executed
the arbitrary mandates of the kings, imposed on the people by the Roman
will, or that of heathen governors, were exhorted to act in accordance
with that which the true fear of God would produce, in contrast with the
iniquity habitually practised in accordance with the will of man; the
multitude were exhorted to practical charity, while the people,
considered as a people, were treated as a generation of vipers, on whom
the wrath of God was coming. Grace dealt with them in warning of
judgment, but judgment was at the door.

Thus, from [Luk 3:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#003), we have these
two things: in [Luk 3:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#003), the
position of John towards the people as such, in the thought that God
Himself would soon appear; in [Luk
3:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006), his address to the conscience
of individuals; [Luk 3:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007) teaching
them that the formal privileges of the people would afford no shelter in
the presence of the holy and righteous God, and that to take refuge in
national privilege was only to bring wrath upon themselves for the
nation was under judgment and exposed to the wrath of God. In Verse 10
([Luk 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010)) he comes to details. In
[Luk 3:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015), the question as to the
Messiah is solved.

The great subject however of this passage the great truth which the
testimony of John displayed before the eyes of the people was that God
Himself was coming. Man was to repent. Privileges, granted meanwhile as
means of blessing, could not be pleaded against the nature and the
righteousness of Him who was coming, nor destroy the power by which He
could create a people after His own heart. Nevertheless the door of
repentance was open according to His faithfulness towards a people whom
He loved.

But there was a special work for the Messiah according to the counsels,
the wisdom, and the grace of God He baptised with the Holy Ghost and
with fire. That is to say, He brought in the power and the judgment
which dispelled evil, whether in holiness and blessing, or in
destruction.

He baptises with the Holy Ghost. This is not merely a renewal of
desires, but power, in grace, in the midst of evil.

He baptises with fire. This is judgment that consumes the evil.

This judgment is thus applied to Israel, His threshing-floor. He would
gather His wheat in safety elsewhere; the chaff should be burnt up in
judgment.

But at length John is put in prison by the regal head of the people. Not
that this event took place historically at that moment; but the Spirit
of God would set forth morally the end of his testimony, in order to
commence the life of Jesus, the Son of man, but born the Son of God in
this world.

It is with Verse 21 ([Luk 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021)) that
this history begins, and in a manner both wonderful and full of grace.
God, by John the Baptist, had called His people to repentance; and those
on whom His word produced its effect came to be baptised by John. It was
the first sign of life and of obedience. Jesus, perfect in life and in
obedience, come down in grace for the remnant of His people, goes
thither, taking His place with them, and is baptised with the baptism of
John as they were. Touching and marvellous testimony! He does not love
at a distance, nor merely in bestowing pardon; He comes by grace into
the very place where the sin of His people had brought them, according
to the sense of that sin which the converting and quickening power of
their God had wrought in them. He leads His people there by grace, but
He accompanies them when they go. He takes His place with them in all
the difficulties of the way, and goes with them to meet all the
obstacles that present themselves; and truly, as identifying Himself
with the poor remnant, those excellent of the earth, in whom was all His
delight, calling Jehovah His Lord; and making Himself of no reputation,
not saying that His goodness extended to God, not taking His eternal
place with God, but the place of humiliation; and, for that very reason,
of perfection in the position to which He had humbled Himself, but a
perfection that recognised the existence of sin, because in fact there
was sin, and it behoved the remnant to be sensible of it in returning to
God. To be sensible of it was the beginning of good. Hence He can go
with them. But in Christ, however humble grace might be, His taking that
path with them was grace that wrought in righteousness; for in Him it
was love and obedience, and the path by which He glorified His Father.
He went in by the door.

Jesus therefore, in taking this place of humiliation which the state of
the beloved people required, and to which grace brought Him, found
Himself in the place of the fulfilment of righteousness, and of all the
good pleasure of the Father, of which He thus became the object, as in
this place.

The Father could acknowledge Him, as the One who satisfied His heart in
the place where sin and, at the same time, the objects of His grace,
were found, that He might give free course to His grace. The cross was
the full accomplishment of this. We shall say a word on the difference
when speaking of the temptation of the Lord; but it is the same
principle as to Christ's loving will and obedience. Christ was here with
the remnant, instead of being substituted for them and put in their
place to atone for sin; but the object of the Father's delight had, in
grace, taken His place with the people, viewed as confessing their sins
\[See Note \#9\] before God, and presenting themselves to God as
concerned in them, while by this really morally out of them, and renewed
in heart to confess them, without which the Lord could not have been
with them, except as a witness to preach grace to them prophetically.

Jesus having taken this position, and praying appearing as the godly
man, dependent on God and lifting up His heart to God, thus also the
expression of perfection in that position heaven opens to Him. By
baptism He took His place with the remnant; in praying being there He
exhibited perfection in His own relationship with God. Dependence, and
the heart going up to God, as the first thing and as the expression, so
to say, of its existence, is the perfection of man here below; and, in
this case, of man in such circumstances as these. Here then heaven can
open. And observe, it was not heaven opening to seek some one afar from
God, nor grace opening the heart to a certain feeling; but it was the
grace and perfection of Jesus which caused heaven to open. As it is
said, "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life."
Thus also it is the positive perfection of Jesus \[See Note \#10\] that
is the reason of heaven's opening. Remark also here that, when once this
principle of reconciliation is brought in, heaven and earth are not so
far from each other. It is true that, till after the death of Christ,
this intimacy must be centred in the Person of Jesus and realised by Him
alone, but that comprised all the rest. Proximity was established,
although the grain of wheat had to remain alone, until it should "fall
into the ground and die." Nevertheless the angels, as we have seen,
could say, "Peace on earth, the good pleasure \[of God\] in men." And we
see the angels with the shepherds, and the heavenly host in the sight
and hearing of earth praising God for that which had taken place; and
here, heaven open upon man, and the Holy Ghost descending visibly upon
Him.

Let us examine the import of this last case. Christ has taken His place
with the remnant in their weak and humble condition, but in it
fulfilling righteousness. The entire favour of the Father rests upon
Him, and the Holy Ghost comes down to seal and anoint Him with His
presence and His power. Son of God, man on earth, heaven is open to Him,
and all the affection of heaven is centred upon Him, and upon Him
associated with His own. \[See Note \#11\] The first step which these
humbled souls take in the path of grace and of life finds Jesus there
with them, and, He being there, the favour and delight of the Father,
and the presence of the Holy Ghost. And let us always remember that it
is upon Him as man while Son of God.

Such is the position of man accepted before God. Jesus is its measure,
its expression. It has these two things the Father's delight, and the
power and seal of the Holy Ghost; and that in this world, and known by
him who enjoys it. There is now this difference, already noticed, that
we look by the Holy Ghost into heaven where Jesus is, but we take His
place down here.

Let us contemplate man thus in Christ heaven open the power of the Holy
Ghost upon Him and in Him the testimony of the Father, and the
relationship of the Son with the Father.

It will be remarked that the genealogy of Christ is here traced, not to
Abraham and David, that He should be the heir of the promises after the
flesh, but to Adam; in order to exhibit the true Son of God a man on
earth, where the first Adam lost his title, such as it was. The last
Adam, the Son of God, was there, accepted of the Father, and preparing
to take upon Himself the difficulties into which the sin and fall of the
first Adam had brought those of his race who drew nigh to God under the
influence of His grace.

The enemy was through sin in possession of the first Adam; and Jesus
must gain the victory over Satan, if He would deliver those who are
under his power. He must bind the strong man. To conquer him practically
is the second part of the christian life. Joy in God, conflict with the
enemy, make up the life of the redeemed, sealed with the Holy Ghost and
walking by His power. In both these things the believer is with Jesus,
and Jesus with him.

Note \#9

He took it in and with the godly remnant, in the act which distinguished
them from the unrepentant, but was the right place of the people, the
first act of spiritual life. The remnant with John is the true Jew
taking his true place with God. This Christ goes with them in.

Note \#10

Remark here, Christ has no object in heaven to fix His attention on, as
Stephen; He is the object of heaven. So He was to Stephen by the Holy
Ghost, when heaven was open to the saint. His Person is always clearly
evident, even when He puts His people in the same place with Himself or
connects Himself with them. See on this Matthew.

Note \#11

I do not speak here of the union of the church with Christ in heaven,
but His taking His place with the remnant, who come to God through
grace, led by the efficacy of His word, and by the power of the Spirit
This is the reason I apprehend that we find all the people baptised, and
then Jesus comes and is associated with them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 4](luk004)

</div>
