<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk005)  [Next](luk007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001)

The circumstances related in [Luk
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001) have reference to the same
truth, and in an important aspect. The sabbath was the sign of the
covenant between Israel and God rest after finished works. The Pharisees
blame the disciples of Christ, because they rub out the ears of corn in
their hands. Now a rejected David had overleapt the barrier of the law
when his need required it. For when God's Anointed was rejected and cast
out, everything became in a manner common. The Son of man (Son of David,
rejected like the son of Jesse, the elect and anointed king) was Lord of
the sabbath; God, who established this ordinance, was above the
ordinances He had established, and present in grace the obligation of
man yielded to the sovereignty of God; and the Son of man was there with
the rights and the power of God. Marvellous fact! Moreover the power of
God present in grace did not allow misery to exist, because it was the
day of grace. But this was setting aside Judaism. That was the
obligation of man to God, Christ was the manifestation of God in grace
to men. \[See Note \#18\]

Availing Himself of the rights of supreme goodness, and displaying a
power that authorised His pretension to assert those rights, He heals,
in a full synagogue, the man with the withered hand. They are filled
with madness at this manifestation of power, which overflows and carries
away the dykes of their pride and self-righteousness. We may observe
that all these circumstances are gathered together with an order and
mutual connection that are perfect. \[See Note \#19\] The Lord had shewn
that this grace which had visited Israel according to all that could be
expected from the Lord Almighty, faithful to His promises could,
nevertheless, not be confined to the narrow limits of that people, nor
be adapted to the ordinances of the law; that men desiredthe old things,
but that the power of God acted according to its own nature. He had
shewn that the most sacred, the most obligatory, sign of the old
covenant, must bow to His title superior to all ordinance, and give
place to the rights of His divine love which was in action. But the old
thing was thus judged, and passing away. He had shewn Himself in
everything in the calling of Peter especially to be the new centre,
around which all that sought God and blessing must gather; for He was
the living manifestation of God and of blessing in men. Thus God was
manifested, the old order of things was worn out and unable to contain
this grace, and the remnant were separated around the Lord from a world
that saw no beauty in Him that they should desire Him. He now acted on
this basis; and if faith sought Him in Israel, this power of grace
manifested God in a new way. God surrounds Himself with men, as the
centre of blessing in Christ as man. But He is love, and in the activity
of that love He seeks the lost. None but one, and one who was God and
revealed Him, could surround Himself with His followers. No prophet ever
did (see John 1). None could send out with the authority and power of a
divine message but God. Christ had been sent; He now sends. The name of
"apostle" (sent), for He so names them, contains this deep and
marvellous truth God is acting in grace. He surrounds Himself with
blessed ones. He seeks miserable sinners. If Christ, the we centre of
grace and happiness, surrounds Himself with followers, yet He sends also
His chosen ones to bear testimony of the love which He came to manifest.
God has manifested Himself in man. In man He seeks sinners. Man has part
in the most immediate display of the divine nature in both ways. He is
with Christ as man; and he is sent by Christ. Christ Himself does this
as man. It is man full of the Holy Ghost. Thus we see Him again
manifested in dependence on His Father before choosing the apostles; He
retired to pray, He passes the night in prayer.

And now He goes beyond the manifestation of Himself, as personally full
of the Holy Ghost to bring in the knowledge of God among men. He becomes
the centre, around which all must come who sought God, and a source of
mission for the accomplishment of His love the centre of the
manifestation of divine power in grace. And, therefore, He called around
Him the remnant who should be saved. His position, in every respect, is
summed up in that which is said after He came down from the mountain. He
comes down with the apostles from His communion with God. In the plain
\[See Note \#20\] He is surrounded by the company of His disciples, and
then by a great multitude, drawn together by His word and works. There
was the attraction of the word of God, and He healed the diseases of
men, and cast out the power of Satan. This power dwelt in His Person;
the virtue that went out of Him gave these outward testimonies to the
power of God present in grace. The attention of the people was drawn to
Him by these means. Nevertheless we have seen that the old things, to
which the multitude were attached, were passing away He surrounded
Himself with hearts faithful to God, the called of His grace. Here
therefore He does not, as in Matthew, announce strictly the character of
the kingdom, to shew that of the dispensation which was at hand, saying,
"Blessed are the poor in spirit, etc.; but, distinguishing the remnant,
by their attachment to Himself, He declares to the disciples who
followed Him that they were these blessed ones. They were poor and
despised, but they were blessed. They should have the kingdom. This is
important, because it separates the remnant, and puts them in
relationship with Himself to receive the blessing. He describes, in a
remarkable manner, the character of those who were thus blessed of God.

The Lord's discourse is divided into several branches.

Verses 20-26 ([Luk 6:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)). The
contrast between the remnant, manifested as His disciples, and the
multitude who were satisfied with the world, adding a warning to those
who stood in the place of disciples, and in that gained the favour of
the world. Woe be to such! Remark also here, that it is not a question
of persecution for righteousness' sake, as in Matthew, but only for His
name's sake. All was marked by attachment to His Person.

Verses 27-36 ([Luk 6:27-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027)). The
character of God their Father in the manifestation of grace in Christ,
which they were to imitate. He reveals, note, the Father's name and puts
them in the place of children.

Verses 37, 38 ([Luk 6:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037)). This
character particularly developed in the position of Christ, as He was on
earth at that time, Christ fulfilling His service on earth. This implied
government and recompense on God's part, as was the case with regard to
Christ Himself.

Verse 39 ([Luk 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)). The condition of
the leaders in Israel, and the connection between them and the
multitude.

Verse 40 ([Luk 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#040)). That of the
disciples in relation to Christ.

Verses 41-42 ([Luk 6:41-25](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#041)). The way
to attain it, and to see clearly in the midst of evil, is to put evil
away from oneself.

Afterwards, in general, its own fruit characterised every tree. Coming
around Christ to hear Him was not the question, but that He should be so
precious to their hearts that they would put aside every obstacle and
practically obey Him.

Let us sum up these things which we have been considering. He acts in a
power which dispels evil, because He finds it there, and He is good; and
God alone is good. He reaches the conscience, and calls souls to
Himself. He acts in connection with the hope of Israel and the power of
God to cleanse, pardon and give them strength. But it is a grace which
we all need; and the goodness of God, the energy of His love, did not
confine itself to that people. Its exercise did not agree with the forms
on which the Jews lived (or, rather, could not live); and the new wine
must be put into new bottles. The question of the sabbath settled the
question of the introduction of this power; the sign of the covenant
gave way to it: He who exercised it was Lord of the sabbath. The
lovingkindness of the God of the sabbath was not stayed, as if having
His hands tied by that which He had established in connection with the
covenant. Jesus then assembles the vessels of His grace and power,
according to the will of God, around Himself. They were the blessed
ones, the heirs of the kingdom. The Lord describes their character. It
was not the indifference and pride that arose from ignorance of God,
justly alienated from Israel, who had sinned against Him, and despised
the glorious manifestation of His grace in Christ. They share the
distress and pain which such a condition of God's people must cause in
those who had the mind of God. Hated, proscribed, put to shame for the
sake of the Son of man, who had come to bear their sorrows, it was their
glory. They should share His glory when the nature of God was glorified
in doing all things according to His own will. They would not be put to
shame in heaven; they should have their reward there, not in Israel. "In
like manner had their fathers done unto the prophets." Woe unto those
that were at ease in Zion, during the sinful condition of Israel, and
their rejection and ill-treatment of their Messiah! It is the contrast
between the character of the true remnant and that of the proud among
the people.

We then find the conduct that is suitable to the former conduct which,
to express it in one word, comprises in its essential elements, the
character of God in grace, as manifested in Jesus on the earth. But
Jesus had His own character of service as the Son of man; the
application of this to their particular circumstances is added in Verses
37, 38 ([Luk 6:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037)). In 39 ([Luk
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)) the leaders of Israel are set
before us, and in Verse 40 ([Luk 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#040))
the portion of the disciples. Rejected like Himself, they should have
His portion; but, assuming that they followed Him perfectly, they should
have it in blessing, in grace, in character, in position also. What a
favour! \[See Note \#21\] Moreover, the judgment of self, and not of
one's brother, was the means of attaining clear moral sight. The tree
good, the fruit would be good. Self-judgment applies to the trees. This
is always true. In self-judgment, it is not only the fruit that is
corrected; it is oneself. And the tree is known by its fruit not only by
good fruit, but by its own. The Christian bears the fruit of the nature
of Christ. Also it is the heart itself, and real practical obedience,
that are in question.

Here then the great principles of the new life, in its full practical
development in Christ, are set before us. It is the new thing morally,
the savour and character of the new wine the remnant made like unto
Christ whom they followed, unto Christ the new centre of the movement of
the Spirit of God, and of the calling of His grace. Christ has come out
of the walled court of Judaism, in the power of a new life and by the
authority of the Most High, who had brought blessing into this
enclosure, which it was unable to acknowledge. He had come out from it,
according to the principles of the life itself which He announced;
historically, He was still in it.

Note \#18

This is an important point. A part in the rest of God is the distinctive
privilege of saints of God's people. Man had it not at the fall, still
God's rest remained the special portion of His people. He did not get it
under the law. But every distinct institution under the law is
accompanied by an enforcement of the sabbath, the formal expression of
the rest of the first Adam, and this Israel will enjoy at the end of
this world's history. Till then, as the Lord said so blessedly, My
Father worketh hitherto and I work. For us, the day of rest is not the
seventh day, the end of this world's week; but the first day, the day
after the sabbath, the beginning of a new week, a new creation, the day
of Christ's resurrection, the commencement of a new state for man, for
the accomplishment of which all creation round us waits, only we are
before God in Spirit as Christ is. Hence the Sabbath, the seventh day,
the rest of the first creation on human and legal ground, is always
treated with rejection in the New Testament, though not set aside till
judgment came, but as an ordinance it died with Christ in the grave,
where He passed it only it was made for man as a mercy. The Lord's day
is our day, and precious external earnest of the heavenly rest.

Note \#19

I may remark here that, where chronological order is followed in Luke,
it is the same as in Mark and that of the events, not as in Matthew put
together to bring out the object of the Gospel; only he occasionally
introduces a circumstance which may have happened at another time
illustrative of the subject historically related. But in chapter 9 Luke
arrives at the last journey up to Jerusalem ([Luk
9:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#051)), and, from this on, a series of
moral instruction follows to [Luk
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031), chiefly, if not all, during the
period of this journey, but which for the most part has little to say to
dates.

Note \#20

Properly 'a level place' on the mountain. (topou pedinou)

Note \#21

This however does not speak of nature intrinsically, for in Christ was
no sin. Nor has the word used for "perfect" that sense. It is one
completely thoroughly instructed, formed completely by the teaching of
his master He will be like him, as his master, in all in which he was
formed by him. Christ was the perfection; we grow up unto Him in all
things unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ (see
[Col 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#028)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 7](luk007)

</div>
