<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk001)  [Next](luk003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)

In the next chapter (2) the scene changes. Instead of the relations of
God with Israel according to grace, we see first the pagan emperor of
the world the head of Daniel's last empire exercising his power in
Emmanuel's land, and over the people of God, as though God did not know
them. Nevertheless we are still in presence of the birth of the Son of
David, of Emmanuel Himself; but He is outwardly under the power of the
head of the beast, of a pagan empire. What a strange state of things is
brought in by sin! Take special notice however that we have grace here:
it is the intervention of God which makes all this manifest. Connected
with it are some other circumstances which it is well to observe. When
the interests and the glory of Jesus are in question, all this power
which governs without the fear of God, which reigns, seeking its own
glory, in the place where Christ should reign all the imperial glory is
but an instrument in the hands of God for the fulfilment of His
counsels. As to the public fact, we find the Roman emperor exercising
despotic and pagan authority in the place where the throne of God should
have been, if the sin of the people had not made it impossible.

The emperor will have all the world registered, and every one goes to
his own city. The power of the world is set in motion, and that by an
act which proves its supremacy over those who, as the people of God,
should have been free from all but the immediate government of their
God, which was their glory an act which proves the complete degradation
and servitude of the people. They are slaves, in their bodies and in
their possessions, to the heathen, because of their sins (see [Neh
9:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#036)). But this act only
accomplishes the marvellous purpose of God, causing the Saviour-king to
be born in the village where, according to the testimony of God, that
event was to take place. And, more than that, the divine Person, who was
to excite the joy and the praises of heaven, is born among men, Himself
a child in this world.

The state of things in Israel and in the world, is the supremacy of the
Gentiles and the absence of the throne of God. The Son of man, the
Saviour, God manifested in the flesh, comes to take His place a place
which grace alone could find or take in a world that knew Him not.

This registration is so much the more remarkable, in that, as soon as
the purpose of God was accomplished, it was carried no farther; that is
to say, not till afterwards, under the government of Cyrenius. \[See
Note \#4\] The Son of God is born in this world, but He finds no place
there. The world is at home, or at least by its resources it finds a
place, in the inn; it becomes a kind of measure of man's place in, and
reception by, the world; the Son of God finds none, save in the manger.
Is it for nothing that the Holy Ghost records this circumstance? No.
There is no room for God, and that which is of God, in this world. So
much the more perfect therefore is the love that brought Him down to
earth. But He began in a manger and ended on the cross, and along the
way had not where to lay His head. The Son of God a child, partaking in
all the weakness and all the circumstances of human life, thus
manifested appears in the world. \[See Note \#5\] But if God comes into
this world, and if a manger receives Him, in the nature He had taken in
grace, the angels are occupied with the event on which depends the fate
of the whole universe, and the accomplishment of all the counsels of
God; for He has chosen weak things to confound things that are mighty.
This poor infant is the object of all the counsels of God, the upholder
and heir of the whole creation, the Saviour of all who shall inherit
glory and eternal life.

Some poor men who were faithfully performing their toilsome labours,
afar from the restless activity of an ambitious and sinful world,
receive the first tidings of the Lord's presence on earth. The God of
Israel did not seek for the great among His people, but had respect to
the poor of the flock. Two things here present themselves. The angel who
comes to the shepherds of Judea announces to them the fulfilment of the
promises of God to Israel. The choir of angels celebrate in their
heavenly chorus of praise all the real import of this wondrous event.

"Unto you," says the heavenly messenger who visits the poor shepherds,
"is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the
Lord." This was proclaiming good tidings to them and to all the people.
\[See Note \#6\] But in the birth of the Son of man, God manifest in the
flesh, the accomplishment of the incarnation had far deeper importance
than this. The fact that this poor infant was there, disallowed and left
(humanly speaking) to its fate by the world, was (as understood by the
heavenly intelligences, the multitude of the heavenly host, whose
praises resounded at the angel's message to the shepherds) "Glory to God
in the highest, peace on earth, good pleasure \[of God\] in men." These
few words embrace such widely extended thoughts, that it is difficult to
speak suitably of them in a work like this; but some remarks are
necessary. First, it is deeply blessed to see that the thought of Jesus
excludes all that could oppress the heart in the scene which surrounded
His presence on earth. Sin, alas! was there. It was manifested by the
position in which this wondrous infant was found. But if sin had placed
Him there, grace had placed Him there. Grace superabounds; and in
thinking of Him, blessing, grace, the mind of God respecting sin, that
which God is, as manifested by the presence of Christ, absorb the mind
and possess the heart, and are the heart's true relief in a world like
this. We see grace alone; and sin does but magnify the fulness, the
sovereignty, the perfection of that grace. God, in His glorious
dealings, blots out the sin with respect to which He acts, and which He
thus exhibits in all its deformity; but there is that which "much more
aboundeth." Jesus, come in grace, fills the heart. It is the same thing
in all the details of christian life. It is the true source of moral
power, of sanctification, and of joy.

We see next, that there are three things brought out by the presence of
Jesus born as a child on the earth. First, glory to God in the highest.
The love of God His wisdom His power (not in creating a universe out of
nothing, but in rising above the evil, and turning the effect of all the
enemy's power into an occasion of shewing that this power was only
impotence and folly in presence of that which may be called "the
weakness of God") the fulfilment of His eternal counsels the perfection
of His ways where evil had come in the manifestation of Himself amidst
the evil in such a manner as to glorify Himself before the angels: in a
word, God had so manifested Himself by the birth of Jesus, that the
hosts of heaven, long familiar with His power, could raise their chorus,
"Glory to God in the highest!" and every voice unites in sounding forth
these praises. What love like this love? and God is love. What a purely
divine thought, that God has become man! What supremacy of good over
evil! What wisdom in drawing nigh to the heart of man and the heart of
man back to Him! What fitness in addressing man! What maintenance of the
holiness of God! What nearness to the heart of man, what participation
in his wants, what experience of his condition! But beyond all, God
above the evil in grace, and in that grace visiting this defiled world
to make Himself known as He had never yet been known!

The second effect of the presence of Him who manifested God on the earth
is, that peace should be there. Rejected His name should be an occasion
of strife; but the heavenly choir are occupied with the fact of His
presence, and with the result, when fully produced of the consequences,
wrapped up in the Person of Him who was there (looked at in their proper
fruits), and they celebrate these consequences. Manifested evil should
disappear; His holy rule should banish all enmity and violence. Jesus,
mighty in love, should reign, and impart the character in which He had
come to the whole scene that should surround Him in the world He came
into, that it might be according to His heart who took delight therein
([Pro 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#031)). \[See Note \#7\] See, as
regards a smaller scale, [Psa
85:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010). The means of this
redemption, the destruction of Satan's power, the reconciliation of man
by faith, and of all things in heaven and earth with God are not here
pointed out. Everything depended on the Person and presence of Him who
was born. All was wrapped up in Him. The state of blessing was born in
the birth of that child.

Presented to the responsibility of man, man is unable to profit by it,
and all fails. His position thereby becomes only so much the worse.

But, grace and blessing being attached to the Person of Him just born,
all their consequences necessarily flow forth After all it was the
intervention of God accomplishing the counsel of His love, the settled
purpose of His good pleasure. And, Jesus once there, the consequences
could not fail: whatever interruption there might be to their
fulfilment, Jesus was their surety. He was come into the world. He
contained in His Person, He was the expression of, all these
consequences The presence of the Son of God in the midst of sinners said
to all spiritual intelligence, "Peace on the earth."

The third thing was the good pleasure \[See Note \#8\] the affection of
God in men. Nothing more simple, since Jesus was a man He had not taken
hold of angels. It was a glorious testimony that the affection, the good
pleasure, of God was centred in this poor race, now far from Him, but in
which He was pleased to accomplish all His glorious counsels. So in John
1 the life was the light of men.

In a word, it was the power of God present in grace in the Person of the
Son of God taking part in the nature, and interesting Himself in the
lot, of a being who had departed from Him, and making him the sphere of
the accomplishment of all His counsels, and of the manifestation of His
grace and His nature to all His creatures. What a position for man! for
it is indeed in man that all this is accomplished. The whole universe
was to learn in man, and in what God therein was for man, that which God
was in Himself, and the fruit of all His glorious counsels, as well as
its complete rest in His presence, according to His nature of love. All
this was implied in the birth of that child of whom the world took no
notice. Natural and marvellous subject of praise to the holy inhabitants
of heaven, unto whom God had made it known! It was glory to God in the
highest.

Faith was in exercise in those simple Israelites to whom the angel of
the Lord was sent; and they rejoiced in the blessing fulfilled before
their eyes, and which verified the grace that God had shewn in
announcing it to them. The word, "as it was told unto them," adds its
testimony of grace to all that we enjoy by the lovingkindness of God.

The child receives the name of Jesus on the day of His circumcision,
according to Jewish custom (see [Luk
1:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#059)), but according to the counsels
and revelations of God, communicated by the angels of His power.
Moreover everything was performed according to the law; for historically
we find ourselves still in connection with Israel. He who was born of a
woman was born under the law.

The condition of poverty in which Jesus was born is also shewn by the
sacrifice offered for the purification of His mother.

But another point is here made prominent by the Holy Ghost,
insignificant as He may apparently be who gave occasion to it.

Jesus is recognised by the godly remnant of Israel, so far as the Holy
Ghost acts in them. He becomes a touchstone for every soul in Israel.
The condition of the remnant taught by the Holy Ghost (that is, of those
who had taken the position of the remnant) was this: They were sensible
of the misery and ruin of Israel, but waited upon the God of Israel,
trusting to His unchangeable faithfulness for the consolation of His
people. They still said: How long? And God was with this remnant. He had
made known to those who thus trusted in His mercy the coming of the
promised One, who was to be the fulfilment of this mercy to Israel.

Thus, in presence of the oppression of the Gentiles, and of the iniquity
of a people who were ripening or rather ripened in evil, the remnant who
trust in God do not lose that which, as we saw in the preceding chapter,
belonged to Israel. In the midst of Israel's misery they had for their
consolation that which promise and prophecy had declared for Israel's
glory.

The Holy Spirit had revealed to Simeon that he should not die until he
had seen the Lord's Christ. That was the consolation, and it was great.
It was contained in the Person of Jesus the Saviour, without going
farther into the details of the manner or the time of the accomplishment
of Israel's deliverance.

Simeon loved Israel; he could depart in peace, since God had blessed Him
according to the desires of faith. The joy of faith ever dwells on the
Lord and on His people, but sees, in the relationship that exists
between them, all the extent of that which gives rise to this joy.
Salvation, the deliverance of God, was come in Christ. It was for the
revelation of the Gentiles, till then hidden in the darkness of
ignorance without a revelation; and for the glory of Israel, the people
of God. This indeed is the fruit of the government of God in Christ,
that is to say, the millennium. But if the Spirit revealed to this pious
and faithful servant of the God of Israel the future which depended on
the presence of the Son of God, He revealed to him that he held the
Saviour Himself in his arms; thus giving him present peace, and such a
sense of the favour of God that death lost its terrors. It was not a
knowledge of the work of Jesus acting on an enlightened and convicted
conscience; but it was the fulfilment of the promises to Israel, the
possession of the Saviour, and the proof of the favour of God, so that
the peace which flowed from thence filled his soul. There were the three
things: the prophecy that announced the coming of Christ, the possession
of Christ, and the effect of His presence in the whole world. We are
here in connection with the remnant of Israel, and consequently find
nothing of the church and of purely heavenly things. The rejection comes
afterwards. Here it is all that belongs to the remnant, in the way of
blessing, through the presence of Jesus. His work is not the present
subject.

What a beautiful picture, and what a testimony rendered to this child,
by the manner in which through the power of the Holy Ghost He filled the
heart of this holy man at the close of his earthly life! Observe also
what communications are made to this feeble remnant, unknown amid the
darkness that covered the people. But the testimony of this holy man of
God (and how sweet it is to think how many of these souls, full of grace
and of communion with the Lord, have flourished in the shade, unknown to
men, but well known to and beloved of God; souls who, when they appear,
coming out of their retreat according to His will in testimony to
Christ, bear so blessed a witness to a work of God which is carried on
in spite of all that man is doing, and behind the painful and embittered
scene that is unfolding on the earth!), Simeon's testimony here, was
more than the expression of the deeply interesting thoughts which had
filled his heart in communion between himself and God. This knowledge of
Christ and of the thoughts of God respecting Him, which is developed in
secret between God and the soul, gives understanding of the effect
produced by the manifestation to the world of Him who is its object. The
Spirit speaks of it by the mouth of Simeon. In his previous words we
received the declaration of the sure fulfilment of God's counsels in the
Messiah, the joy of his own heart. Now it is the effect of the
presentation of Jesus, as the Messiah to Israel on the earth, which is
described. Whatever may have been the power of God in Christ for
blessing, He put the heart of man to the test. He should thus be, by
revealing the thoughts of many hearts (for He was light), and so much
the more that He was humbled in a world of pride, an occasion of falling
to many, and the means of rising to many from their low and degraded
condition. Mary herself, although the mother of the Messiah, should have
her own soul pierced through by a sword; for her child should be
rejected, the natural relationship of the Messiah to the people broken
and disallowed. This contradiction of sinners against the Lord laid all
hearts bare as to their desires, their hopes, and their ambition,
whatever forms of piety might be assumed.

Such was the testimony rendered in Israel to the Messiah, according to
the action of the Spirit of God upon the remnant, amid the bondage and
misery of that people: the full accomplishment of the counsels of God
towards Israel, and towards the world through Israel, for joy of heart
to the faithful who had trusted in these promises, but for a test at
that moment to every heart by means of a Messiah who was a sign spoken
against. The counsels of God and the heart of man were revealed in Him.

Malachi had said that those who feared the Lord in the evil days, when
the proud were called happy, should often speak together. This time had
arrived in Israel. From Malachi to the birth of Jesus, there was but the
passage of Israel from misery to pride a pride moreover that was dawning
even in the days of the prophet. That which he said of the remnant was
also being accomplished; they "spake together." We see that they knew
each other, in this lovely picture of God's hidden people: "She spake of
him to all them that looked for redemption in Israel." Anna, a holy
widow, who departed not from the temple, and who deeply felt the misery
of Israel, had besieged the throne of God with a widowed heart, for a
people to whom God was no longer a husband, who were really widowed like
herself, and she now makes known to all who pondered on these things
together, that the Lord had visited His temple. They had looked for
redemption in Jerusalem; and now the Redeemer unknown of men was there.
What a subject of joy to this poor remnant! What an answer to their
faith!

But Jerusalem was not after all the place in which God visited the
remnant of His people, but the seat of pride of those who said "the
temple of the Lord." And Joseph and Mary, having performed all that
which the law required, return with the child Jesus to take their place
together with Him in the despised spot which should give Him its name,
and in those regions where the despised remnant, the poor of the flock,
had more their place, and where the testimony of God had announced that
the light should appear.

There His early days were spent in the physical and mental growth of the
true humanity which He had assumed. Simple and precious testimony! But
He was not less conscious, when the time was come for speaking to men,
of His real relationship to His Father. The two things are united in
that which is said at the end of the chapter. In the development of His
humanity is manifested the Son of God on earth. Joseph and Mary, who
(while marvelling at all that happened to Him) did not thoroughly know
by faith His glory, blame the child according to the position in which
He formally stood towards them. But this gives occasion to the
manifestation of another character of perfection in Jesus. If He was the
Son of God and had the full consciousness of it, He was also the
obedient man, essentially and ever perfect and sinless an obedient
child, whatever sense He also had of another relationship unconnected in
itself with subjection to human parents. Consciousness of the one did
not injure His perfection in the other. His being the Son of God secured
His perfection as a man and a child on the earth.

But there is another important thing to remark here; it is, that this
position had nothing to do with His being anointed with the Holy Ghost.
He fulfilled, no doubt, the public ministry which He afterwards entered
on according to the power and the perfection of that anointing; but His
relationship to His Father belonged to His Person itself. The bond
existed between Him and His Father. He was fully conscious of it,
whatever might be the means or the form of its public manifestation, and
of the power of His ministry. He was all that a child ought to be; but
it was the Son of God who was so. His relationship to His Father was as
well known to Him, as His obedience to Joseph and to His mother was
beautiful, becoming, and perfect.

Here we close this touching and divine history of the birth and early
days of the divine Saviour, the Son of man. It is impossible to have
anything more profoundly interesting. Henceforward it is in His
ministry, in His public life, that we shall find Him, rejected of men,
but accomplishing the counsels and the work of God; separate from all,
in order to do this in the power of the Holy Ghost, given to Him without
measure, to fulfil that course with which nothing can be compared, with
respect to which it would be lowering the truth to call it interesting.
It is the centre and the means, including His death, His offering
Himself without spot to God and the only possible means of all
relationship between our souls and God; the perfection of the
manifestation of His grace, and the foundation of all relationship
between any creature and Himself.

Note \#4

I have no doubt that the only right translation of this passage is, "The
census itself was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria." The
Holy Ghost notes this circumstance to shew that, when once the purpose
of God was accomplished, the decree was not historically carried out
till afterwards. A great deal of learning has been spent on what I
believe to be simple and clear in the text.

Note \#5

That is to say, as an infant. He did not appear, like the first Adam,
coming out, in His perfection, from the hand of God. He is born of a
woman, the Son of man, which Adam was not.

Note \#6

"All the people" (not, as in the Authorised Version, "all people").

Note \#7

This quotation leads to a glorious apprehension, both of what was then
doing, and of our blessing. The special interest of God is in the sons
of men; wisdom (Christ is the wisdom of God) daily Jehovah's delight,
rejoicing in the habitable part of His earth, before creation,so that it
was counsel, and His delight in the sons of men. His incarnation is the
full proof of this. In Matthew we have our Lord, when He takes His place
with the remnant as this is, fully revealed, and it is in the Son's
taking this place as man and being anointed of the Holy Ghost, that the
whole Trinity is fully revealed. This is a wonderful unfolding of God's
ways.

Note \#8

This is the same word as when it is said of Christ, "In whom I am well
pleased." It is beautiful to see the unjealous celebration, by these
holy beings, of the advancement of another race to this exalted place by
the incarnation of the Word. It was God's glory, and that sufficed them.
This is very beautiful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 3](luk003)

</div>
