<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar015)  [Next](luk000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)

The last chapter is divided into two parts a fact that has even given
rise to questions as to the authenticity of Verses 9-20 ([Mar
16:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009)). The first part of the
chapter, Verses 1-8 ([Mar 16:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001)),
relates the end of the history in connection with the re-establishment
of that which has always been before us in this Gospel the relationship
of the Prophet of Israel, and of the kingdom with the people (or at
least with the remnant of the chosen people). The disciples, and Peter,
whom the Lord individually acknowledges in spite (yea, in grace,
because) of his denial of his Master, were to go and meet Him in
Galilee, as He said unto them. There the connection was re-established
between Jesus in resurrection and the poor of the flock, who waited for
Him (they alone being recognised as the people before God). The women
say nothing to any others. The testimony of Christ risen was committed
only to His disciples, to these despised Galileans. Fear was the means
employed by the providence of God to prevent the women speaking of it,
as they would naturally have done.

Verses 9-20 ([Mar 16:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009)). This is
another testimony. The disciples do not appear here as an elect remnant,
but in the unbelief natural to man. The message is sent to the whole
world. Mary Magdalene, formerly possessed by seven demons the absolute
slave of that dreadful power is employed to communicate the knowledge of
His resurrection to the companions of Jesus. Afterwards Jesus Himself
appears to them, and gives them their commission. He tells them to go
into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. It is no
longer specifically the gospel of the kingdom. Whosoever throughout the
world believed and joined Christ by baptism should be saved: he who
believed not should be condemned. It was a question of salvation or
condemnation the believer saved, he who refused the message condemned.
Moreover, if any one was convinced of the truth but refused to unite
with the disciples confessing the Lord, his case would be so much the
worse. Therefore it is said, "he who believeth and is baptised." Signs
of power should accompany believers, and they should be preserved from
that of the enemy.

The first sign should be their dominion over evil spirits, the second,
the proof of that grace which went beyond the narrow limits of Israel,
addressing itself to all the world. They should speak divers languages.

Besides this, with respect to the power of the enemy, manifested in
doing harm, the venom of serpents and poisons should have no effect upon
them, and diseases should yield to their authority.

In a word, it should be the overthrowal of the power of the enemy over
man, and the proclamation of grace unto all men.

Having thus given them their commission, Jesus ascends to heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God the place from which thus power shall come
forth to bless, and from which He will return to put the poor of the
flock in possession of the kingdom. Meanwhile, the disciples occupy His
place, extending their sphere of service unto the ends of the earth; and
the Lord confirms their word by the signs that follow them.

CONCLUSION

It may perhaps be thought that I have dwelt little on the sufferings of
Christ in that which I have written on Mark. Never will this subject be
exhausted; it is as vast as the Person and the work of Christ must be.
Blessed be God for it! In Luke we have more details. And I follow the
order of thought which the Gospel sets before me; and it appears to me
that, with regard to the crucifixion of Christ, it is the accomplishment
of His service that the evangelist has in view. His great subject was
the Prophet. He must needs relate His history unto the end; and we
possess in a brief narrative, a very complete picture of the events that
mark the end of the Lord's life of that which He had to fulfil as the
servant of His Father. I have followed this order of the Gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Introduction](luk000)

</div>
