<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar005)  [Next](mar007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

In that which follows, the history (properly so called) of His service
is resumed (chapter 6). Only we see Him already rejected by a blinded
people, in spite of the power which He had manifested, and which bore
testimony to the glory of His Person. Nevertheless He pursues His
service, and sends forth His disciples in order that no effort might be
wanting; but with the testimony of the judgment that awaited those who
should be guilty of the rejection of His mission a rejection that was
already taking place. The Lord however continues to give proof in mercy
and in goodness that Jehovah, who had compassion on His people, was
there; until at length He had to prepare His disciples for the certain
result of His work, namely, His death by the hand of the Gentiles, to
whom the chief priests would deliver Him.

To the Jews He was the carpenter, the son of Mary. Their unbelief
stopped the beneficent hand of God with regard to themselves. Jesus
carries on His work elsewhere, and sends forth His disciples an act
which implied the possession of divine power. It was still to Israel
that the mission they received from Him directed them, and they were to
pronounce judgment upon the land of Emmanuel, the land of Israel, as a
polluted land, wherever their testimony should be rejected. They were to
go forth resting on the mighty protection of Him who sent them, and they
should lack nothing. He was sovereign Lord: all things were at His
disposal. Christ can not only communicate blessings as the channel of
blessing Himself, but can also confer on His disciples the power of
casting out devils. The disciples fulfil their task. This passage shews
forth in a remarkable manner the position and glory of Christ. He is the
servant for men, the carpenter's son. In His new service, He takes no
place but the filling up of that which God had given Him to do. He could
do no mighty works there, because of their unbelief ever ready to serve,
but shut up, straitened in the exercise of His love, where no door
opened to receive its influence; and nature judging according to sight
never does. Only where a need was, His love, never tired, works must
work. The few sick folk profit by a love that despises none, because it
never seeks itself.

But, in the following verse, He who could not work mighty works (because
His service was dependent on divine conditions, on which God could found
and carry on His intercourse with men, in order to reveal Himself) now
gives power to others over all unclean spirits, a power which is divine.
Any can work miracles, if God gives the power; but God alone can give
it. They are to lack nothing, for Emmanuel was there; and to announce
judgment if their message was rejected. Divine love had made Him
entirely a dependent Servant; but the dependent Servant was God present
in grace and righteousness.

But the effect of all these manifestations of power is, that the
conscience of the king who then reigned in Israel is awakened; and the
evangelist opens to us the history of the murderous opposition of the
authorities in Israel to the witnesses for the truth. Herod had put John
to death, in order to gratify the iniquity of a woman who pleased him
iniquity that he shared with her. A dance was worth the life of the
prophet of God. Such was the ruler of Israel.

The apostles return. Jesus withdraws them from the inquisitive and needy
crowd, by going into a desert place; but the multitude follow Him.
Jesus, rejected as He is by the land He loved, has compassion on the
poor of the flock, and manifests in their behalf the power of Jehovah to
bless them according to Psalm 132. He satisfies the poor with bread.
Having sent the people away, He crosses the sea on foot; and, rejoining
His disciples, the wind ceases a figure, of which we have spoken when
meditating on Matthew. Their work was finished. As to themselves, in
spite of all His miracles, their hearts at that time were still hard,
and forgot the miracles, one after the other. The Lord pursues His work
of blessing. It was but to touch Him and be healed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 7](mar007)

</div>
