<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar006)  [Next](mar008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001)

The ruling power in exercise among the Jews had shewn itself hostile to
the testimony of God, and had put to death the one whom He had sent in
the way of righteousness. The scribes, and those who pretended to follow
righteousness, had corrupted the people by their teaching, and had
broken the law of God.

They washed cups and pots, but not their hearts; and, provided that the
priests religion gained by it, set aside the duties of children to their
parents. But God looked at the heart, and from the heart of man
proceeded every kind of impurity, iniquity, and violence. It was that
which defiled the man, not having his hands unwashed. Such is the
judgment on religiousness without conscience and without fear of God,
and the true discernment of what the heart of man is in the sight of
God, who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.

But God must also shew His own heart; and if Jesus judged that of man
with the eye of God if He manifested His ways and His faithfulness to
Israel; He displayed nevertheless through it all, what God was to those
who felt their need of Him and came to Him in faith, owning and resting
upon His pure goodness. From the land of Tyre and Sidon comes a woman of
the condemned race, a Gentile and a Syrophenician. The Lord replies to
her, on her request that He would heal her daughter, that the children
(the Jews) must first be filled; that it was not right to take the
children's bread and cast it to the dogs: an overwhelming answer, if the
sense she had of her need and of the goodness of God had not gone
beyond, and set aside, every other thought. These two things made her
humble of heart, and ready to own the sovereign favour of God towards
the people of His choice in this world. Had He not a right to choose a
people? And she was not one of them. But that did not destroy His
goodness and His love. She was but a Gentile dog, yet such was the
goodness of God that He had bread even for dogs. Christ, the perfect
expression of God, the manifestation of God Himself in the flesh, could
not deny His goodness and His grace, could not say that faith had higher
thoughts of God than were true, for He was Himself that love. The
sovereignty of God was acknowledged no pretension made to any right
whatsoever. The poor woman rested only upon grace. Her faith, with an
intelligence given of God, laid hold of the grace which went beyond the
promises made to Israel. She penetrates into the heart of the God of
love, as He is revealed in Jesus, even as He penetrates into ours, and
she enjoys the fruit of it. For this was brought in now: God Himself
directly in presence of and connection with man, and man as he was
before God not a rule or system for man to prepare himself for God.

In the next miracle, we see the Lord, by the same grace, bestowing
hearing and speech upon a man who was deaf and unable even to express
his thoughts. He could have received no fruit from the word, from God,
and could give no praise to Him. The Lord is returned into the place
where He arose as light on Israel; and here He deals with the remnant
alone. He takes the man apart from the multitude. It is the same grace
that takes the place of all pretensions to righteousness in man, and
that manifests itself to the destitute. Its form, though exercised now
in favour of the remnant of Israel, is suited to the condition of Jew or
Gentile it is grace. But as to these too it is the same: He takes the
man apart from the crowd, that the work of God may be wrought: the crowd
of this world had no real part therein. We see Jesus here, His heart
moved at the condition of man, and more especially at the state of His
ever-loved Israel, of which this poor sufferer was a striking picture.
He causes the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak. So was it
individually, and so will it be with the whole remnant of Israel in the
latter days. He acts Himself, and He does all things well. The power of
the enemy is destroyed, the man's deafness, his inability to use his
tongue as God gave it him, are taken away by His love who acts with the
power of God.

The miracle of the loaves bore witness to the presence of the God of
Israel, according to His promises; this, to the grace that went beyond
the limits of these promises, on the part of God, who judged the
condition of those who asserted a claim to them according to
righteousness, and that of man, evil in himself; and who delivered man
and blessed him in love, withdra wing him from the power of Satan, and
enabling him to hear the voice of God, and to praise Him.

There are yet some remarkable features in this part of the history of
Christ, which I desire to point out. They manifest the spirit in which
Jesus laboured at this moment. He departs from the Jews, having shewn
the emptiness and hypocrisy of their worship, and the iniquity of every
human heart as a source of corruption and sin.

The Lord at this solemn moment, which displayed the rejection of Israel
goes far away from the people to a place where there was no opportunity
for service among them, to the borders of the stranger and Canaanite
cities of Tyre and Sidon ([Mar 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024)),
and (His heart oppressed) would have no one know where He was. But God
had been too plainly manifested in His goodness and His power, to allow
Him to be hidden whenever there was need. The report of what He was had
gone abroad, and the quick eye of faith discovered that which alone
could meet its need. It is this that finds Jesus (when all, that had
outwardly a right to the promises, are deceived by this pretension
itself and by their privileges). Faith it is that knows its need, and
knows that only, and that Jesus alone can meet it. That which God is to
faith is manifested to the one that needs it, according to the grace and
power that are in Jesus. Hidden from the Jews, He is grace to the
sinner. Thus, also ([Mar 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#033)), when
He heals the deaf man of his deafness and of the impediment in his
speech, He takes him aside from the multitude, and looks up to heaven
and sighs. Oppressed in His heart by the unbelief of the people, He
takes the object of the exercise of His power aside, looks up to the
sovereign Source of all goodness, of all help for man, and grieves at
the thought of the condition in which man is found. This case then
exemplifies more particularly, the remnant according to the election of
grace from among the Jews, who are separated by divine grace from the
mass of the nation, faith, in these few, being in exercise. The heart of
Christ is far from repulsing His (earthly) people. His soul is
overwhelmed by the sense of the unbelief that separates them from Him
and from deliverance; nevertheless He takes away from some the deaf
heart, and looses their tongue, in order that the God of Israel may be
glorified.

Thus also on the death of Lazarus, Christ grieves at the sorrow which
death brings upon the heart of man. There, however, it was a public
testimony.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 8](mar008)

</div>
