<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat002)  [Next](mat004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)

We now begin His actual history. John the Baptist comes to prepare the
way of Jehovah before Him, according to the prophecy of Isaiah;
proclaiming that the kingdom of heaven was at hand, and calling on the
people to repent. It is by these three things that John's ministry to
Israel is characterised in this Gospel. First the Lord Jehovah Himself
was coming. The Holy Ghost leaves out the words "for our God," at the
end of the verse, because Jesus comes as man in humiliation, although
acknowledged at the same time to be Jehovah, and Israel could not be
thus owned as entitled to say "our." In the second place the kingdom of
heaven \[See Note \#6\] was at hand that new dispensation which was to
take the place of the one which, properly speaking, belonged to Sinai,
where the Lord had spoken on the earth. In this new dispensation "the
heavens should reign." They should be the source of, and characterise,
God's authority in His Christ. Thirdly, the people, instead of being
blessed in their present condition, were called to repentance in view of
the approach of this kingdom. John therefore takes his place in the
wilderness, departing from the Jews, with whom he could not associate
himself because he came in the way of righteousness ([Mat
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#032)). His food is that which he
finds in the wilderness (even his prophetic garments bearing witness to
the position which he had taken on the part of God), himself filled with
the Holy Ghost.

Thus was he a prophet, for he came from God, and addressed himself to
the people of God to call them to repentance, and he proclaimed the
blessing of God according to the promises of Jehovah their God; but he
was more than a prophet, for he declared as an immediate thing the
introduction of a new dispensation, long expected, and the advent of the
Lord in Person. At the same time, although coming to Israel, he did not
own the people, for they were to be judged; the threshing-floor of
Jehovah was to be cleansed, the trees that did not bear good fruit to be
cut down. It would be a remnant only that Jehovah would place in the new
position in the kingdom that he announced, without its being yet
revealed in what manner it was to be established. He proclaimed the
judgment of the people.

What a fact of immeasurable greatness was the presence of the Lord God
in the midst of His people, in the Person of Him who, although He was
doubtless to be the fulfilment of all the promises, was necessarily,
though rejected, the Judge of all the evil existing among His people!

And the more we give these passages their true application, that is to
say, the more we apply them to Israel, the more we apprehend their real
force. \[See Note \#7\]

No doubt repentance is an eternal necessity to every soul that
approaches God; but what a light is thrown upon this truth, when we see
the intervention of the Lord Himself who calls His people to this
repentance, setting aside on their refusal the whole system of their
relationships with Him, and establishing a new dispensation a kingdom
which only belongs to those who hear Him and causing at length His
judgment to break forth against His people and the city which He had so
long cherished! "If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy
day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes."

This truth gives room for the exhibition of another and most highly
important one, announced here in connection with the sovereign rights of
God rather than in its consequences, but which already contained in
itself all those consequences. The people from all parts, and as we
learn elsewhere especially the ungodly and despised, went out to be
baptised, confessing their sins. But those who, in their own eyes, held
the chief place among the people, were in the eyes of the prophet who
loved the people according to God, the objects of the judgment he
announced. Wrath was impending. Who had warned these scornful men to
flee from it? Let them humble themselves like the rest; let them take
their true place, and prove their change of heart. To boast in the
privileges of their nation, or of their fathers, availed nothing before
God. He required that which His very nature, His truth, demanded.
Moreover He was sovereign; He was able of those stones to raise up
children to Abraham. This is what His sovereign grace has done, through
Christ, with regard to the Gentiles. There was reality needed. The axe
was at the root of the trees, and those that did not bring forth good
fruit should be cut down. This is the great moral principle which the
judgment was going to put in force. The blow was not yet struck, but the
axe was already at the root of the trees. John was come to bring those
who received his testimony into a new position, or at least into a new
state in which they were prepared for it. On their repentance he would
distinguish them from the rest by baptism. But He who was coming after
John He whose shoes John was not worthy to bear would thoroughly purge
His floor, would separate those that were truly His, morally His, from
among His people Israel (that was His floor), and would execute judgment
on the rest. John on his part opened the door to repentance beforehand;
afterwards should come the judgment.

Judgment was not the only work that belonged to Jesus. Two things are
however attributed to Him in John's testimony He baptises with fire this
is the judgment proclaimed in Verse 12, ([Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)), which consumes all that is
evil. But He baptises also with the Holy Ghost that Spirit which, given
to, and acting in divine energy in man, quickened, redeemed, cleansed in
the blood of Christ, brings him out fromthe influence of all that acts
on the flesh, and sets him in connection and in communion with all that
is revealed of God, with the glory into which He brings His creatures in
the life which He imparts, destroying morally in us the power of all
that is contrary to the enjoyment of these privileges.

Observe here, that the only good fruit recognised by John, as the way of
escape, is the sincere confession, through grace, of sin. Those only who
make this confession escape the axe. There were really no good trees
excepting those which confessed that they were bad.

But what a solemn moment was this for the people beloved of God! What an
event was the presence of Jehovah in the midst of the nation with whom
He stood in relationship!

Observe that John the Baptist does not here present the Messiah as the
Saviour come in grace, but as the Head of the kingdom, as Jehovah, who
would execute judgment if the people did not repent. We shall see
afterwards the position which He took in grace.

In Verse 13, ([Mat 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)), Jesus
Himself, who until now has been presented as the Messiah and even as
Jehovah, comes to John to be baptised with the baptism of repentance. We
must remember that to come to this baptism was the only good fruit which
a Jew, in his then condition, could produce. The act proved itself to be
the fruit of a work of God of the effectual work of the Holy Ghost. He
who repents confesses that he has previously walked afar from God; so
that it is a new movement, the fruit of God's word and work in him, the
sign of a new life, of the life of the Spirit in his soul. By the very
fact of John's mission, there was no other fruit, no other admissible
proof, of life from God, in a Jew. We are not to infer from this, that
there were none in whom the Spirit already acted vitally; but, in this
condition of the people and according to the call of God by His servant,
that was the proof of this life of the turning of the heart to God.
These were the true remnant of the people, those whom God acknowledged
as such; and it was thus they were separated from the mass who were
ripening for judgment. These were the true saints the excellent of the
earth; although the self-abasement of repentance could be their only
true place. It was there they must begin. When God brings in mercy and
justice, they avail themselves thankfully of the former, confessing it
to be their only resource, and they bow their heart before the latter,
as the just consequence of the condition of God's people, but as
applying it to themselves .

Now Jesus presents Himself in the midst of those who do this. Although
truly the Lord, Jehovah, the righteous Judge of His people, He who was
to purge His floor, He nevertheless takes His place among the faithful
remnant who humble themselves before this judgment. He takes the place
of the lowest of His people before God; as in Psalm 16 ([Psa
16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)) He calls Jehovah His Lord,
saying unto Him, "My goodness extendeth not to Thee"; and says to the
saints, and the excellent in the earth, "all my delight is in them."
Perfect testimony of grace the Saviour identifying Himself, according to
this grace, with the first movement of the Spirit in the hearts of His
own people, humbling Himself not only in the condescension of grace
towards them, but in taking His place as one of them in their true
position before God; not merely to comfort their hearts by such
kindness, but in order to sympathise with all their sorrows and their
difficulties; in order to be the pattern, the source, and the perfect
expression of every sentiment suitable to their position.

With wicked unrepentant Israel He could not associate Himself, but with
the first living effect of the word and Spirit of God in the poor of the
flock, He could and did in grace. He does so now. With the first right
step, one really of God, Christ is found.

But there was yet more. He comes to bring those who received Him into
relation with God, according to the favour which rested on perfectness
like His, and on the love which, by taking up His people's cause,
satisfied the heart of the Lord, and, having perfectly glorified God in
all that He is, made it possible for Him to satisfy Himself with
goodness. We know indeed that in order to do this, the Saviour had to
lay down His life, because the condition of the Jew, as that of every
man, required this sacrifice before either the one or the other could
stand in relation with the God of truth. But even for this the love of
Jesus did not fail. Here however He is leading them on to the enjoyment
of the blessing expressed in His Person, which should be securely
founded on that sacrifice-blessing which they must reach by the path of
repentance, into which they entered by John's baptism; which Jesus
received with them, that they might go on together towards the
possession of all the good things which God has prepared for them that
loved Him.

John, feeling the dignity and excellency of the Person of Him who came
unto him, opposes the Lord's intention. The Holy Ghost by this brings
out the true character of the Lord's action. As to Himself, it was
righteousness which brought Him there, and not sin righteousness which
He accomplished in love. He, as well as John the Baptist, fulfilled that
which belonged to the place assigned Him by God. With what condescension
He links Himself at the same time with John "It becometh us." He is the
lowly and obedient Servant. It was thus He ever behaved Himself on
earth. Moreover, as to His position, grace brought Jesus there, where
sin brought us, who came in by the door the Lord had opened for His
sheep. In confessing sin as it is, in coming before God in the
confession of (the opposite of sin morally) our sin, we find ourselves
in company with Jesus. \[See Note \#8\] Indeed it is in us the fruit of
His Spirit. This was the case with the poor sinners who came out to
John. Thus it was that Jesus took His place in righteousness and
obedience among men, and more exactly among the repentant Jews. It is in
this position of a man righteous, obedient, and fulfilling on earth, in
perfect humility, the work for which He had offered Himself in grace,
according to Psalm 40, giving Himself up to the accomplishment of all
the will of God in complete renunciation that God His Father fully
acknowledged Him, and sealed Him, declaring Him on earth to be His
well-beloved Son.

Being baptised the most striking token of the place He had taken with
His people the heavens are opened unto Him, and He sees the Holy Ghost
descending on Him like a dove; and, lo! a voice from heaven, saying,
"This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

But these circumstances demand attention.

Never were the heavens opened to the earth, nor to a man on the earth,
before the beloved Son was there. \[See Note \#9\] God had doubtless, in
His longsuffering and in the way of providence, blessed all His
creatures; He had also blessed His own people, according to the rules of
His government on earth. Besides this, there were the elect, whom He had
preserved in faithfulness. Nevertheless until now the heavens had not
been opened. A testimony had been sent by God in connection with His
government of the earth; but there was no object on the earth upon which
the eye of God could rest with complacency, until Jesus, sinless and
obedient, His beloved Son, stood there. But what is so precious to us
is, that it is as soon as in grace He takes publicly this place of
humiliation with Israel that is, with the faithful remnant, presenting
Himself thus before God, fulfilling His will the heavens open upon an
object worthy of their attention. Ever doubtless was He worthy of their
adoration, even before the world was. But now He has just taken this
place in the dealings of God as a man, and the heavens opened unto
Jesus, the object of God's entire affection on the earth. The Holy Ghost
descends upon Him visibly. And He, a man on earth, a man taking His
place with the meek of the people who repented, is acknowledged as the
Son of God. He is not only anointed of God, but, as man, He is conscious
of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon Him the seal of the Father set
upon Him. Here it is evidently not His divine nature, in the character
of the Eternal Son of the Father. The seal would not even be in
conformity with that character; and as to His Person it is manifested,
and His consciousness of it, at twelve years old in Luke's Gospel. But
while He is such, He is also a man, the Son of God on the earth, and is
sealed as a man. As a man He has the consciousness of the immediate
presence of the Holy Ghost with Him. This presence is in connection with
the character of lowliness, meekness, and obedience, in which the Lord
appeared down here. It is "like a dove" that the Holy Ghost descends
upon Him; just as it was in the form of tongues of fire, that He came
down upon the heads of the disciples, for their testimony in power in
this world, according to the grace which addressed each and every one in
his own language.

Jesus thus creates in His own position as man the place into which He
introduces us by redemption ([Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)). But the glory of His Person is
always carefully guarded. There is no object presented to Jesus, as to
Saul for instance, and, in a still more analogous case, to Stephen, who,
being full of the Spirit, sees also the heavens opened, and looks up
into them, and sees Jesus, the Son of man, and is transformed into His
image. Jesus has come; He is Himself the object over whom the heavens
open; He has no transforming object, as Stephen, or as we ourselves in
the Spirit; heaven looks down at Him, the perfect object of delight. It
is His relationship with His Father, already existing, which is sealed.
\[See Note \#10\] Neither does the Holy Ghost create His character
(except so far as, with respect to His human nature, He was conceived in
the virgin Mary's womb by the power of the Holy Ghost); He had connected
Himself with the poor, in the perfection of that character, before He
was sealed, and then acts according to the energy and the power of that
which He received without measure in His human life here below (compare
[Act 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038); [Mat
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028); [Joh
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)).

We find in the word four memorable occasions on which the heavens open.
Christ is the object of each of these revelations; each has its especial
character. Here the Holy Ghost descends upon Him, and He is acknowledged
the Son of God (compare [Joh 1:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)).
At the end of the same chapter of John, He declares Himself to be the
Son of man. There it is the angels of God who ascend and descend upon
Him. He is, as Son of man, the object of their ministry. \[See Note
\#11\] At the end of Acts 7, an entirely new scene is opened. The Jews
reject the last testimony that God sends them. Stephen, by whom this
testimony is rendered, is filled with the Holy Ghost, and the heavens
are opened to him. The earthly system was definitely closed by the
rejection of the Holy Ghost's testimony to the glory of the ascended
Christ. But this is not merely a testimony. The Christian is filled with
the Spirit, heaven is opened to him, the glory of God is manifested to
him, and the Son of man appears to him, standing at the right hand of
God. This is a different thing from the heavens open over Jesus, the
object of God's delight on earth. It is heaven open to the Christian
himself, his object being there when rejected on earth. He sees there by
the Holy Ghost the heavenly glory of God, and Jesus, the Son of man, the
special object of the testimony he renders, in the glory of God. The
difference is as remarkable as it is interesting to us; and it exhibits,
in a most striking manner, the true position of the Christian as on
earth, and the change which the rejection of Jesus by His earthly people
has produced. Only, the church, the union of believers in one body with
the Lord in heaven, was not yet revealed. Afterwards (Revelation 19)
heaven opens, and the Lord Himself comes forth, the King of kings and
Lord of lords.

Thus we see Jesus, the Son of God on earth, the object of heaven's
delight, sealed with the Holy Ghost; Jesus, the Son of man, the object
of the ministry of heaven, angels being His servants; Jesus, on high at
the right hand of God, and the believer, full of the Spirit, and
suffering here for His sake, beholding the glory on high, and the Son of
man in the glory; and Jesus, the King of kings and Lord of lords, coming
forth to judge and make war against the scornful men who dispute His
authority and oppress the earth.

To return: the Father Himself acknowledges Jesus, the obedient man on
earth, who enters as the true Shepherd by the door, as His beloved Son
in whom is all His delight. Heaven is opened to Him; He sees the Holy
Ghost come down to seal Him, the infallible strength and support of the
perfection of His human life; and He has the Father's own testimony to
the relationship between them. No object on which His faith was to rest
is presented to Him as it is to us. It is His own relation to heaven and
to His Father which is sealed. His soul enjoys it through the descent of
the Holy Ghost and the voice of His Father.

But this passage in Matthew requires some further notice. The blessed
Lord, or rather what occurred as to Him, gives the place or model in
which He sets believers, be they Jew or Gentile: only of course we are
brought there by redemption. "I go to my Father and your Father, my God
and your God," is His blessed word after His resurrection. But to us
heaven is opened; we are sealed with the Holy Ghost; the Father owns us
as sons. Only the divine dignity of Christ's Person is always carefully
guarded here in humiliation, as in the transfiguration in glory. Moses
and Elias are in the same glory, but disappear when Peter's haste,
permitted to be expressed, would put them on a level. The nearer we are
to a divine Person, the more we adore and recognise what He is.

But another very remarkable fact is found here. For the first time, when
Christ takes this place among men in lowliness, the Trinity is fully
revealed. No doubt the Son and Spirit are mentioned in the Old
Testament. But there the unity of the Godhead is the great revealed
point. Here the Son is owned in man, the Holy Ghost comes down on Him,
and the Father owns Him as His Son. What a wonderful connection with
man! what a place for man to be in! Through Christ's connection with Him
the Godhead is revealed in its own fulness. His being a man draws it out
in its display. But He was really a man, but the Man in whom the
counsels of God about man were to be fulfilled.

Hence, as He has realised and displayed the place in which man is set
with God in His own Person, and in the counsels of grace as to us our
relationship with God, so, as we are in conflict with the enemy, He
enters into that side of our position also. We have our relationship
with God and our Father, and now we have to say to Satan also. He
overcomes for us, and shews us how to overcome. Remark too, the
relationship with God is first fully settled and brought out, and then,
as in that place, the conflict with Satan begins, and so with us. But
the first question was, Would the second Adam stand where the first had
failed? only, in the wilderness of this world and Satan's power instead
of the blessings of God for there we had got.

Another point is to be remarked here, fully to bring out the place the
Lord takes. The law and the prophets were till John. Then the new thing
is announced, the kingdom of heaven. But judgment closes with God's
people. The axe is at the root of the trees, the fan is in the hand of
the coming One, the wheat is gathered into God's garner, the chaff burnt
up. That is, there is a close of the history of God's people in
judgment. We come in on the ground of being lost, anticipating the
judgment; but man's history as responsible was closed. Hence it is said,
"now once in the end of the world he hath appeared to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself." It has happened externally and literally to
Israel; but it is morally true for us: only we are gathered for heaven,
as in result the remnant then, and shall be in heaven. But, Christ
rejected, the history of responsibility is over, and we come in in grace
as already lost. Consequent on the announcement of this as imminent,
Christ comes and, identifying Himself with the remnant who escape on
repentance, makes this new place for man on the earth: only we could not
be in it till redemption was accomplished. Still He revealed the
Father's name to those He had given Him out of it.

Note \#6

This expression is found only in Matthew, as specially occupied with
dispensations, and the dealings of God with the Jews. "The kingdom of
God" is the generic term. "The kingdom of heaven" is the kingdom of God,
but the kingdom of God as specially taking this character of heavenly
government; we shall find it (farther on) separated into the kingdom of
our Father, and the kingdom of the Son of man.

Note \#7

And we must remember that, besides the special promises to, and calling,
of Israel as God's earthly people, that people were just man viewed in
his responsibility to God under the fullest culture that God could give
him. Up to the flood there was testimony but no dispensational dealings,
or institutions of God. After it, in the new world, human government,
calling and promise in Abraham, law, Messiah, God come in grace,
everything God could do, and that in perfect patience, was done, and in
vain as to good in flesh; and now Israel was being set aside as in the
flesh, and the flesh judged, the fig tree cursed as fruitless, and God's
man, the second Adam, He in whom blessing was by redemption, introduced
into the world. In the first three Gospels, as we have seen, we have
Christ presented to man to be received; in John, man is set aside and
Israel, and God's sovereign ways in grace and resurrection brought in.

Note \#8

It is the same thing as to the sense of our nothingness. He made Himself
nothing, and in the consciousness of our nothingness we find ourselves
with Him, and at the same time are filled with His fulness. Even when we
fall, it is not until we are brought to know ourselves as we really are
that we find Jesus raising us up again.

Note \#9

In the beginning of Ezekiel, it is said indeed that the heavens were
opened; but this was only in vision, as the prophet himself explains. In
that instance it was the manifestation of God in judgment.

Note \#10

This is true also of us when we are in that relationship by grace.

Note \#11

It is all a mistake to make Christ the ladder. He, as Jacob was, is the
object of their service and ministry.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 4](mat004)

</div>
