<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat010)  [Next](mat012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

From that hour we find the definitive judgment of the nation, not indeed
as yet openly declared (that is in chapter 12), nor by the cessation of
Christ's ministry, which wrought, notwithstanding the opposition of the
nation, in gathering out the remnant, and in the still more important
effect of the manifestation of Emmanuel; but it is unfolded in the
character of His discourses, in the positive declarations which describe
the condition of the people, and in the Lord's conduct amid
circumstances which gave rise to the expression of the relations in
which He stood towards them.

Having sent His disciples away to preach, He continues the exercise of
His own ministry. The report of the works of Christ reaches John in
prison. He, in whose heart, notwithstanding his prophetic gift, there
still remained something of Jewish thoughts and hopes, sends by his
disciples to ask Jesus if He is the One who should come, or if they were
still to look for another. \[See Note \#30\] God allowed this question
in order to put everything in its place. Christ, being the Word of God
ought to be His own witness. He ought to bear testimony to Himself as
well as to John, and not to receive testimony from the latter; and this
He did in the presence of John's disciples He healed all the diseases of
men, and preached the gospel to the poor; and John's messengers were to
set before him this true testimony of what Jesus was. John was to
receive it. It was by these things men were tested. Blessed was he who
should not be offended at the lowly exterior of the King of Israel. God
manifest in the flesh did not come to seek the pomp of royalty, although
it was His due, but the deliverance of suffering men. His work revealed
a character much more profoundly divine, which had a spring of action
far more glorious than that which depended on the possession of the
throne of avid than a deliverance which would have set John at liberty,
and put an end to the tyranny that had imprisoned him.

To undertake this ministry, to go down into the scene of its exercise,
to bear the sorrows and the burdens of His people might be an occasion
of stumbling to a carnal heart that was looking for the appearance of a
glorious kingdom which would satisfy the pride of Israel. But was it not
more truly divine more necessary to the condition of the people as seen
of God? The heart of each one therefore would be thus tested, to shew
whether he belonged to that repentant remnant, who discerned the ways of
God, or to the proud multitude, who only sought their own glory,
possessing neither a conscience exercised before God, nor a sense of
their need and misery.

Having set John under the responsibility of receiving this testimony,
which put all Israel to the test, and distinguished the remnant from the
nation in general, the Lord then bears witness to John himself,
addressing the multitude, and reminding them how they had followed the
preaching of John. He shews them the exact point to which Israel had
come in the ways of God. The introduction, in testimony, of the kingdom
made the difference between that which preceded and that which followed.
Among all that are born of women there had been none greater than John
the Baptist, none who had been so near Jehovah, sent before His face,
none who had rendered Him a more exact and complete testimony, who had
been so separate from all evil by the power of the Spirit of God a
separation proper to the fulfilment of such a mission among the people
of God. Still he had not been in the kingdom: it was not yet
established; and to be in the presence of Christ in His kingdom,
enjoying the result of the establishment of His glory, \[See Note \#31\]
was a greater thing than all testimony to the coming of the kingdom.

Nevertheless from the time of John the Baptist there was a notable
change. From that time the kingdom was announced. It was not
established, but it was preached. This was a very different thing from
the prophecies that spoke of the kingdom for a yet distant period, while
recalling the people to the law as given by Moses. The Baptist went
before the King, announcing the nearness of the kingdom, and commanding
the Jews to repent that they might enter into it; Thus the law and the
prophets spake on God's part until John. The law was the rule; the
prophets, maintaining the rule, strengthened the hopes and the faith of
the remnant. Now, the energy of the Spirit impelled men to force their
way through every difficulty and all the opposition of the leaders of
the nation and of a blinded people, that they might at all costs attain
the kingdom of a King rejected by the blind unbelief of those who should
have received Him. It needed seeing that the King had come in
humiliation, and that He had been rejected it needed this violence to
enter the kingdom. The strait gate was the only entrance.

If faith could really penetrate the mind of God therein, John was the
Elias who should come. He that had ears to hear, let him hear. It was in
fact for those only.

Had the kingdom appeared in the glory and in the power of its Head,
violence would not have been necessary; it would have been possessed as
the certain effect of that power; but it was the will of God that they
should morally be tested It was thus also that they ought to have
received Elias in spirit.

The result is given in the Lord's words which follow, that is, the true
character of this generation, and the ways of God in relation to the
Person of Jesus, manifested by His rejection itself. As a generation the
threatenings of justice, and the attractions of grace were equally lost
upon them. The children of wisdom, those whose consciences were taught
of God, acknowledged the truth of John's testimony, as against
themselves, and the grace, so necessary to the guilty, of the ways of
Jesus.

John, separate from the iniquity of the nation, had, in their eyes, a
devil. Jesus, kind to the most wretched, they accused of falling in with
evil ways. Yet the evidence was powerful enough to have subdued the
heart of a Tyre or Sodom; and the righteous rebuke of the Lord warns the
perverse and unbelieving nation of a more terrible judgment than that
which awaited the pride of Tyre or the corruption of Sodom.

But this was a test for the most favoured of mankind. It might have been
said, Why was the message not sent to Tyre, ready to hearken? Why not to
Sodom, that that city might have escaped the fire that consumed it? It
is that man must be tested in every way; that the perfect counsels of
God may be developed. If Tyre or Sodom had abused the advantages which a
God of creation and of providence had heaped upon them, the Jews were to
manifest what was in the heart of man, when possessing all the promises
and made the depositaries of all the oracles of God.

They boasted of the gift, and departed from the Giver. Their blinded
heart acknowledged not and even rejected their God.

The Lord felt the contempt of His people whom He loved; but, as the
obedient man on earth, He submitted to the will of His Father, who,
acting in sovereignty, the Lord of heaven and earth, manifested, in the
exercise of this sovereignty, divine wisdom, and the perfection of His
character. Jesus accepts the will of His Father in its effects, and,
thus subject, sees its perfection.

It was befitting that God should reveal to the lowly all the gifts of
His grace in Jesus, this Emmanuel on earth; and that He should hide them
from the pride that sought to scrutinise and to judge them. But this
opens the door to the glory of God's counsels in it.

The truth was, that His Person was too glorious to be fathomed or
understood by man, although His words and His works left the nation
without excuse, in their refusal to come unto Him that they might know
the Father.

Jesus, subject to His Father's will, although thoroughly sensible of all
that was painful to His heart in its effects, sees the whole extent of
the glory that should follow His rejection. All things were delivered
unto Him of His Father. It is the Son who is revealed to our faith, the
veil that covered His glory being taken away now that He is rejected as
Messiah. No one knoweth Him but the Father. Who among the proud could
fathom what He was? He who from all eternity was one with the Father,
become man, surpassed, in the deep mystery of His being, all knowledge
save that of the Father Himself. The impossibility of knowing Him who
had emptied Himself to become man, maintained the certainty, the
reality, of His divinity, which this self-renunciation might have hidden
from the eyes of unbelief. The incomprehensibility of a being in a
finite form revealed the infinite which was therein. His divinity was
guaranteed to faith, against the effect of His humanity on the mind of
man. But if no one knew the Son, except the Father only, the Son, who is
truly God, was able to reveal the Father. No man has ever seen God. The
only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, has revealed Him.
No one knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
Him. Wretched ignorance that in its pride rejects Him! It was thus
according to the good pleasure of the Son that this revelation was made.
Distinctive attribute of divine perfection! He came for this purpose; He
did it according to His own wisdom. Such was the truth of man's
relations with Him, although He submitted to the painful humiliation of
being rejected by His own people, as the final test of their, of man's
state.

Observe also here, that this principle, this truth, with regard to
Christ, opens the door to the Gentiles, to all who should be called. He
reveals the Father to whomsoever He will. He always seeks the glory of
His Father. He alone can reveal Him He to whomthe Father, the Lord of
heaven and earth, has delivered all things; The Gentiles are included in
the rights conferred by this title, even every family in heaven and
earth. Christ exercises these rights in grace, calling whom He will to
the knowledge of the Father.

Thus we find here the perverse and faithless generation; a remnant of
the nation justifying the wisdom of God as manifested in John and in
Jesus in judgment and in grace; the sentence of judgment on the
unbelievers; the rejection of Jesus in the character in which He had
presented Himself to the nation; and His perfect submission, as man, to
the will of His Father in this rejection, giving occasion for the
manifestation to His soul of the glory proper to Him as Son of God a
glory which no man could know, even as He alone could reveal that of the
Father. So that the world who refused Him was in total ignorance, save
at the good pleasure of Him who delights in revealing the Father.

We should also remark here, that the mission of the disciples to Israel
who rejected Christ continues (if Israel be in the land) until He comes
as the Son of man, His title of judgment and of glory as heir of all
things (that is to say, until the judgment by which He takes possession
of the land of Canaan, in a power that leaves no room for His enemies).
This, His title of judgment and glory as heir of all things, is
mentioned in John 5, Daniel 7, Psalms 8 and 80.

Observe too, that in chapter 11, the perverseness of the generation that
had rejected John's testimony, and that of the Son of man come in grace
and associating Himself in grace with the Jews, opens the door to the
testimony of the glory of the Son of God, and to the revelation of the
Father by Him in sovereign grace a grace that could make Him known as
efficaciously to a poor Gentile as to a Jew. It was no longer a question
of responsibility to receive, but of sovereign grace that imparted to
whomsoever it would. Jesus knew man, the world, the generation which had
enjoyed the greatest advantages of all that were in the world. There was
no place for the foot to rest on in the miry slough of that which had
departed from God. In the midst of a world of evil Jesus remained the
sole revealer of the Father, the source of all good. Whom does He call?
What does He bestow on those who come? Only source of blessing and
revealer of the Father, He calls all those who are weary and heavy
laden. Perhaps they did not know the spring of all misery, namely,
separation from God, sin. He knew, and He alone could heal them. If it
was the sense of sin which burdened them, so much the better. Every way
the world no longer satisfied their hearts; they were miserable, and
therefore the objects of the heart of Jesus. Moreover He would give them
rest; He does not here explain by what means; He simply announces the
fact. The love of the Father, which in grace, in the Person of the Son,
sought out the wretched, would bestow rest (not merely alleviation or
sympathy, but rest) on every one that came to Jesus. It was the perfect
revelation of the Father's name to the heart of those that needed it;
and that by the Son; peace, peace with God. They had but to come to
Christ: He undertook all and gave rest. But there is a second element in
rest. There is more than peace through the knowledge of the Father in
Jesus. And more than that is needed; for, even when the soul is
perfectly at peace with God, this world presents many causes of trouble
to the heart. In these cases it is a question of submission or of
self-will. Christ, in the consciousness of His rejection, in the deep
sorrow caused by the unbelief of the cities in which He had wrought so
many miracles, had just manifested the most entire submission to His
Father, and had found therein perfect rest to His soul. To this He calls
all that heard Him, all that felt the need of rest to their own souls.
"Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me," that is to say, the yoke of
entire submission to His Father's will, learning of Him how to meet the
troubles of life; for He was "meek and lowly in heart," contentto be in
the lowest place at the will of His God. In fact nothing can overthrow
one who is there. It is the place of perfect rest to the heart.

Note \#30

His sending to Jesus shews full confidence in His word as a prophet but
ignorance as to His Person; and this is what is brought out here in its
full light.

Note \#31

This is not God's assembly; but the rights of the King as manifested in
glory being established, the foundation being laid, Christians are in
the kingdom and the patience of Jesus Christ, who is glorified but
hidden in God. They share the destiny of the King, and will share His
glory when He reigns.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 12](mat012)

</div>
