<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mal004)  [Next](mat001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Matthew

Let us now consider the Gospel by Matthew. This Gospel sets Christ
before us in the character of the Son of David and of Abraham, that is
to say, in connection with the promises made to Israel, but presents Him
withal as Emmanuel, Jehovah the Saviour, for such the Christ was. It is
He who, being received, should have accomplished the promises (and
hereafter He will do so) in favour of this beloved people. This Gospel
is, in fact, the history of His rejection by the people, and,
consequently, that of the condemnation of the people themselves, so far
as their responsibility was concerned (for the counsels of God cannot
fail), and the substitution of that which God was going to bring in
according to His purpose.

In proportion as the character of the King and of the kingdom develops
itself, and arouses the attention of the leaders of the people, they
oppose it, and deprive themselves, as well as the people who follow
them, of all the blessings connected with the presence of the Messiah.
The Lord declares to them the consequences of this, and shews His
disciples the position of the kingdom which should be set up on the
earth after His rejection, and also the glories which should result from
it to Himself and to His people with Him. And in His Person, and as
regards His work, the foundation of the assembly also is revealed the
church as built by Himself. In a word, consequent on His rejection by
Israel, first, the kingdom as it exists now is revealed (Chapter 13),
then the church (Chapter 16), and then, the kingdom in the glory
(Chapter 17).

At length, after His resurrection, a new commission, addressed to all
nations, is given to the apostles sent out by Jesus as risen. \[See Note
\#1\]

Note \#1:

This was from resurrection in Galilee; not from heaven and glory, that
was near Damascus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 1](mat001)

</div>
