<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat019)  [Next](mat021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)

We may remark that, when the Lord answers Peter, it was the consequence
of having left all for Christ upon His call. The motive was Christ
Himself: therefore He says, "Ye which have followed me." He speaks also
of those who had done it for His name's sake. This was the motive. The
reward is an encouragement, when, for His sake, we are already in the
way. This is always the case when reward is spoken of in the New
Testament. \[See Note \#59\] He who was called at the eleventh hour was
dependent on this call for his entrance into the work; and if, in his
kindness, the master chose to give him as much as the others, they
should have rejoiced at it. The first adhered to justice; they received
that which was agreed upon; the last enjoyed the grace of his master.
And it is to be remarked that they accept the principle of grace, of
confidence in it. "Whatsoever is right I will give!" The great point in
the parable is that confidence in the grace of the master of the
vineyard, and grace as the ground of their action. But who understood
it? A Paul might come in late, God having then called him, and be a
stronger testimony to grace than the labourers who had wrought from the
dawning of the gospel day.

The Lord afterwards pursues the subject with His disciples. He goes up
to Jerusalem, where the Messiah ought to have been received and crowned,
to be rejected and put to death, but after that to rise again; and when
the sons of Zebedee come and ask him for the two first places in the
kingdom, He answers that He can lead them indeed to suffering; but as to
the first places in His kingdom, He could not bestow them, except
(according to the Father's counsels) on those for whom the Father had
prepared them. Wondrous self-renunciation! It is for the Father, for us,
that He works. He disposes of nothing. He can bestow on those who will
follow Him a share in His sufferings: everything else shall be given
according to the counsels of the Father. But what real glory for Christ
and perfection in Him, and what a privilege for us to have this motive
only, and to partake in the Lord's sufferings! and what a purification
of our carnal hearts is here proposed to us, in making us act only for a
suffering Christ, sharing His cross, and committing ourselves to God for
recompense!

The Lord then takes occasion to explain the sentiments that become His
followers, the perfection of which they had seen in Himself. In the
world, authority was sought for; but the spirit of Christ was a spirit
of service, leading to the choice of the lowest place, and to entire
devotedness to others. Beautiful and perfect principles, the full bright
perfection of which was displayed in Christ. The renunciation of all
things, in order to depend confidingly on the grace of Him whom we
serve, the consequent readiness to take the lowest place, and thus to be
the servant of all this should be the spirit of those who have part in
the kingdom as now established by the rejected Lord. It is this that
becomes His followers. \[See Note \#60\]

With the end of [Mat 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028), this
portion of the Gospel terminates, and the closing scenes of the blessed
Saviour's life begin. At [Mat 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029),
\[See Note \#61\] begins His last presentation to Israel as the Son of
David, the Lord, the true King of Israel, the Messiah. He begins His
career in this respect at Jericho, the place where Joshua entered the
land the place on which the curse had so long rested. He opens the blind
eyes of His people who believe in Him and receive Him as the Messiah,
for such He truly was, although rejected. They salute Him as Son of
David, and He answers their faith by opening their eyes. They follow Him
a figure of the true remnant of His people, who will wait for Him.

Note \#59

Indeed, reward is in scripture always an encouragement to those who are
in sorrow and suffering by having from higher motives entered into God's
way. So Moses; so even Christ, whose motive in perfect love we know, yet
for the joy set before Him endured the cross despising the shame. He was
the Leader and Completer in the path of faith.

Note \#60

Observe the way in which the sons of Zebedee and their mother come to
seek the highest place, at the moment when the Lord was preparing
unreservedly to take the very lowest. Alas! we see so much of the same
spirit. The effect was to bring out how absolutely He had stripped
Himself of everything. These are the principles of the heavenly kingdom:
perfect self-renunciation, to be contented in thorough devotedness; this
is the fruit of love that seeketh not her own the yieldingness that
flows from the absence of self-seeking; submission when despised;
meekness and lowliness of heart. The spirit of service to others is that
which love produces at the same time as the humility which is satisfied
with this place. The Lord fulfilled this even unto death, giving His
life as a ransom for many.

Note \#61

The case of the blind man at Jericho is, in all the first three Gospels,
the commencement of the final circumstances of Christ's life which led
on to the cross, the general contents and teachings of each being
closed. Hence He is addressed as Son of David, being the last
presentation of Himself as such to them, God's testimony being given to
Him as such.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 21](mat021)

</div>
