<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic000)  [Next](mic002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

[Micah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 1:1</span></span>

The Lord speaks in this book from His temple, and addresses all the
peoples-the whole earth. That is to say, He takes His place upon His
earthly throne to judge the whole earth, in testimony against all the
nations. But He comes from on high, coming forth out of His place to
tread upon the high places of the earth. And all that is lifted up shall
be molten under Him, and all that is abased shall be as wax before the
fire. And wherefore this intervention in judgment? Why does He not leave
the nations still to walk in their own ways, afar from Him, in
long-sufferance to their folly? It is because His own people, the
witness for His name upon the earth, are in transgression against
Him-have given themselves up to the service of other gods, or to
iniquity. There is no longer any testimony of God in the earth, except
indeed it be a false testimony; and God must therefore render it to
Himself. All the sins of the nations then come into remembrance before
Him, and spread themselves out before eyes that cannot endure them. He
leaves His people to the consequences of their sin, so that they fall
under the power of their enemies, whose pride on this account rises to
such a height that it brings down the judgment of God, who intervenes to
deliver the remnant whom He loves and to take His place of righteous
Ruler over all the nations.

We have already seen, more than once, that the Assyrian plays the
principal part in these closing scenes of the ways of God upon the
earth. We again find him here as the rod of God-a prominent subject in
the prophecy of Micah.

[Mic 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006). The iniquity of Samaria,
and her graven images are the cause of the terrible scourge, according
to the just judgment of God; and the waves of this flood reach even to
Judah.

It will be remarked here, that the events which took place in the days
of the prophet who speaks, having the same moral character as the
definitive judgment of the last days, are used to introduce the grand
action of that judgment, while also as a warning to the people for the
time then present. We have already seen this, more than once, in the
prophets.

Shalmaneser and Sennacherib are doubtless in view here; but they are
only the occasion of the prophecy, looked at in its full extent. The
Assyrian comes up to the gates of Jerusalem. His progress is described
in Verses 11-16 ([Mic 1:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)), as in
Isaiah, only that the description is more intermingled with the causes
of the judgment upon the different cities that he attacks than it is in
Isaiah, who enumerates them rather as the stages of his march.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 2](mic002)

</div>
