<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic003)  [Next](mic005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)

But again the prophet, in the spirit of Isaiah, concludes his
denunciations of sin, and his prophecies of judgment and desolation, by
announcing the full re-establishment of blessing and glory in Zion. The
Spirit repeats (there was no room for change) the declaration of the
glory of Zion in the last days, given in Isaiah 2. But, the prophecy
being much less developed, it connects this declaration immediately with
the events of the last days. Israel should dwell in perfect peace,
consequent on God's rebuking the strong nations and judging among the
peoples ([Mic 4:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003)); and Jehovah is
exalted amongst them. Each nation, say they, will boast of its God: but
Jehovah is our God for ever and ever. Jehovah is the glory of His
people. In that day Jehovah will accept the remnant of His people; He
will assemble the poor, feeble, halting Jacob, and reunite that which He
had scattered and afflicted. It should be the remnant of His desire;
that which He had cast off should be a strong nation. Jehovah Himself
would reign over them in Zion for ever.

Nevertheless, though the prophecy be less developed, the order of the
events through which the people had to pass is brought out only so much
the clearer by the shortness of the prophecy, which is thus a key to the
more lengthened developments of Isaiah. The prophet announces that "the
first dominion," the kingdom of David and Solomon, shall return to
Jerusalem: and with this statement the direct announcement of the
millennial state of blessedness closes. But, meanwhile, the royalty with
which the glory of Jerusalem was connected had to be set aside ([Mic
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009)): a double judgment on Jerusalem
connected itself with this. The daughter of Jerusalem must go to
Babylon, and there be delivered and redeemed from the hand of her
enemies, by the power of God. She was to be their captive, far away from
Zion. That is, the captivity of Jerusalem amidst the Gentile monarchies
is announced. It was while in this condition deliverance would be
granted to her. But another event was to characterise these last days of
her history. Many nations should be assembled against her, seeking to
profane her and to gaze insultingly upon her (this is the attack made
upon Jerusalem when Jehovah was dealing with her in her own place); but
they who came up against her knew not the thoughts of Jehovah. He had
gathered them together as sheaves into the threshing-floor. The daughter
of Zion should trample on them and beat them in pieces, and consecrate
their spoils unto Jehovah, who in that day will magnify His name of the
God of the whole earth (compare [Isa
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012); and [Zac
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002); [Mic
Zec\_12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic000.htm#002); Psalm 83).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 5](mic005)

</div>
