<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh007)  [Next](neh009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

By means of Ezra and Nehemiah, the law resumes its authority, and that
at the people's own request, for God had prepared their hearts.
Accordingly, God had gathered them together on the first day of the
seventh month. It was really the trumpet of God, although the people
were unconscious of it, that gathered them to this new moon, which shone
again in grace, whatever might be the clouds that veiled its feeble
light. The people's hearts were touched by the testimony of the law, and
they wept. But Nehemiah and Ezra bade them rejoice, for the day was
holy. Doubtless these men of God were right. Since God was restoring His
people, it became them to rejoice and give thanks.

The second day, continuing the search into the holy book they found that
Israel ought to keep a feast on the fifteenth day of the same month. On
restoration from chastening, when the church finds itself again before
God, it often happens that precepts are recollected, which had been long
forgotten and lost during the apparently better days of God's people;
and with the precepts, the blessing that attends their fulfilment is
recovered also. Since the days of Joshua, the children of Israel had not
followed these ordinances of the law. What a lesson! This feast of
tabernacles was kept with great gladness, \[See Note \#1\] a touching
expression of the interest with which God marked the return of His
people; a partial return, it is true, and soon beclouded (and even the
hope to which it gave rise entirely destroyed by the rejection of the
Messiah, who should have been its crown), yet of great value, as the
first fruits in grace of that restoration which will accompany Israel's
turning of heart to Christ, as manifested by their saying, "Blessed is
he that cometh in the name of Jehovah!" The gladness was sincere and
real; but everything was imperfect. The tenth day had not its antitype.
Israel's humiliation had, as yet, no connection with that death which at
once filled up their iniquity, and atoned for it. Their joy was well
founded. It was yet but transient.

Note \#1

The feast of tabernacles was the celebration of their rest and
possession of the land after passing through the wilderness. The booths
marked that they had been under tents as pilgrims.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 9](neh009)

</div>
