<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num027)  [Next](num029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 26, 27, 28, and 29.

The journey being now ended, God numbers afresh His people, and counts
them by name, as heirs ready to take possession of the inheritance. He
has kept them through everything, and brought them as far as Canaan;
their raiment even did not wax old. He settles the details of the
inheritance, and appoints a leader in the room of Moses to introduce
them into the land of promise. Chapter 26 presents us with the
numbering.

In the beginning of chapter 27 are details upon the order according to
which they were to inherit. Moses is favoured with a view of the land,
and the people are placed under the conduct of Joshua to enter therein.
Moses and Aaron had led them through the wilderness; but here it is a
new scene, and Joshua (as to the assembly, Christ in the power of His
Spirit) is appointed to conquer the land. But he is dependent on the
priesthood in his progress onward; as effectively the presence and the
operations of the Holy Spirit are dependent on the presence of Christ in
the holy place.

In chapters 28 and 29 we have the worship of the people, the sacrifices
which are the meat of God. We shall dwell a little on these chapters.
They are not the ways of God, and the gathering together the people to
Himself, as in chapter 23 of Leviticus, but the offerings themselves as
offered to God and especially those of sweet savour, made by fire,
except that which was purely accessory. First, there are lambs for the
regular daily service; that is, for that of the morning and evening,
and, for that of the sabbath, two lambs; then, bullocks and goats also
for the extraordinary feasts. The lamb has the most simple meaning; it
is the constant presentation of the value of Christ and so of believers
in Him, the true Lamb of God-the sweet savour of His sacrifice ascending
continually, by day and by night; and when the true sabbath is come, its
efficacy will only ascend more abundantly, as a matter of intelligence
and application. This can be said as regards God Himself, as to the
increased display of the fruit of the travail of the Saviour's soul. The
bullocks seem to me to represent rather the energy of the devotedness of
persons in their estimate of that sacrifice. It was the largest thing
that could be offered: still having regard to the sacrifice of Christ
and the price set upon it. The ram was always a victim of consecration,
or of amends for some violation of the rights of consecration. As to the
number of these two last kinds, there were in general two bullocks, a
ram, and seven lambs; an additional bullock and ram the first day of the
seventh month; one bullock, one ram, seven lambs the tenth of that
month; and the decreasing number of the feast of tabernacles. It appears
to me that all this gives the testimony of the worship rendered to God
upon the earth.

Thus, when the testimony is renewed, when God revives the light which
produces it, the first feast noticed here, the answer on the part of man
is simple and perfect-the two bullocks (as there were two lambs on the
sabbath day), the full and complete testimony to the devotedness of man,
for two gave a valid testimony. The ram of consecration is the estimate
of the sacrifice of Christ fully developed. Man being still down here,
and sin not out of question, the goat was added as an offering for sin.
If the worship of the people was in connection with the resurrection of
Christ ([Num 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#017)), it was the same
thing; so in the case of the work of the Spirit in gathering together
([Num 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#026)). It was the exercise of
power on the part of God which made an opportunity for worship; the
answer on the part of the people was the same.

The first day of the seventh month had reference to the recall of
Israel, which was a speciality, the renewal, according to the value of
Christ's work, of God's connection with the earth, and especially with
Israel. Hence besides the regular recognition of grace on the first of
the month, an additional bullock, ram, and seven lambs were offered. The
general testimony or answer to Christ's work was offered, but a special
and partial one besides, for the earthly restoration of Israel. So on
the day of atonement, when Israel, seeing the Lord, will be fully
restored in grace. The general and complete testimony, when the
resurrection of Christ and the power of the Holy Spirit, which allowed
the Gentiles also to come in and thus extended to the, perfect testimony
of the relations between God and man, produced, as thus witnessed in the
offerings, an answer from below which fully recognised the good which
God had done, and the relations established thereupon, in being to Him
according to the sweet savour of Christ, either in consecration or in
the intelligent estimate of the offering of Christ. The unction of the
Spirit and joy accompanied it. And the offering took place all the seven
days of the feast, a testimony to its completeness. In the former case,
then, that is at the feast of the first day of the seventh month, there
was one bullock added as witness of a special and peculiar (but at the
same time partial) work, but the general testimony to the value of
Christ's sacrifice on which it depended was maintained.

It is evident that the same principle applies to the tenth day of the
seventh month. It is the application of the atonement of Christ to
Israel on earth. But it was the simple apprehension of the worth of
Christ's sacrifice; its proper value before God. The principle of
consecration and the intrinsic value of the sacrifice remained the same.

The feast of tabernacles introduced another order of ideas, at least a
new development of those ideas; it is the coming dispensation. There is
no perfection in that which is offered joyfully of one's own free will
to God; but that is nearly realised-thirteen bullocks are offered. The
millennium will bring upon earth a joy of worship and thanksgiving,
which (Satan being bound, and the blessing of the reign of Christ being
spread everywhere) will be, externally at least, almost perfect. The two
rams manifest the testimony of abundant consecration, and perhaps
outwardly the introduction of Jews and Gentiles (not consecrated in one
body, but) adequate witnesses upon earth in a distinct manner of this
consecration to God. Then the testimony of the perfectness of the work
of Christ being full, upon earth, either for Israel or for the blessing
of the Gentiles, its complete efficacy was manifested upon earth; and
the question here is only about this manifestation upon earth
(understood by faith, however). There were fourteen lambs. There is,
however, declension in this devotedness of joy and testimony towards
God; it does not cease from being complete, it is true; but its
abundance gradually ceases to manifest itself as it did at the
beginning. The thing, as established of God, remains in its perfection
([Num 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#032)). This was found in the
seventh day, which completed the part purely earthly.

On the eighth day, we have only one bullock, one ram, and seven lambs.
It was the counterpart of what was special to the day of atonement, and
the first day of the seventh month: for, if this last designated Israel
alone brought back to God, the eighth day, on the other hand, designates
that which was outside earthly perfection, and the heavenly people
apart. This, it seems to me, is the general idea of what the Spirit of
God gives us in this passage.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 29](num029)

</div>
