<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi002)  [Next](phi004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)

In Chapter 3 Paul resumes his exhortation; but it was not burdensome to
him, and it was safe for them (danger being present and his tender love
watchful), to renew his warnings and instructions respecting the
admixture of Judaising principles with the doctrine of a glorified
Christ. It was in fact to destroy the latter and to reinstate the flesh
(that is, sin and alienation from God) in its place. It was the first
man, already rejected and condemned, and not the second Man. Yet it is
not in the shape of sin that the flesh appears here, but in that of
righteousness, of all that is respectable and religious, of ordinances
which had the venerable weight of antiquity attached to them, and as to
their origin, if all had not been done away in Christ, the authority of
God Himself.

To the apostle, who knew Christ in heaven, all this was but a bait to
draw the Christian away from Christ, and throw him back again into the
ruin out of which Christ had drawn him. And this would be so much the
worse, because it would be to abandon a known and glorified Christ, and
to return to that which had been proved to be of no value through the
flesh. The apostle therefore spares neither the doctrine nor those who
taught it.

The glory which he had seen, his contests with these false teachers, the
state into which they had thrown the assembly, Jerusalem and Rome, his
liberty and his prison all, had gained him the experience of what
Judaism was worth as to the assembly of God. They were dogs, evil
workers, that is workers of malice and wickedness. It was not the
circumcision. He treats it with profound contempt, and uses language,
the harshness of which is justified by his love for theassembly; for
love is severe towards those who, devoid of conscience, corrupt the
object of that love. It was the concision.

When evil without shame, and labouring to produce evil under a
disgraceful veil of religion, is manifested in its true character,
mildness is a crime against the objects of the love of Christ. If we
love Him, we shall in our intercourse with the assembly give the evil
its true character, which it seeks to hide. This is real love and
faithfulness to Christ. The apostle had certainly not failed in
condescension to the weak in this respect. He had carried it far; his
prison testified it. And now the assembly, deprived of his energy and
that spiritual decision which was full of love to all which is good, was
more in danger than ever. The experience of a whole life of activity, of
the greatest patience, of four years' reflection in prison, led to these
forcible and urgent words, "Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
beware of the concision." The doctrine of the epistle to the Ephesians,
the exhortation of that to the Colossians, the affection of that to
these Philippians, with the denunciation contained in [Phi
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002), date from the same epoch, and are
marked with the same love.

But it sufficed to denounce them. Elsewhere, where they were not well
known, he gave details, as in the case of Timotheus, who had still to
watch over the assembly. It was sufficient now to point out their
well-known character. Whatever Judaised, whatever sought to mingle law
and gospel, trusting in ordinances and the Spirit, was shameless,
malicious, and contemptible. But the apostle will rather occupy himself
with the power that delivers from it. We are the circumcision (that
which is really separate from the evil, that which is dead to sin and to
the flesh), we who worship God, not in the false pretension of
ordinances, but spiritually by the power of the Holy Ghost, who rejoice
in Christ the Saviour and not in the flesh, but on the contrary have no
confidence in it. We see here Christ and the Spirit in contrast with the
flesh and self.

Paul might indeed boast, if needful, in that which belonged to the
flesh. As to all Jewish privileges, he possessed them in the highest
degree. He had outstript every one in holy zeal against innovators. One
thing alone had changed it all-he had seen a glorified Christ. All that
he had according to the flesh was thenceforth loss to him. It would
place something between him and the Christ of his faith and of his
desire the Christ whom he knew. And, observe, that here it is not the
sins of the flesh which Christ expiates and abolishes that he rejects;
it is its righteousness. It has none, we may say; but even if the
apostle had possessed any righteousness of the flesh as, in fact, he did
possess it outwardly he would not have it, because he had seen a better.
In Christ, who had appeared to him on the way to Damascus, he had seen
divine righteousness for man, and divine glory in man. He had seen a
glorified Christ, who acknowledged the poor feeble members of the
assembly as a part of Himself. He would have nothing else. The
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord had eclipsed
everything changed everything which was not that into loss. The stars,
as well as the darkness of night, disappear before the sun. The
righteousness of the law, the righteousness of Paul, all that
distinguished him among men, disappeared before the righteousness of God
and the glory of Christ.

It was a thorough change in his whole moral being. His gain was now loss
to him. Christ was become all. It was not evil which disappeared
everything that belonged to Paul as advantage to the flesh disappeared.
It was another who was now precious to him. What a deep and radical
change in the whole moral being of man, when he ceases to be the centre
of his own importance; and another, a worthy of being so, becomes the
centre of his moral existence! a divine person, a man who had glorified
God, a man in whom the glory of God shone out, to the eye of faith; in
whom His righteousness was realised, His love, His tender mercy,
perfectly revealed towards men and known by men. This was He whom Paul
desired to win, to possess for here we are still in the paths of the
wilderness he desired to be found in Him: "That I may win Christ, and be
found in him." Two things were present to his faith in this desire: to
have the righteousness of God Himself as his (in Christ he should
possess it); and then, to know Him and the power of His resurrection for
he only knew Him as risen and, according to that power working in him
now, to have part in the sufferings of Christ, and be made conformable
to His death.

It was in His death that perfect love had been demonstrated, that the
perfect ground of divine and eternal righteousness had been laid, that
self-renunciation was practically, entirely, perfectly, manifested in
Christ, the perfect object to the apostle of a faith that apprehended it
and desired it according to the new man. Christ had passed through death
in the perfection of that life, the power of which was manifested in
resurrection.

Paul, having seen this perfection in glory, and being united (weak as he
was in himself) to Christ the source of this power, desired to know the
power of His resurrection, that he might follow Him in His sufferings.
Circumstances held this as a reality before his eyes. His heart only
saw, or wished to see, Christ, that he might follow Him there. If death
was on the way, he was only so much the more like Christ. He did not
mind what it cost, if by any means he might attain. This gave undivided
energy of purpose. This is indeed to know Him, as completely put to the
test, and thus to know all that He was, His perfection of love, of
obedience, of devotedness fully manifested; but the object is to win Him
as He is.

Having seen Him in the glory, the apostle understood the path which had
led Him there, and the perfection of Christ in that path. Participating
in His life, he desired to realise its power according to His glory,
that he might follow Him, in order to be where Jesus was, and in the
glory with Him. This is what the Lord said in [Joh
12:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023). Who had apprehended Him like
Paul by the grace of God? Observe here the difference between him and
Peter. Peter calls himself "a witness of the sufferings of Christ and a
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed"; Paul, a witness of the
glory as it is in heaven ("as he is," as John says), desires to share
his sufferings. It is the special foundation of the assembly's place, of
walking in the Spirit, according to the revelation of the glory of
Christ. It is this, I doubt not, which makes Peter say, that in all
Paul's epistles which he acknowledges moreover as a part of the
scriptures there are some things hard to be understood. It took man
clean out of the whole ancient order of things.

Having then seen Christ in glory, there were two things for Paul the
righteousness of God in Christ, and the knowledge of Christ. The first
entirely eclipsed everything of which the flesh could boast. This was
"mine own," the righteousness of man according to the law. The other was
the righteousness of God, which is by faith; that is, man is nothing in
it. It is God's righteousness: man has part in it by believing, that is
to say, by faith in Christ Jesus. The believer has his place before God
in Christ, in the righteousness of God Himself, which He had manifested
in glorifying Christ, having glorified Himself in Him. What a position!
not only sin, but human righteousness, all that is of self, excluded;
our place being according to the perfection in which Christ, as man, has
perfectly glorified God. But this place is necessarily the place of Him
who has accomplished this glorious work. Christ, in His Person and in
His present position, \[See Note \#6\] is the expression of our place:
to know Him is to know it. He is there according to divine
righteousness. To be there, as He is, is that into which divine
righteousness freely, but necessarily, introduces man introduces us in
Christ. Thenceforth, having seen the righteousness of God in that Christ
is there, I desire myself to know what it is to be there: and I desire
to know Christ. But in truth this embraces all that He was in
accomplishing it. The glory reveals the power and the result. That which
He suffered is the work in which He glorified God; so that divine
righteousness has been fulfilled in His exaltation, as man, to divine
glory. And here divine love, perfect devotedness to His Father's glory,
constant and perfect obedience, the endurance of all things in order to
give testimony of His Father's love for men, perfect patience,
unfathomable sufferings, in order that love might be both possible and
perfect for sinners all in short that Christ was, being connected with
His Person, makes Him an object which commands, possesses, delivers, and
strengthens the heart, by the power of His grace acting in the new life,
in which we are united to Him by the all-powerful link of the Spirit,
and causes Him to be the alone object before our eyes.

Accordingly Paul desires to have that which Christ can give, His cup,
and His baptism; and to leave to the Father, that which Christ left to
Him, the disposal of places in the kingdom. He does not desire, like
John and James, the right and left hand, that is, a good place for
himself. He desires Christ, he would win Christ. He does not follow
tremblingly, as the disciples did in that Chapter (Mark 10); he desires
to suffer not, that is, for the sake of suffering, but to have part in
the sufferings of Christ. Instead therefore of going away like the young
man in the same Chapter, because he had much that could profit the
flesh, instead of clinging like him to the law for his righteousness, he
renounces that righteousness which he had in common with the young man;
and all that he had he counted but as dung.

Here then we have the practical personal experience of the operation of
this great principle, which the apostle has set forth in other epistles,
that we have part with a glorified Christ. Also, in telling of the
result as to himself, he speaks of his own resurrection according to the
character of Christ's. It is not that of which Peter speaks, as we have
seen, the simply participating in the glory that was to be revealed. It
is that which precedes. Having seen Christ in the glory, according to
the power of His resurrection, he desires to participate in that: and
this is the force of his word, "if by any means." He desired to have
part in the resurrection from among the dead. If, in order to reach it,
it was needful to pass through death (as Christ had done), he would go
through it, cost what it might, be it in ever so painful a way and death
was at that time before his eyes with its human terror: he desired fully
to take part with Christ.

Now it is the character of this resurrection that it is from among the
dead; it is not simply the resurrection of the dead. It is to come out,
by the favour and the power of God (as it regards Christ, and indeed us
too by Him, by the righteousness of God), from the condition of evil
into which sin had plunged men to come out, after having been dead in
sins, and now to sin, through the favour and power and righteousness of
God. What grace! and what a difference! By following Christ according to
the will of God, in the place where He has set us (and to be content
with the lowest place, if God has given it us, is the same renunciation
of self as to labour in the highest the secret of each is, that Christ
is everything and ourselves nothing), we participate in His resurrection
a thought full of peace and joy, and which fills the heart with love to
Christ. Joyful and glorious hope, which shines before our eyes in
Christ, and in that blessed Saviour glorified! The objects of divine
favour in Him, we come forth because the eye of God is upon us, because
we are His from the house of death, which cannot detain those who are
His, because the glory and the love of God are concerned in them. Christ
is the example and the pattern of our resurrection; the principle (Rom.
8) and the assurance of our resurrection is in Him. The road to it is
that which the apostle here traces.

But since resurrection and likeness to Christ in glory were the objects
of his hope, it is very evident that he had not attained it. If that was
his perfection, he could not be yet perfect. He was, as has been said,
on the road; but Christ had apprehended him for it, and he still pressed
onward to lay hold of the prize, for the enjoyment of which Christ had
laid hold of him. No, he repeats to his brethren, I count not myself to
have attained. But one thing at least he could say he forgot all that
was behind him, and pressed on ever towards the goal, keeping it always
in sight to obtain the prize of the calling of God, which is found in
heaven. Happy Christian! It is a great thing never to lose sight of it,
never to have a divided heart, to think but of one thing; to act, to
think, always according to the positive energy wrought by the Holy Ghost
in the new man, directing him to this only and heavenly object. It is
not his sins properly which he here says he forgot it was his progress
that he forgot, his advantages, all that was already behind. And this
was not merely the energy that shewed itself at the first impulse; he
still counted everything but as dung, because he had still Christ in
view. This is true christian life. What a sad moment would it have been
for Rebecca, if, in the midst of the desert with Eliezer, she had
forgotten Isaac, and begun to think again of Bethuel and her father's
house! What had she then in the desert with Eliezer?

Such is the true life and position of the Christian; even as the
Israelites, although preserved by the blood from the messenger of
judgment, were not in their true place till they were on the other side
of the Red Sea, a freed people. Then he is on the road to Canaan, as
belonging to God.

The Christian, until he understands this new position which Christ has
taken as risen from the dead, is not spiritually in its true place, is
not perfect or full-grown in Christ. But when he has attained this, it
is not assuredly that he is to despise others. "If," says the apostle,
"they were otherwise minded, God would reveal" to them the fulness of
His truth; and all were to walk together with one mind in the things to
which they had attained. Where the eye was single, it would be so: there
were many with whom this was not the case; but the apostle was their
example. This was saying much. While Jesus lived the peculiar power of
this resurrection life could not be revealed in the same way; and
moreover while on earth Christ walked in the consciousness of that which
He was with His Father before the world existed, so that, although He
endured for the joy that was set before Him, although His life was the
perfect pattern of the heavenly man, there was in Him a repose, a
communion, which had quite a peculiar character; instructive
nevertheless to us, because the Father loves us as He loved Jesus, and
Jesus also loves us as the Father loved Him. With Him it was not the
energy of one who must run the race in order to attain that which he has
never yet possessed; He spoke of that which He knew, and bore witness of
that which He had seen, of that which He had forsaken from love to us,
the Son of man who is in heaven.

John enters farther into this character of Christ: in his epistle
therefore we find more of that which He is in His nature and character,
than of what we shall be with Him in the glory. Peter, building on the
same foundation as the others, waits however for that which shall be
revealed. His pilgrimage was indeed towards heaven, to obtain a treasure
which was preserved there, which shall be revealed in the last time; but
it is more connected with that which had been already revealed. From his
point of view, the morning star on which Paul lived appeared only on the
extreme horizon. For him practical life was that of Jesus among the
Jews. He could not say with Paul, "Be ye followers of me." The effect of
the revelation of the heavenly glory of Christ, between His going away
and His reappearance, and that of the union of all Christiansto Him in
heaven, was fully realised in him only who received it. Faithful through
grace to this revelation, having no other object which guided his steps,
or to divide his heart, he gives himself as an example. He truly
followed Christ, but the form of his life was peculiar, on account of
the way in which God had called him; and it is thus that Christians
possessing this revelation ought to walk.

Accordingly Paul speaks of a dispensation committed to him.

It was not to turn their eyes from Christ; it is on having the eyes
constantly fixed upon Him that he insists. It was this which
characterised the apostle, and in this he gives himself as an example.
But the character of this looking to Jesus was special. It was not a
Christ known on earth who was its object, but a Christ glorified whom he
had seen in heaven. To press ever forward to this end formed the
character of his life; even as this same glory of Christ, as a testimony
to the bringing in divine righteousness and to the assembly's position,
formed the basis of his teaching. Therefore he can say, "Be followers of
me." His gaze was ever fixed on the heavenly Christ, who had shone
before his eyes and still shone before his faith. The Philippians were
thus to walk together, and to mark those who followed the apostle's
example; because (for evidently it was a period in which the assembly as
a whole had much departed from her first love and her normal condition)
there were many who, while bearing the name of Christ and having once
given good hope, so that the apostle speaks of them with tears, were
enemies of the cross of Christ. For the cross on earth, in our life,
answers to the heavenly glory on high. It is not the assembly at
Philippi which is the subject here, but the condition of the outward
universal assembly. Many were already calling themselves Christians, who
joined to that great name a life which had the earth and earthly things
for its object. The apostle did not acknowledge them. They were there;
it was not a matter of local discipline, but a condition of
Christianity, in which even all were seeking their own interest; and,
spirituality being thus lowered, the Christ of glory little realised,
many who had no life at all might walk among them without being
detected, by those who had so little life themselves and scarcely walked
better than they did. For it does not appear that they who were minding
earthly things committed any evil that required public discipline. The
general low tone of spirituality among the real Christians left the
others free to walk with them; and the presence of the latter debased
Still more the standard of godliness of life.

But this state of things did not escape the spiritual eye of the
apostle, which, fixed on the glory, discerned readily and clearly all
that had not that glory for its motive; and the Spirit has given us the
divine judgment, most grave and solemn, with regard to this state of
things. No doubt it has grown enormously worse since then, and its
elements have developed and established themselves in a manner and in
proportions that are very differently characterised; but the moral
principles with regard to walk remain ever the same for the assembly.
The same evil is present to be avoided, and the same efficacious means
for avoiding it. There is the same blessed example to follow, the same
heavenly Saviour to be the glorious object of our faith, the same life
to live if we desire to be Christians indeed.

That which characterised these persons who professed the name of Christ
was, that their hearts were set upon earthly things. Thus the cross had
not its practical power it would have been a contradiction. Their end
therefore was destruction. The true Christian was not such; his
conversation was in heaven and not on the earth; his moral life was
spent in heaven, his true relationships were there. From thence he
expected Christ as a Saviour, that is to say, to deliver him from the
earth, from this earthly system far from God here below For salvation is
always viewed in this epistle as the final result of the conflict, the
result due to the almighty power of the Lord. Then, when Christ shall
come to take the assembly to Himself-Christians, truly heavenly, shall
be like Him in His heavenly glory, a likeness which is the object of
their pursuit at all times (compare [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)). Christ will accomplish it in
them, conforming their bodies of humiliation to His glorious body
according to the power whereby He is able to subdue all things to
Himself. Then the apostle and all Christians will have attained the end,
the resurrection from among the dead.

Such is the tenor of this Chapter. Christ, seen in glory, is the spring
of energy to christian life, to win Christ, so that all else is loss; as
Christ making Himself of no reputation is the spring of christian
graciousness of walk: the two parts of christian life which we are too
apt to sacrifice one to another or at least to pursue one forgetful of
the other. In both Paul singularly shines. In the following Chapter we
have superiority to circumstances. This also is Paul's experience and
state; for it will be remarked that it is the personal experience of
Paul which runs all through his (humanly speaking) faultless experience
not perfection. Likeness to Christ in glory is the only standard of
that. As to this third Chapter, many have inquired whether the thing
aimed at was a spiritual assimilation to Christ here, or a complete
assimilation to Him in the glory. This is rather to forget the import of
what the apostle says, namely, that the sight and the desire of the
heavenly glory, the desire of possessing Christ Himself thus glorified,
was that which formed the heart here below. An object here below to be
attained in oneself could not be found, since Christ is on high; it
would be to separate the heart from the object which forms it to its own
likeness. But although we never reach the mark here below, since it is a
glorified Christ and resurrection from among the dead, yet its pursuit
assimilates us more and more to Him. The object in the glory forms the
life which answers to it here below. Were a light at the end of a long
straight alley, I never have the light itself till I am arrived there;
but I have ever increasing light in proportion as I go forward; I know
it better; I am more in the light myself. Thus it is with a glorified
Christ, and such is christian life (compare 2 Cor. 3).

Note \#6

Not, of course, as to being at the right hand of God this was personal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 4](phi004)

</div>
