<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philemon Index](plm)  
  [Previous](tit003)  [Next](heb000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

[Philemon 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">plm 1:1</span></span>

The very beautiful and interesting Epistle to Philemon does not require
much comment; it is an expression of the love which works by the Spirit
within the assembly of God in all the circumstances of individual life.

Written for the purpose of awakening in Philemon sentiments which
certain events had a tendency to extinguish in his heart, this epistle
is suited to produce those feelings in the reader more than to be the
object of explanation.

It is a fine picture of the way in which the tenderness and the strength
of the love of God, working in the heart, occupies itself with every
detail wherein that love might be wounded, or that might be an occasion
for its growth and manifestation. In this point of view the epistle is
as important as beautiful; for this development of tender and delicate
consideration in the midst of the apostleÂ¹s gigantic labours, and of
the immense truths that formed the basis of relationship between all
creatures and God in Christ, gives a very peculiar character to
Christianity and shews its divine nature; since He who reveals the most
profound truths, and puts them in their right place in the circle of
divine thought, does so as speaking of a known thing, as communicating
His own thoughts; and can (being the Spirit of the God of love) fill the
heart with considerations which love only can suggest, with a dignity
which manifests their source, and with a delicacy of application which
shews that, whatever be the grandeur of His thoughts, He is at liberty
to consider everything.

When the human mind is occupied with elevated subjects, it feels their
weight, and bends under the load; it is absorbed; it has to abstract
itself, to fix its attention. God reveals His own thoughts; and, vast as
they may be to the human mind, they flow with the clearness and
connectedness that is natural to them, when he communicates them by His
chosen instruments. The latter are free to love; for the God who employs
them and inspires them is love. It is a more essential part of their
task to present Him thus, than even to speak of the deep things.
Accordingly, when they are moved by that love, the character of Him who
sends them is demonstrated as that of the God who is the source of love,
by a perfect consideration for others, and the most delicate attention
to those things which their hearts would feel.

Moreover this love develops itself in relationships formed by the Holy
Ghost Himself, between the members of the body of Christ, that is to
say, between men. Springing from a divine source, and always fed b y it,
Christian affections assume the form of human regard, which by
exhibiting love and the opposite of selfishness, bear the stamp of their
origin. Love, free from self, can and does think of all that concerns
others and understands what will affect them.

Onesimus, a fugitive slave, had been converted by means of Paul in his
bonds. Philemon, a rich man or at least one of easy fortune, received
the assembly in his house (his wife also being converted). and in his
measure laboured himself in the LordÂ¹s work. Archippus was a servant of
the Lord, who ministered in the assembly, perhaps an evangelist; at any
rate he took part in the conflicts of the gospel, and was thus
associated with Philemon and the assembly.

The apostle, in sending Onesimus back, addresses the whole assembly.
This is the reason that we have here, Â³grace and peaceÂ² without the
addition of Â³mercyÂ² as when individuals only are addressed by the
apostles. His appeal on behalf of Onesimus is to Philemon; but the whole
assembly is to interest itself in this beloved slave, who was become a
child of God. Their christian hearts would be a support and a guarantee
for the conduct of Philemon; although the apostle expects pardon and
kindness for Onesimus form the love of Philemon himself as a servant of
God.

Paul (as was his custom) recognizes all the good that was in Philemon,
and uses it as a motive to Philemon himself, that he might let the
feelings of grace flow out freely, in spite of anything that the return
of Onesimus might excite in the flesh or any displeasure that Satan
might try to re-awaken in him. The apostle would have that which he
desired for Onesimus to be PhilemonÂ¹s own act. The enfranchisement of
his former slave, or even his kind reception as a brother, would have
quite a different bearing in that case, than if it had arisen from a
command on the apostleÂ¹s p\[art; for christian affection and the bonds
of love were in question. He gives due weight to the right he had to
command, but only I order to abandon it, and to give more force to his
request; and at the same time he suggests that the communion of
PhilemonsÂ¹ faith with the whole assembly of God and with the
apostleâ€¹that is, the way in which his faith connected him, in the
activities of christian love, with the assembly of God and those
appointed by him to labour in it, and with the Lord Himselfâ€¹which had
already shewn itself so honourably in Philemon, would have its full
development in the acknowledgment of tall the apostleÂ¹s rights over his
heart.

In Verse 6 ([Plm 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006)) we must read
Â³every good thing which is in us.Â²

It is beautiful to see the mixture of affection for Onesimusâ€¹ which
shews itself in an anxiety that makes him plead every motive which could
act on the heart of Philemonâ€¹with the christian feeling that inspired
him with full confidence in the kindly affections of this faithful and
excellent brother. The return of his fugitive slave was indeed likely to
stir something in his natural heart; the apostle interposes his letter
on behalf of his dear child in the faith, born in the time of his
captivity. God had interposed the work of His grace, which ought to act
on the heart of Philemon, producing altogether new relationships with
Onesimus. The apostle beseeches him to receive his former slave as a
brother, but it is evident (ver 12), although Paul wished it to be the
spontaneous act of the master whom Onesimus had wronged, that the
apostle expected the affranchisement of the latter. Be that si it may,
he takes everything upon himself for his dear son. According to grace
Onesimus was more profitable to Philemon, as well as to Paul, than
formerly, when the flesh had made him an unfaithful and valueless
servant; and this he should rejoice in. (Ver 11) Paul alludes to the
name of Â³OnesimusÂ², which means Â³profitable.Â² Finally he reminds
Philemon that he was indebted to him for his own salvationâ€¹for his
life as a Christian.

Paul at this moment was a prisoner at Rome. God had brought Onesimus
there (whither all resorted) to lead him to salvation and the knowledge
of the Lord, in order that we should be instructed, and that Onesimus
should have a new position in the christian assembly. \[See Note \#1\]

It was apparently towards the end of the apostleÂ¹s imprisonment. He
hopes at least soon to be released and tells Philemon to prepare him a
lodging.

We find the names again in the Epistle to the Colossians. There the
apostle says, Â³Onesimus, who is one of you;Â² so that, if it be the
same, he was of Colosse. It seems likely, because there is Archippus
also, who is exhorted to take heed to his ministry. If it be so, the
fact that he speaks thus of Onesimus to the Christians at Colosse is
another proof of his loving care for this new convert. He lays him thus
upon the hearts of the assembly, sending his letter by him and Tychicus.
In the Epistle to the Ephesians there are no salutations; but the same
Tychicus is its bearer. Timothy is joined with Paul in the address of
the Epistle to the Colossians, as well as in this to Philemon. It was
not so in the Epistle to the Ephesians; but in that to the Philippians
to whom the apostle hoped to send Timothy ere long, their two names are
again united.

I do not draw an conclusions from these last details; but they furnish
ground for inquiry into details. Each of the four epistles was written
during the apostleÂ¹s captivity at Rome, and when he was expecting to be
delivered form that captivity.

Finally, that which we have especially to remark in the Epistle to
Philemon is the love which, in the intimate centre of this circle
(guarded all round by an unparalleled development of doctrine) reigned
and bore fruit, and bound the members of Christ together, and spread the
savour of grace over all the relationships in which men could stand
towards each other, occupying itself about all the details of life with
a perfect propriety, and with the recognition of every right that can
exist among men and of all that the human heart can feel.

Note \#1

1: It seems to me, from the way in which the apostle speaks, that he
even thought Onesimus would be an instrument of God in the assembly,
useful in the LordÃ•s served. He would have retained him to minister to
himself in the bonds of the gospel; but he respects his connection with
Philemon. It was also much better for the soul of Onesimus that he
should submit himself where had done wrong; and if he was to be free,
that he should receive his freedom from the love of Philemon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Introduction](heb000)

</div>
