<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa080)  [Next](psa082) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 81](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001)

Psalm 81, while celebrating in figure the restoration of Israel, again
returns to historical ground, specially introducing Joseph, who
represents the ten tribes (see [Eze
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#016)). Otherwise Judah, the Jews,
might have claimed everything. But in the restoration (although there
are special events connected with the Jews, and it was amongst them that
Jesus was conversant, entering especially into their circumstances in
the latter day, producing the association, so profoundly interesting,
which we have been studying in the first two books) yet it is evident
that in the full purposes of God the stick of Joseph must have its place
and become one in the Son of man's hand, and as all Israel. Now the new
moon was the symbol of the reappearance of Israel in the sun's light,
hailed with joy by the people and connected with redemption in the
thought of faith (see [Psa 81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005) of the
psalm). Then Israel called in trouble, and God delivered him; but then
another important principle comes in. God answered them when in trouble;
but He proved them also. They tempted God then, doubting His care and
power. He was putting them to the test by difficulties, which seemed to
say there was want of care or power; and they said, Is Jehovah among us!
But Jehovah answered in grace (Exodus 17). This, I apprehend, is the
case referred to. But even in the second Meribah called so because
Israel strove again with Jehovah, when Moses (Numbers 20) spake
unadvisedly with his lips and was shut out from Canaan (for, from Sinai
on, they were under legal though gracious government) Jehovah was
sanctified in giving them water in a grace which was above even Moses'
failure. Still, while grace and faithfulness to His promises to His
people were found in the government of God ([Exo
34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)), they were put to the test
legally on the very terms of that mercy. It was a testing government
though a merciful one, and so indeed in some sense is the divine
government. God puts this test to themif faithful to God, no strange God
among them (He was Jehovah their God, which brought them out of the land
of Egypt), blessing was prepared. They had only to open their mouth
wide, and He would fill it. But Israel would not hearken, and they were
given up to their own hearts' lusts. Still we see Gods yearning love
over them and the delight He would have had in blessing them and putting
aside all their enemies His righteous government would have been
manifested in them (compare [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037); [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042)). Oh that they had hearkened!
Thus we get the ground of Israel's ruin. They were placed as redeemed
from Egypt under the test of obedience and fidelity to God. They had
failed. Still they would appear again, to reflect the light of Jehovah's
countenance. Thus love of Jehovah for the people breaks out even in
their failure.

A very important principle for every soul is brought before us here.
Redemption, with conditional blessing after it, only ends in the loss of
the blessing, just as creation did. It is the same thing or worse. It
depends on us to secure the blessing; and now as fallen beings (instead
of innocent and free ones), grace alone can keep us, and so it will be
with Israel. The gracious and tender character and thoughts of God
towards His people come out most beautifully in this psalm. The passages
I have referred to in the Gospels show the same tenderness, but,
further, that Jesus is this very Jehovah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 82](psa082)

</div>
