<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa045)  [Next](psa047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)

Psalm 46. The remnant, now that Messiah has appeared in glory, can
celebrate what God is in favor of His people, and with the special
knowledge acquired through what He has been for them in trouble. There
may be yet an assault: indeed according to prophecy I believe there will
be. But as the whole effect of Messiah's coming in blessing was
celebrated in Psalm 45, so here the great result in divine government.
The spared remnant have Jehovah with them as the God of Israel ([Psa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)). For here Jehovah is again
introduced as a present thing. Here it is specially (and suitably, after
what we have been studying, needs not to be said) as refuge and
deliverance. Earth, mountains, and waters may tremble, or swell and
roar: His people need not fear. God is with them. Nor is this all. He
has His city on the earth, where He who is the Most High dwells, and has
His tabernacles gladdened by that river which, everywhere in these
descriptions, is the sign of blessing; as in the heavenly Jerusalem, and
in the earthly in Ezekiel nay, in paradise, and in figures, in the
believer, and in the assembly, who calls to the water of life him who
thirsts. But even then the river is there. God is there the sure and
best of answers to the taunting demand "Where is thy God?" She shall not
be moved, but helped right early.

Verse 6 ([Psa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006)) gives in
magnificent abruptness the great result. All is decided. Then they say,
"Jehovah Sabaoth is with us." The God of the whole people is the refuge
of this feeble remnant ([Psa 46:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)),
they summon the earth to see what the works of Jehovah are, what is come
of the impotent rage and violence of men; for He will be exalted among
the heathen and exalted in the earth. The place of faith is to be still
and wait on Him and know that He is God, as the remnant of Jacob will
with joy that Jehovah of hosts, the God of Jacob, is with them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 47](psa047)

</div>
