<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa098)  [Next](psa100) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 99](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)

Psalm 99, though simple in its character, embraces some important
principles. Jehovah now reigns, not only in making manifest heavenly
power, but in the establishment of that power as king upon the earth. He
now sits between the cherubim as heretofore in Israel. He is great in
Zion and high above all peoples. I have no doubt this word people
(ammim), generally translated "people" in the Authorised Version, which
confounds it with Israel, is used, not as goim ([Psa
98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002) and often) in opposition with
Israel and the knowledge of Jehovah, but for nations not Israel, but
brought into relationship with Israel, and so with Jehovah Himself.
Israel is called goi (Psalm 43) when judged and rejected. Further, the
King (Messiah, but still Jehovah) loves judgment, and establishes
equity, executing judgment and righteousness in Jacob. Thus Jehovah, the
God of Jacob, was to be exalted, and in Jerusalem.

But another touching and important principle is then brought out: Israel
had utterly failed, cast off Jehovah, rejected Messiah, was judged and
cast off. But Jehovah had never given up His faithfulness and grace.
Hence the Spirit turns back here to recognise the saints under the old
covenant who had, through grace, been faithful (the remnant was always
acknowledged; in one aspect we are it still, all children of Jerusalem
the desolate, and waiting under discipline and government, only a
Father's). Moses and Aaron among His priests, Samuel among those who
called on His name, the true prophets with no office, whatever their
measure these called on Jehovah, and He heard them. The relationship of
faith was there. Jehovah answered them, but governed His people, taking
vengeance of their inventions. So, at the end, whosoever shall call on
the name of Jehovah shall be saved; but how surely are their inventions
punished! These are the two hinges of all God's waysgrace and the ear of
goodness to the cry of the meek and needy, and government as holy and
true. So with us: only we have a Father's government (still God's) after
salvation and adoption. Thus new-born Israel is identified with the
faithful Israel of old. The child of Ruth and Boaz is a son born to
Naomi. Mara is known no more.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 100](psa100)

</div>
