<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa090)  [Next](psa092) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 91](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001)

We have now (Psalm 91) another most important principle introduced;
Messiah's taking His place with Israel, the place of trust in Jehovah,
so as to afford the channel for the full blessing of the people. Three
names of Elohim (God) come before us in this psalm: one that by which He
was in relationship with Abraham, the Almighty; another which Abraham
through the testimony of Melchisedec may have known prophetically, the
millennial title of Elohim when He takes His full title over the earth
(compare [Gen 14:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)), the Most
High. Both, as all the names of God, have their proper meaning: one
complete power; the other absolute supremacy. The question then arises,
Who is the God who has this place? Who is this supreme God over all to
the earth? Who shall find His secret place to dwell in? He who has found
this shall be completely protected by almighty power. Messiah (Jesus)
says, I will take the God of Israel as that place, Jehovah. In Verses
3-8 ([Psa 91:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003)) we have the answer.
Doubtless it is true of every godly Israelite, and they are in view, but
led by the Spirit of Jesus, the one perfect faithful One who took this
place indeed.

In Verse 9 ([Psa 91:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#009)) I apprehend
Israel speaks (that is, the Spirit personifying Israel addressing
Messiah): "Because thou hast taken Jehovah, which is my refuge,... as
thy habitation," almighty power shall guard thee. This continues to
Verse 13 ([Psa 91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013)). In Verse 14
([Psa 91:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014)) Jehovah Himself speaks of
Him as the One who has set His love upon Him. The form of the psalm is
striking. The Spirit of God proposes the problem. He who finds the
secret place of the supreme God (of the millennium) will have all the
full blessing of Abraham's God, the Almighty. Messiah says, I take
Jehovah the God of Israel. Then the answer; so it was and He ([Psa
91:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003)) would enjoy the fruit of it.
In Verse 9 ([Psa 91:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#009)) Israel speaks
and declares by the Spirit He would have the blessings. In Verse 14
([Psa 91:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014)) Jehovah sets His seal on
all this, and the solver of the great riddle of God will find the full
blessing of Jehovah, on whom He had set His love, whose name He had
known even Jehovah the God of Israel. It is a very interesting psalm in
this way. But we have to remark that all is viewed on earth, the
character of God in all respects. How Christ, as a present thing,
relinquished the title to deliverance flowing from this, for perfect
obedience, trusting His Father absolutely, belongs to deeper views of
the purposes of God and of the paths of the blessed One Himself. Satan
would have just used this to take Him out of the path of obedience, and
into that of distrust and His own will: blessed be God, in vain, as we
know. The sure mercies of David were to be in an obedient and risen
Onethis point is treated in a psalm of unexampled beauty farther on and
thus deeper blessings and higher glories brought out. But He who went in
that perfect path of submission, has not the less made good all the
fruit of all that is here, for those who shall walk after Him in the
place of this trust in Jehovah upon earth. This principle we see indeed,
in various forms, all through the Psalms. Indeed the atonement of Christ
was needed, which implied His resigning personally this blessing, in
order that others might walk in that path in which He could personally
walk, of course, without it. Psalm 21 gives a divine revelation as to
the way in which the promise of life was fulfilled to the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 92](psa092)

</div>
