<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa082)  [Next](psa084) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 83](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#001)

Psalm 83 requires only to call attention to its subject. It is the last
confederacy of the nations surrounding Canaan, with Assur helping them.
At the close of the psalm, though the cry be to God as such (for Israel
is not yet established in covenant blessing), Jehovah's name is brought
in. Judgment is to be executed, that the rebellious nations may seek
Jehovah's name. It is not, know the Father, nor, know there is a God;
but, know Jehovah. When His judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants
of the world will learn righteousness. Men will know that He whose name
alone is Jehovah (He who is, and was, and is to come) is the Most High
over all the earth; that is, Jehovah (the one true God), the God of
Israel, is the One above all, the One supreme over the earth. It is in
this name He takes possession of the earth, as Melchisedec pronounces
the blessing in the name of the Most High, possessor of heaven and
earth. And Nebuchadnezzar, the humbled head of the Gentiles, praises and
blesses the Most High. It is His millennial name in which He takes to
Him His great power and reigns, and the true Melchisedec is priest upon
His throne, and the counsel of peace between both. This establishes
prophetically Jehovah, the God of Israel, supreme in the earth. His
people, now restored to relationship, look for a full blessing and the
name of Jehovah is again used. Up to this, save as looking back or
looking forward, the cry of the people is addressed to God, the people
not being in possession of covenant blessings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 84](psa084)

</div>
