<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa014)  [Next](psa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

Psalm 15 gives the answer he in whom is uprightness of heart in the path
of the law. Remark here, that while the godly (when all is utterly dark,
and wickedness has entirely the upper hand, and the foundations of human
earthly hope, even in the things that belong to God on the earth, are
destroyed, and wickedness is in the place of righteousness) look above
and see God's throne immutable in heaven, and thus all in heaven and
earth brought into connection; yet, as to the point they look to, it is
Jehovah in His holy temple and deliverance coming out of Zion; and so it
will (see [Isa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006)). The immutable
throne in heaven will establish in sure power the long desolate throne
upon the earth. Jehovah will be in His temple, but will reign in the
Person of Christ in Zion. This is Jewish deliverance and according to
just Jewish hopes.

There is one important general remark to make here the sense of full
relationship with Jehovah is enjoyed. Whatever the trial, whatever the
condition of the remnant, the wickedness of the people, the oppression
of the Gentiles in the land, the faith of the remnant contemplates its
relationship with Jehovah. And hence Jehovah is viewed as in His holy
temple, though there is as yet no manifestation of His power. We have
not, therefore, the remnant as yet entirely cast out, nor is the power
of Antichrist here contemplated as manifested. When he sets up his
power, there will be open apostasy, and the faithful will be driven out.
But the wicked and the Gentile, as such, in the land, are contemplated.
We learn clearly from this psalm (11) that the wicked is characteristic.
It is plural, except Verse 5 ([Psa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)) where it is in contrast with the
righteous.

These psalms, passing over the driving out from Jerusalem, go on in hope
to another scene the deliverance wrought by Jehovah when He is indeed
returned to Jerusalem; not the destruction of Antichrist by the Lord
coming from heaven, but the driving out of the Gentile oppressors by
Jehovah established in Zion. Hence all Israel is brought in ([Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)). And their salvation comes out
of Zion. Hence these psalms, as far as they refer to Christ, look at the
time in which He walked on earth before His final rejection. They do
not, save Psalms 2 and 8, directly refer to Him, but to the remnant. But
in His public path on earth, He did, from His baptism by John Baptist,
associate Himself graciously with them; as at the close He tasted in
grace their final sorrows in the close of their history.

These psalms present to us the state of the remnant while still having
their place among the nations who have not yet openly broken, in
apostasy, with Jehovah, but whose wickedness is in fact showing itself,
and ripening to its highest pitch. And they pass over, in faith, to the
time when Jehovah, seated in Zion, delivers His people, casting all the
Gentiles out of His land, all Israel being restored from their
captivity. The whole latter-day scene, except the last half-week of
Antichrist's power, is before us. Jehovah is still in His place, as
publicly owned. It was just thus in the Lord's days. In [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005), Elohim is spoken of, because it
is not relationship which is there in question, but God Himself in His
nature and character. Not man, or anything human, or even Satan's power,
was there; but God was in the generation of the righteous.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 16](psa016)

</div>
