<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa139)  [Next](psa141) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 140](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Psalms 140 through 144.

The five following psalms go over ground which we have trodden over in
detail: only they apply to a restored Israel, still in conflict, and not
fully blessed.

Psalm 140 looks for deliverance from the evil and violent man. Israel is
in connection with Jehovah, but compassed about by the proud.

Psalm 141. Having learnt the government of Jehovah, the godly looks for
his words and thoughts to be kept of Jehovah, that Jehovah may bless
him. Smiting he will accept as discipline. He looks for acceptance for
his prayers. And even in the judgment coming upon the proud (Israel, I
apprehend), he looks to it as breaking them down so as to hear His word.
It is such a psalm as David might have penned when pursued by Saul. He
looks for judgment on the wicked, but that calamities may arrest some.

Psalm 142 looks to Jehovah alone as a refuge.

Psalm 143 specially for mercy and goodness, that in the midst of the
persecution of the enemy, and the pressure on the godly, Jehovah would
not enter into judgment with him, but show His lovingkindness. As the
servant of Jehovah, he begs; to be taught and guided. Thus these psalms
are all of one in deep distress; but they look, in relationship with
Jehovah (not cast out, and knowing Him only as God), for the cutting off
of the enemies.

Psalm 144 blesses Jehovah as the source of strength. Its plea for the
destruction of the enemies is, What is man? Why should Jehovah make
account \[See Note \#1\] of such a worm, and delay bringing in blessing
by thus lingering in judgment? Deliverance is thus looked for, for the
full true final blessing of Israel. Happy the people in such a case:
happy the people who have Jehovah for their God! Directly, the psalm
applies to David himself, who is named in it, and owns God, as subduing
his (David's) people under him, as the source of royal power. I do not
see that it brings in any personally in the latter day. Did it so, it
would be "the prince"; for there will be a human house of David on the
earth. But it is the bringing in of the people into that state of
subjection under Christ, when they will be willing in the day of His
power, when in the day of Jezreel they will appoint themselves one head,
when the day will be great, when Jehovah will utterly scatter the power
of the enemies of Israel, give them a new song, and bless them. Messiah
will surely be their head; but it is prophetically spoken of by David in
person. The true Beloved will be their sure head.

Note \#1

Compare Psalm 8, grace's view of it, and Job's impatience ([Job
7:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#017)) against discipline, God's
taking notice of men's ways in government.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 141](psa141)

</div>
