<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa102)  [Next](psa104) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 103](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001)

Psalms 103-106 give us the results and the covenant in grace and in
responsibility, of Israel's history.

Psalm 103 is the voice of Messiah in Israel in praise according to God's
dealing with them; Psalm 104, the same in creation; Psalm 105, God's
ways in grace, from Abraham up to the giving of the land (now to be
possessed in peace); Psalm 106, the acknowledgment of Israel's ways from
first to last, but owning Jehovah's mercy, and looking for it, for it
endures for ever. Grace and favor are the one foundation on which hope
can be built leading to obedience. This closes the book.

Psalms 103, 104 call for a few observations on the details. No doubt the
Spirit of Christ leads these praises, for His praise shall be of Jehovah
in the great congregation; but it is in the name of all Israel the psalm
is spoken. They have forgiveness and mercy through the tender
compassions and mercy of Jehovah. As for man, he is as grass; and the
people had been as grass and withered (Isaiah 40). But the mercy of
Jehovah is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him, the
obedient ones. Thus all is ascribed to goodness, yet faithfulness, from
the very nature and name of Jehovah; but to the obedient ones, the godly
remnant. Now Jehovah owned them with lovingkindness and tender mercies.
All their sins were utterly removed from them. Jehovah's throne was
prepared in the heavensthe only possible means of securing blessing. And
now His kingdom ruled over all It was not only His title, but
established in fact. It is Israel's praise, consequent on the
intervention of Jehovah, of which the previous psalms have spoken. [Mat
9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001) marks Jesus out as the Jehovah
who now at the close healed all Israel ([Psa
103:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003)). The more intimately we know
scripture, the more simple and distinct is the truth that, though Son of
man, Christ is the Jehovah of the Old Testament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 104](psa104)

</div>
