<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa109)  [Next](psa111) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

Psalm 110, though of the very highest interest, is in application so
simple that it needs but brief comment. The despised and poor man, hated
for his love, is David's Lord, and called to sit at the right hand of
Jehovah. It is of deep interest to see how in Isaiah 6 Adonai is Jehovah
of hosts in the fullest sense, and in this psalm, being David's Son,
sits at the right hand of Jehovah, and strikes through kings in the day
of His wrath. Compare Psalm 2. All the truth, in regard to the assembly
of association with Him on high is passed over, and the psalm passes
from the session of Christ at God's right hand to the sending the rod of
His strength out of Zion. This shows how entirely all is Jewish in these
psalms. Note, further, it is the answer to His rejection on earth. It is
not His coming from heaven to destroy Antichrist. What is in view is His
having already taken possession of Zion, and the rod of His strength
goes out thence. This answers to the whole position of this book, where
we have seen the Jews restored, but the dominion of Israel or of Christ
in Zion not yet made good. But the people are now willing (Amminadib) in
the day of His power (see [Sol 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#012)).
Alas! how different in the day of His humiliation! That was depicted in
Psalm 109. But this is the morning of a new day, in which we have not
fathers, but the children of grace. Then we have the certain oath of
Jehovah for Christ sitting thus a priest on His throne on earth. This is
promise and prophecy. The day too of His wrath is looked forward to.
Adonai, who is at Jehovah's right hand, has a coming day of wrathone
already noticed, when His enemies are made His footstool. While sitting
at the right hand of Jehovah, it is not so. It is then the time of
mercy, the accepted time. Christ has been heard and exalted, and His
work amongst men is the result of His atonement in grace. Now the time
of wrath is come, in which the judgment written will be executed. I
suppose in Verse 6 ([Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)) it is
"the head over a great country" the head of power in the earth, not
Antichrist, nor even the beast. These are destroyed on His coming from
heaven. Self-exalting man is brought low. Christ, who in humble
dependence on His Father took the refreshment given Him according to
God's will on the way, shall have His head high exalted in the earth.
These psalms give the groundwork of the whole scene. What now follows is
a review of the circumstances, and indeed from of old, and such as are
to come, with reflections (so to speak) on them, and praise as to the
result.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 111](psa111)

</div>
