<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev006)  [Next](rev008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001)

First, the perfect number of the remnant of Israel is sealed, before the
providential instruments of God's judgments are allowed to act; 144,000
= 12 x 12 x 1000. They are secured for blessing according to God's
purposes and set apart by Him; not yet seen in their blessings, but
secured for them. Afterwards the vast multitude from among the gentiles
is seen. We must remark here, there is no previous prophetic
announcement of the blessing of the spared ones in the great tribulation
(not the three years and-a-half of Matthew 24-this refers to Jews but
that mentioned in the epistle to the church at Philadelphia). Hence this
is fully given to us here, and we are distinctly told who they are. A
multitude of Gentiles is seen standing not as around the throne, but
before it and before the Lamb, their righteousness owned and themselves
victorious. They ascribe salvation to God thus revealed, that is, to God
on the throne, and to the Lamb. They belong to these earthly scenes, not
to the assembly. This is answered by the angels who are around the
throne, the elders, and the living creatures all together composing the
heavenly part of the scene already connected with the throne; the angels
surrounding the others, which form the centre and immediate circle of
the throne, the white-robed multitude before it. The angels give their
Amen, and pronounce the praise of their God too.

All this belonged to the white-robed multitude and the angels; only the
former speak of the Lamb, who was also their salvation. The angels add
their Amen to this; but praise their God. They had ascribed glory and
blessing to the Lamb before; but, naturally, salvation to the Lamb was
not their own part of the song. But the four living creatures and the
elders do not worship here, because their own relationships were
different, and these are not what are spoken of here. They are found, as
far as the book goes, in Chapters 4 and 5, where they are on thrones
around, and cast their crowns before the throne, and worship Him that
liveth for ever and ever. They give the motives of worship according to
the relationships they are in: that of the angels is with their God; of
the white robed multitude, with the God of the throne and the Lamb as
having the title to the government and deliverance of the earth as a
present thing. That the Lamb was the Son, yea, the God who created the
angels, is not the question here, but of each speaking in his own
relationship, so as to bring these relationships out.

We have thus the heavenly hosts, the glorified saints, and the
white-robed multitude, each in a different relationship, but the first
and the last thrown in the main together the glorified saints forming a
class apart. They do not worship here. But one of the elders, who have
always the intelligence of God explains to the prophet who the
white-robed multitude are. It formed no part of the prophetic revelation
as yet, and it was not the assembly's own place. "Sir, thou knowest,"
says the prophet. They had come out of the great tribulation, faithful
in it, their robes white in the blood of the Lamb. They were not
millennial saints, that is, born in that time, and subject by birth to
the responsibility of that condition (which grace had to meet). They
were cleansed and owned to be so, having the consciousness of it and
victory when the others began; so that they, as already cleansed and
owned, are always before the throne a special class, and serve Him day
and night in His temple.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 8](rev008)

</div>
