<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev018)  [Next](rev020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

[Rev 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002) clearly shews the aspect in
which she is judged the great whore who corrupted; and God avenges the
blood of His servants. This judgment of Rome is the great joy of heaven.
Hallelujah and salvation are sung. The elders and four living creatures
fall down and worship, and the voice of the multitude proclaims the
bringing in of the marriage of the Lamb, when the false woman is set
aside. Till then, though espoused, the assembly was not thus actually
united in the heavenly marriage of the Lamb. Still there was no greater
event could be than a judgment of Rome. No doubt the beast had to be
destroyed. Power, when God gave it scope, would soon do that, But here
the old corruptress and persecutor was set aside for ever. Heaven is
full of joy. There is no celebration of joy like this in the Revelation.

The rest of the book is simple and clear enough, for the mystery of God
is closed. I do not myself attach any importance to the distinction, as
a class, of those called to partake of the joy of that day. It means, I
believe, just that, according to the parable of the marriage of the
king's son, the guests are those who have share in the marriage joy. But
several points have to be noticed: God in power has come in to set up
His reign.

The true though not yet the open seat of the power of evil has been
judged and destroyed. Two characters of evil, falsehood or deceitful
corruption and violence have existed since Satan himself began his
career, false in himself, he was a murderer to others. The mystery of
iniquity contained both, though hiding the latter and using others for
it. Still she was characterised by corruption and what was false. Direct
violence was in the hands of the beast. The destruction of that would,
no doubt, relieve the earth of oppression; but for heaven and all that
was heavenly minded, the destruction of this Christ-dishonouring,
soul-enslaving, and soul-debasing corruption, was joy and gladness, and
the witness that divine power had come in. It had set aside the worst
evil, the corrupting what was God's, under pretense of being what Christ
had purchased for Himself, the one precious object of His especial love.
They sing "Hallelujah ! for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth!"

This was to make way for the introduction of what was His own the
manifest power of His Christ. But, before that, the assembly must have
her place of association with Him in that must have Himself: the
marriage of the Lamb is come. Till the evil woman had been set aside,
this could not be. This is the character of heavenly joy and redemption
by which we are brought into it. Man on earth is first good, then
yielding to temptation. Redemption supposes first evil, and even slavery
to it, but then deliverance from it and our being set beyond it, God
having taken to Him His power. The assembly is presented to Christ
without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, cleansed and white, suited to
Christ. The apostle was disposed, in sight of all this blessedness, to
fall down and worship him who had revealed it. His mind was thrown into
devotion by these scenes. Its immediate object was the heavenly
messenger, and he turns to bow to him, but is forbidden. He was a
fellow-servant, and the same to all who had the testimony of Jesus; for
the spirit of prophecy, we are told, is the testimony of Jesus. The
testimony not to worship intermediate beings is the last warning left to
a declining assembly, as, so to speak, one of the first (in Colossians).

We now arrive at the great announcement of the coming of Christ in
power. Heaven, which had been opened on Jesus and to Stephen, now opens
for Jesus as King of kings and Lord of lords. Holy and true He had been
known by faith, and the faithful and true Witness. The last He is now;
not as witness, but in judgment, save as judgment itself is the witness
of His faithfulness and truth. The characters in which He appears are
plain but all-important. It is first in general judgment but in the form
of war, not what we may call sessional judgment, but overcoming power.
Sessional judgment is in Chapter 20 from Verse 4 ([Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)). His eyes have the piercingness
of divine judgment. He had many crowns, witness of His various and
universal dominion. But, though thus revealed as man, He had a glory
none could penetrate into; \[See Note \#17\] of which He had the
conscious power, but which was not revealed. He was the avenger His
garment was dipped in blood. All characterised Him, we may note here,
according to that in which He is manifested by the judgment itself It
was the Revealer, the Word of God His eternal character what He was
before creation; now making it good in judgment.

The armies in heaven had not garments dipped in blood. They were
triumphant; they followed Him in His triumph, pure and perfect, His
chosen, called, and faithful ones. The vengeance of Idumea was not their
part, though they share His victory over the beast. The vengeance in
Edom had a more earthly character, and is connected more with Judah. The
Assyrian is there (see Ps. 83), not the beast. The beast and the false
prophet are destroyed by Him as coming from heaven. He smites the
nations with the rod of His mouth, He rules them with a rod of iron:
this the saints will have with Him. ([Rev
2:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026).) He treads the wine-press
too. \[See Note \#18\] This is the part that is more earthly, as Isaiah
63 shews. So He that sits on the cloud thrusts in His sickle on the
earth. It was an angel who cast the grapes into the wine-press, and the
wine-press was trodden \[See Note \#19\] it is not said, as by one
sitting on the cloud. The character of the judgment of the beast and the
false prophet is heavenly it is the Word of God, the Lord from heaven;
the wine-press is earthly. He is publicly, officially, and intrinsically
King of kings, and Lord of lords. The beast and the false prophet are
cast alive into the lake of fire: this was a present final judgment the
rest were judicially slain. The final judgment of these deceived ones is
not said to take place here. Satan is not yet cast into the lake of
fire, but into the bottomless pit, where the legion of devils besought
the Lord they might not be sent. He is bound there so as not to deceive
the nations for a thousand years. There will be no seduction by Satan
during the thousand years.

Note \#17

So it was as to His Person and service. No one knew the Son but the
Father. It was the secret of His rejection. He was that, and so
necessarily such in the world. But the world under Satan's influence
would not have that. In His humiliation His divine glory was maintained
in the unsounded depths of His Person. Now He is revealed in glory; but
there ever remained what none could search or penetrate into His own
Person and nature. His revealed name was the Word of God. As revealing
God in grace or power so as to make Him known, we know Him. But His
Person as Son always remains unsearchable. His name is written, so that
we know it is unknowable not unknown but unknowable. But He made good
now the character and requirements of God in respect of men what they
ought to be with God, and what God was to them in their natural
relationship, revealed in respect of their responsibility. Judgment
refers to these, and to ourselves.

Note \#18

This too He does alone not that the saints may not be with Him as His
cortege, so to speak, but the execution of judgment is His. In Isaiah it
is only said that of the people none were with Him. In sessional
judgment, judgment is given to them.

Note \#19

I have already stated that the harvest is discriminative judgment: there
is wheat for the garner. The wine-press is vengeance, righteous
vengeance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 20](rev020)

</div>
