<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev002)  [Next](rev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001)

There is no threat of removing the candlestick: that was settled.
Judgment, setting aside the assembly, was fixed. But this body would be
treated as the world, not ecclesiastically as a corrupt assembly.
(compare 1 Thess. 5) However, some had preserved their integrity, and
would be owned; and they would walk with Christ as those that had done
righteousness. This was the promise too. They had confessed His name
practically before men, before the world, and theirs would be confessed
before God when the nominal assembly was treated as the world. They were
real Christians in the midst of a worldly profession, and their names
would not be struck out of the register, then ill-kept on earth, but
infallibly rectified by heavenly judgment. It has been remarked that,
simultaneously with bringing in the Lord's coming, the ear to hear comes
after the distinguishing the overcomers. Such a remnant only is looked
for. I cannot doubt that we have Protestantism here.

The assembly of Philadelphia has a peculiarly interesting character.
Nothing is said of its works, but that Christ knows them. But what is
interesting in it is that it is peculiarly associated with Christ
Himself. Christ, as in all these last assemblies, is not seen in the
characters in which He walked in the midst of the assemblies, but in
such as faith peculiarly recognises when ecclesiastical organization has
become the hot-bed of corruption. Here it is His personal character,
what He is intrinsically, holy and true, what the word displays and
requires, and what the word of God is in itself-moral character and
faithfulness. Indeed this last word includes all: faithfulness to God
within and without, according to what is revealed, and faithful to make
good all He has declared.

Christ is known as the Holy One. Then outward ecclesiastical
associations or pretensions will not do. There must be what suits His
nature, and faithful consistency with that word which He will certainly
make good. With this He has the administration; and opens and no man
shuts, and shuts and no man opens. See what His path was on earth: only
then graciously dependent, as we are. He was holy and true, to man's
view had a little strength, kept the word lived by every word that
proceeded out of God's lips waited patiently for the Lord, and to Him
the porter opened. He lived in the last days of a dispensation, the holy
and true One, rejected, and, to human eye, failing in success with those
who said they were Jews, but were the synagogue of Satan. So the saints
here: they walk in a place like His; they keep His word, have a little
strength, are not marked by a Pauline energy of the Spirit, but do not
deny His name. This is the character and motive of all their conduct. It
is openly confessed, the word kept, the Name not denied. It seems
little; but in universal decline, much pretension and ecclesiastical
claim, and many falling away to man's reasonings, keeping the word of
Him that is holy and true, and not denying His name is everything.

And this element is noticed. Christ, the holy and true One, is waiting.
Here on earth He waited patiently for Jehovah. It is the character of
perfect faith. Faith has a double character energy which overcomes, and
patience which waits for God and trusts Him. (See the first in [Heb
11:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#023); the latter in [Rev
3:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#008).) It is the latter which is
found here; the word of patience kept.

But as regards the former substantive qualities, keeping the word and
not denying Christ's name (though with a little strength) in presence of
ecclesiastical pretension to a successional God-established religion,
promises were given. Christ would force these pretentious claimants to
divine succession to come and own that He had loved those who kept His
word. An open door was given at present, and no man could shut it; just
as the porter had opened to Him, so that scribes and Pharisees and
priests could not hinder it. In the future they would have to own
themselves humbled, and that those who followed the word of the holy and
true One were those He had loved.Meanwhile His approbation was
sufficient. This was the test of faith to be satisfied with His
approbation, content with the authority of His word.

But there was a promise also as to the Lord's judgments in the earth.
Christ is waiting till His enemies be made His footstool. We must wait
for it to see the world set right. We have to go on where the god of
this world has his way, though under divine limitation. The thought that
good is to have its rights in this world is to forget the cross and
Christ. We cannot have our rights till He has, for we have none but His.
Judgment (since Pilate had it, and Christ was the righteous One before
him) has not yet returned to righteousness. Till then Christ waits,
though at the right hand of God; and we wait. It is not persecution and
martyrdom, as in Smyrna. It is as hard a task perhaps, or, at any rate,
our task now patience and contentedness with Christ's approbation,
keeping His word, not denying His name.

But then there were other and blessed encouragements. There was an hour
of temptation coming upon all the world to try those who belonged to
earth, who dwelt there as belonging to it. Some might be spared,
victorious in the trial; but those who kept the word of Christ's
patience would be kept from it. On the whole world it would come; and
where were they? Out of the world. They had not belonged to it when in
it. They had been waiting for Christ to take His power waiting His time
to have the world. They belonged to heaven, to Him who was there; and
they would be taken to be with Him when the world was to be in the time
of terrible trial. There was a special time before He took His power;
and not only would they reign with Him in result, but they would be kept
from that hour, and had the assurance of it in the time of their trial.
And hence the Lord points them to His coming as their hope; not as
warning that the unrepentant would be treated as the world when He
appeared. He came quickly, and they were to look for the crown then,
holding fast what they had, feeble but spiritually associated with Him
as they were, lest any should take it.

We have now the general promise in heavenly places marked by special
association with Christ; and they are publicly owned in that in which
they seemed on earth to have nothing. Others had the pretension to be
the people of God, the city of God to have divine religious title; these
were only consistent with His word, and they waited for Christ. Now,
when Christ takes His power, when things are real, according to Him in
power, they have this place according to God. It was the cross and
contempt below; it is the display of God's name and heavenly city above.

Let us examine the promise to the overcomers here. He who had but a
little strength is a pillar in the temple of the God in whom and with
whom he is blessed. He was held perhaps for outside the ecclesiastical
unity and order; he is a pillar in it in heaven, and will go no more
out. On him who was hardly owned to have a part in grace has the name of
his rejected Saviour's God been stamped publicly in glory. He who was
hardly accounted to belong to the holy city has its heavenly name
written on him too, and Christ's new name the name not known to prophets
and Jews according to the flesh, but which He has taken as dead to this
world (where the false assembly settles down) and risen into heavenly
glory. The careful association with Christ is striking here, and gives
its character to the promise. "The temple of my God," says Christ; "the
name of my God ;", " of the city of my God", " my new name." Associated
in Christ's own patience, Christ confers upon him what fully associates
him in His own blessing with God. This is of peculiar blessing, and full
of encouragement for us.

Laodicea follows. Lukewarmness characterises the last state of
profession in the assembly. It is nauseous to Christ; He will spue it
out of His mouth. It was not mere want of power, it was want of heart
the worst of all ills. This threat is peremptory, not conditional. It
brought irremediable rejection. With this want of heart for Christ and
His service, there was much pretension to the possession of resources
and competency in themselves; " I am rich," whereas they had nothing of
Christ. It is the professing assembly accounting itself rich without
having Christ as the riches of the soul by faith. Therefore He counsels
them to buy of Him true and approved righteousness, clothing for their
moral nakedness, and what gave spiritual sight; for they were, as
respects what Christ is and gives before God, poor, naked, and
miserable, and specially so. This is Christ's judgment of their
pretended acquisitions according to man. However, as long as the
assembly subsists, Christ continues to deal in grace, stands at the door
and knocks presses reception of Himself in the closest way on the
conscience. If any one, still in what He was going to spue out, heard
His voice and opened, He would give him admission to be with Him, and a
part in the kingdom.

There is no coming here; nor was there for the judgment of Jezebel. That
was practically Babylon; and she is judged before Christ comes. This is
spued out of Christ's mouth, cast off as worthless to Him; but the
general body is judged as the world. The Lord's coming is in Thyatira
for the saints, and in Philadelphia too. That is its aspect as to the
assembly, and that only. Sardis is reduced, if unrepentant, to the
condition of the world, and judged as such. When the state of Laodicea
arrives, the assembly is disowned and rejected of Christ in that
character: but for that His coming is not to be spoken of. Although
Thyatira goes down to the end and closes ecclesiastically the assembly's
history, yet only in the first three is the assembly at large treated as
the subject of repentance. In Thyatira space had been given Jezebel to
repent, and she did not: and the scene is to close and be replaced by
the kingdom. In this respect the last four assemblies go together. There
is no prospect of repentance of the whole assembly, or restoration.
Sardis is called to hold fast and repent, and remember what she had
received; but, if she does not watch, is to be treated as the world.
Hence, as we have seen, the call to hear is addressed to overcomers,
after the promise.

The character of Christ in connection with this assembly must not be
passed over. It brings out the passage from the various condition of the
assembly to His authority above and beyond it over the world. Christ
personally takes up what the assembly has ceased to be. He is the Amen,
the fulfillment and verifier of all the promises, the real witness and
revealer of God and of truth, when the assembly is not; and the
beginning of the creation of God Head over all things, and the glory and
witness of what it is as from God as the new creation. The assembly
ought to have displayed the power of the new creation by the Holy Ghost;
as if any man is in Christ, it is a new creation, where all things are
of God. We, as its firstfruits, are created again in Him. The assembly
has thus the things which remain. (2 Cor. 3) But she has been an
unfaithful witness of it. Does she possess a part in it? It is because
Christ does, and He is the true beginning of it as really displayed. The
responsible witness of it by the Holy Ghost having failed, Christ now
takes it up, coming in for its effectual display.

But the series of preparatory events in the world must first be gone
into. And it is to be remarked, that there is no mention here of the
fact of the Lord's coming in reference to the assembly. It is promised
that He will come quickly; and the assembly is threatened with being
spued out of His mouth. But the fact of His coming for His own, or the
assembly's rapture at any time, is not stated. This falls in fully with
what we have seen of John's ministry \[See Note \#9\] his being occupied
with the manifestation of the Lord on earth, and scarce touching (and
only when needed on leaving the disciples) on heavenly promises. In John
14 and 17 he does it exceptionally. Here it is left out. Even in Chapter
12, which remarkably confirms what I say, the rapture is only seen as
identified with the catching up of the man-child, Christ Himself. Hence
we have no specific relative epoch noted for the taking away the saints
here, save that they are taken before the war in heaven which leads to
the last three years and a half. But on the other hand the saints
belonging to the assembly, or before, are always seen above when the
epistles to the assemblies are ended. They are waiting for judgment to
be given to them for the avenging of their blood; but they are never
seen on earth.

Note \#9

His character too was for judgment among the assemblies and the assembly
on earth; not His own bride, but the outward body here on earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 4](rev004)

</div>
