<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev008)  [Next](rev010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001)

The fifth angel sounds; and one who should have been by position the
instrument of light and governmental order over the earth was seen as
having lost his place; and the power to let loose the full darkening
influence of Satan was given him. He opened the bottomless pit the place
where evil is shut up and chained; not where it is punished, that is,
the lake of fire. Supreme authority, and all heavenly light over the
earth, and healthful influence of order, were darkened and made to cease
by the evil Satanic influence which was let loose. Nor was this all:
direct instruments of Satanic power came out of this evil influence in
numbers; crowds of moral locusts with the sting of false doctrine in
their tail. But it was not to destroy temporal prosperity on the earth,
but to torment the ungodly Jews; not to kill, but to harass and vex
them. This was to continue five months; for it is not the final
judgment. The torment was worse than death pain and anguish of heart.
But they had the semblance of military imperial power, crowned, and with
masculine energy, to those that met them; but they were, if seen behind
and the secret disclosed, subject and weak: their faces were as the
faces of men, their hair as the hair of women. But they were armed in a
steeled conscience. They were the direct instruments of the power of
Satan, and under his orders. The angel of the bottomless pit he who
rules the depths of Satan's wiles, as the ruler of the power of darkness
led them. We are too unbelieving as to the direct influence of Satan in
darkening men's minds when permitted, when men are given up to his
darkening influence. Cruel harassing torments, worse than death, with
darkening of their minds, become the portion of the once beloved people.
One woe was past.

The sixth angel sounds. The woe which follows is much more human and
providential. It is directed against the inhabitants of the Latin
Empire. The instruments of it are let loose from beyond Euphrates a
countless crowd of horsemen. But they were not simply such. Their
consciences and their words, both were in the power of Satan, but in
judgment from God. But it now killed men. Their mouths belched forth the
power of Satan, and their influence in doctrine was Satanic: with both
they did hurt. I do not believe this death here is mere temporal death
(there may be such), but, I suspect, making apostates. The rest, who did
not thus fall, did not repent of their idolatry and misdeeds.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 10](rev010)

</div>
