<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev000)  [Next](rev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

[Revelation 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 1:1</span></span>

The revelation is one belonging to Jesus Christ, which God gave Him, and
He signifies it to John. Though God over all blessed for ever, He is
here seen as Son of man, the rejected Messiah or Lamb, and so Head over
all things. This fact, that the revelation is one confided to Him, is
important, because it at once makes it the testimony of Jesus and the
word of God being communicated by Jesus, and given to Him by God. This
testimony of Jesus and word of God comes as a vision to John, who bare
record of all He saw. All of it is prophetic in character, not the
Spirit of God the messenger of the Father and of the Son's grace to the
assembly in its own place a direct inspired communication to the
assembly itself for itself as in its own right place but a prophetic
revelation to John about it as in the world, and about the world itself.

The assembly being already in decay and to be removed, whatever the
delay of grace, the time was at hand, and the rejection of the assembly
on earth to be taken as a starting-point. Another system was to be set
up. The apostle had not his face turned towards the assemblies at all,
but his back. The mind of the Spirit is towards Christ's taking the
kingdom. Still Christ was yet amongst them, but as Son of man, the
character in which He judges and inherits the world. The apostle turns
and sees Him. Still it behoved, if He was recounting the coming dealing
with the world in judgment, to notice by the bye "the things that are."
By giving them in seven contemporary churches, no time was necessary; it
left the final results as at the door, for they were in the last days,
yet it gave, if there was delay, opportunity for a full moral picture of
the whole of the assembly's history. I see in this only the wisdom of
the Spirit, and exactly the character of John's ministry. " If I will
that He tarry till I come."

I cannot doubt then for a moment that (while professedly of universal
application for every one that had an ear, not an address to the general
conscience of the assembly) the seven assemblies represent the history
of Christendom, the assembly as under man's responsibility, the fact of
the judgment of the world coming afterwards on its close (the assemblies
being "the things that are ") and the character of events, beginning
with the assembly leaving its first love, and ending with holding fast
till He comes, and with being spued out of Christ's mouth. The adoption
of the number seven, which cannot mean completeness at the same time
because the states are different; the reference to Christ's coming; the
reference to the great tribulation to come on all the earth in the
letter to Philadelphia; the clear object of warning the assembly till
Christ came, the world being then in scene for judgment: all leave no
cloud upon the conclusion that the seven churches are successive phases
of the professing assembly's history, though not exactly consecutive
(the fourth going on to the end; new phases then commencing, and going
on to the end collaterally also). \[See Note \#5\]

But though the assembly be thus spoken of, God Himself appears here as
the administrator of the world, even when addressing the assembly; and
Christ as man coming, under Him to this purpose, the Holy Ghost being
noticed as the direct agent of power in the sevenfold perfection in
which it is exercised. It is not the Father and the Son, but God who is,
yet who embraces past and future in His being, and is never inconsistent
with Himself, making good in time all in which He has announced Himself
in the past. The form of this however is peculiar here. It is not merely
the abstract idea of Jehovah, who was, and is, and is to come. He is
first announced by His present absolute existence, "from him who is,"
the "I am," God Himself; and then to connect Himself with previous
dealings (not present relationships) declares that He is the One who was
(had revealed Himself in previous ages to the earth or to men, to the
Abrahams and Moseses of old time), and at the same time was the coming
One \[See Note \#6\] who would make good everything revealed of and by
Himself. Jesus Christ (who comes last as the Man in immediate connection
with God's witness to, and government of, the earth) is presented as the
faithful witness as He was personally on earth of God; as risen from the
dead (but no ascension or headship of the assembly), taking all in this
character, not after the flesh; and lastly, in government not yet made
good, the Prince of the kings of the earth.

The saints then express their own consciousness of what He has done for
them, yet still in reference to the kingdom, not as the body or bride,
or their own heavenly joys, but the highest possible as regards the
given glory and place. This is the necessary consequence of the
consciousness of a near and blessed relationship. Whatever the glory of
the One we are in relationship with, it is what He is for oneself, one's
own nearness to Him, that comes to the mind when the glory is declared.
Were a general to march in triumph into a town, the feeling of a child
or wife would be, " That is my father," " that is my husband." Here the
feeling, though of this character, is more unselfish. "To him that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood." It is His love to us
which is celebrated, still with the personal feeling "us." The saints
know what He has done for them, and further what He has made them. His
love as perfect King and Priest are His highest characters here: nearest
to God in power downwards, and in approaching Him upwards. He has made
us kings and priests to God and His Father: to Him be glory! Such is the
saint's thought when He is spoken of. He loved us, has cleansed us, and
given us a place with Himself. This flows out the instant He is named.
It is the answer of heart when He is announced, before any communication
takes place. His having done this is not announced; it is the saints'
own consciousness. \[See Note \#7\]

As to others, all must be told. The next point, the first announced, is
His appearing to the world. No direct communication to the assembly for
its own sake the book is not that. Here the assembly has that in its own
consciousness only, as we have seen. Behold! He cometh with clouds;
every eye shall see Him, the Jews too who pierced Him, and all kindreds
of the earth shall wail because of Him. His appearing is in judgment.

We then find, what is so remarkable in John, the mixing up in expression
God and Christ Verse 8 ([Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008))
cannot be said to be one or the other. It is Christ; but it is Christ
Jehovah, Almighty, the Lord; who is, and who was, and who is to come;
the first and the last. (Compare [Rev
22:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012))

Thus, we have the saints of these days; Christ's appearing to judgment;
He is God, the first and the last, Alpha and Omega; the complete circle
of position from John's day to the end. The practical position which
John takes with all the saints, is " the kingdom and patience of Jesus
Christ." He belongs to the kingdom, but must wait while Christ waits,
expecting till His enemies be made His footstool. The generic name given
to testimony applies to all his ministry as well as to the prophecy the
word of God and the testimony of Jesus: only one might have thought that
prophecy was not this last, as it was not to the assembly about itself
from its Head; but the Spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus.

Such is the introduction to this book. We now enter on its contents.
John was in the Spirit on the Lord's day. It is his place and privilege
however then, as a Christian, which is spoken of, not the prophetic
period into which He entered. In the day of resurrection his own place
the day on which Christians meet, the apostle, removed from the society
of Christians, still enjoyed the special elevating power of the Holy
Ghost, though alone; and is thus used of God, allowed to be banished for
the purpose, for what He could not, in an ordinary way, have
communicated to the assembly for its edification. The persecuting
emperor little thought what He was giving to us when He banished the
apostle; no more than Augustus, in his political plans as to the census
of the empire, knew He was sending a poor carpenter to Bethlehem, with
his espoused wife, that Christ might be born there; or the Jews and
Pilate's soldiers, that they were sending the thief to heaven, when they
broke his legs in heartless respect for their own superstitions or
ordinances. God's ways are behind the scenes; but He moves all the
scenes which He is behind. We have to learn this, and let Him work, and
not think much of man's busy movements: they will accomplish God's. The
rest of them all perish and disappear. We have only peacefully to do His
will.

The same voice that afterwards called John up to heaven, He now hears
behind him on earth the voice of the Son of man. It summons his
attention with power; and turning to see the voice, as Moses towards the
bush, He sees, not the image of God's presence in Israel, but the
vessels of God's light in the earth, and a complete summary of it all,
and, in the midst of them, Christ as Son of man. We find, thus, in the
Revelation, God's whole history of the world, or of what is of Him in
it, from the first decay of the assembly to the new heavens and new
earth. But it was impossible for God to set aside the present
expectation of Christ, or to justify the assembly in its careless but
sinful thought, My Lord delayeth His coming. Hence, as always, this
history, and especially that of the assembly, is given in a way which
leaves time out altogether. The moral progress of the assembly is given
in pictures of the state of the existing assemblies selected for that
purpose, beginning with its first decline, and ending with its entire
rejection. Being taken up as assemblies, the general principle of
responsibility is in view, and the assembly viewed, not as the
infallibly blessed body of Christ, but such as that it may be rejected
and set aside on earth; for a local assembly and the external visible
assembly clearly can.

These assemblies are seen as distinct light-bearers; that is, in their
place of service, or rather position of witness in the world. They are
viewed in their own proper character as of God; as set by Him in the
world, they are of gold. He may take them away because they give a dim,
or no true light or witness for God; but the thing taken away was
founded in divine righteousness, and founded originally by a divine
hand.

But the Spirit first occupies itself with the character of Him who stood
amongst them. First, we get His actual position, before stating what He
was. He stood as Son of man. We have not Him here as Head of the one
body, nor even as heavenly Intercessor; nor have we the Christ, of
course (that is, the Jewish character of the Lord). It will be found
that these are just the characters of Christ omitted also in the first
Chapter of John's Gospel. John sees Him in the wide character in which
He is set over all the works of God's hand, and Heir of all promises and
purposes of God to man according to divine righteousness. He is not the
Son of man in service. His garment is down to His feet, and He has the
girdle of divine righteousness about His loins. This is His character.

We have then His qualities or attributes. First, He is the Ancient of
days. In Daniel the same truth comes out. The Son of man is brought to
the Ancient of days; but, farther on in the Chapter, it is the Ancient
of days who comes. The Son of man is Jehovah. This characterises all the
testimony. The King of kings and Lord of lords shews Him : ([Ti1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#015)) but, when He comes, we find that
He is King of kings and Lord of lords. But in this glory He has the
attributes of judgment eyes of fire that which pierces into everything,
and fire is ever the sign of judgment. This was its piercing, searching
character: His feet, the firmness with which sin was met; for brass is
righteousness, viewed, not as intrinsically in God to be approached, but
as dealing with man, in his responsibility as man. The mercy-seat was
gold, the altar and laver brass; but there it was as an altar, that is,
dealing with sin for man, a sacrifice, though fire was there, but here
the burning furnace of judgment. The voice was the sign of power and
majesty.

Next, we have official supremacy. He held all that was subordinate
authority in light and order, here spoken of as regards the assembly, in
His right hand, in His power. He had the power of judgment by the word,
and supreme authority the sun in the fullness of its highest character.
We have His personal glory as Jehovah; His qualities as divine Judge;
and His supreme official position.

But, He was not less the Redeemer, the gracious securer in blessing of
them that were His. John (as ever in prophetic vision of Jehovah, for it
is not the Spirit of adoption here) falls at His feet as one dead. So
Daniel; so in spirit Isaiah (Chapter 6); but His power sustains the
saint, does not destroy him. He lays His right hand on John himself,
declares Himself the first and the last, Jehovah Himself, but withal the
same that died in love and has complete power over death and hades; the
deliverer from it, not the subjecter to it. He has risen out of death
and hades, and has the keys full power over them divine power or
support; and He who died and rose again, and lives forever even as man,
does so, not simply in the power of divine life in man, but of victory
over all that man was subject to by sin and infirmity.

This is the position He here takes with John His servant, and with the
assemblies respectively. We shall see that the state of the latter
assemblies brings out other characters known only to the opened eye of
faith. These were what John had seen and which he was to write. Then as
regards prophetic facts, he was to write the things that were, the state
of these various assemblies as the setting forth historically of the
assembly's various state a history; and the things which should be after
them (that is, when the assembly's history had closed on earth). The
whole assembly therefore, is thus, to the Spirit, present time the
"things that are." The future was what came after it, God's dealings
with the world. This, while it left the coming of the Lord, or
preparatory prophetic events in immediate expectation, left,if there was
delay (and there was to be), the period indefined, and the expectation,
though prolonged, still a present one. We may remark that we have the
personal glory of Christ here, the position as to the assemblies
accompanying it. He is not personally revealed as Son of man, that is,
as taking the Son of man's place: only He who is Ancient of days is so
seen as to make us understand that it was one who had that place was Son
of man. Subsequently, in the Apocalypse, it is not His intrinsic
personal character, but some relative character or place He takes. Only
we have something analogous to this, when the account of future things
comes in. As regards the world, He is seen as the Lamb, one whom the
world has rejected, but who has redemption right over it. There He is
seen with the seven horns and seven eyes His power over the world, as
with the seven stars here as Son of man. These are the things John had
seen.

We now pass to " the things that are." The stars are in Christ's hand;
He speaks of them first; He walks in the midst of the assemblies. The
latter are light-bearers, the assemblies or assembly as set in a given
position, and viewed as such before God; not what the people became, but
what the assembly is in His sight; just as Israel was His people
whatever the Israelites became. The stars are that which is held by
Christ to give light and have authority, what He holds responsible to
this end before Him. It is, in a certain sense, all composing the
assembly therefore, and so it is often said in the addresses to the
assemblies; but more especially those who stand in responsibility
through their connection with Himself, the stars in His hand. They
should shine, and influence, and represent Him, each in its place during
the night. That the clergy gradually took this place, and in this sense
are responsible in it, is quite true; but that is their affair to answer
for themselves before the Lord. The Spirit does not so take it here.
They assume it as honour; they have it as responsibility. If ever they
were called "angels," it was evidently just this assumption, and taken
from this place. Again, it cannot be doubted that leaders, elders, or
others, were in a special place of responsibility, supposing them to be
rightly such. In Acts 20 they are so treated; but the Spirit does not so
own them here. Christ does not address Himself to elders, nor to the
modern notion of a bishop, which did not indeed exist then. Nor is a
diocese \[See Note \#8\] thought of in these addresses. You have not the
authorities (elders) spoken of in scripture, of which there were always
several; and this passage of scripture cannot be applied to human
arrangements as now existing.

What then is the angel? It is not a symbol, properly speaking. The star
is the symbol, and it is here seen in Christ's hand. It is (as angel is
always used where it is not actually a heavenly or earthly messenger)
the mystical representative of one not actually seen. It is so used of
Jehovah, so used of a child, so spoken of Peter. Elders may have
practically been specially responsible from their position; but the
angel represents the assembly, and especially those to whom, from
nearness to Christ and communion with him, or responsibility for it
through the operation of His Spirit in them for His service, He looks
for the state of His assembly in His sight. No doubt the whole assembly
is responsible, and therefore the candlestick is removed when
unfaithfulness is brought home to it; but Christ is in immediate
communication with these in respect of it a solemn thought for all who
have the good of the assembly at heart.

The way in which the angels and the assemblies are identified, and any
distinction in the degree or manner of it, requires a little more
detailed attention. That the assemblies are addressed in their general
responsibility, in the addresses to the angels, is evident. For it is
said, "What the Spirit saith to the churches." It is not a private
communication to an authority for his direction, as to a Titus or a
Timothy, but said to the assemblies; that is, the angel represents their
responsibility. So we find distinct parts of them noticed. " The devil
shall cast some of you into prison;" " fear none of those things which
thou shalt suffer :" , "but I have a few things against thee, thou hast
there :", " My faithful martyr who was slain among you :", "But unto you
I say, the rest in Thyatira" (so it is to be read). Yet the angel and
assembly or candlestick are distinguished: " I will remove thy
candlestick out of its place." " Thou sufferest that woman Jezebel."

But this separation between the angel and the assembly does not take
place in the last three assemblies. The angel is addressed throughout.
As to them too it is only said, Christ has the seven stars, not that He
holds them in His right hand. In Smyrna and Philadelphia there is no
judgment; they were tried, as faithful, and encouraged. As to judgments,
or rather warning threats in the case of Ephesus, which presents the
general fact of the assembly's first decline, the warning is given that
the candlestick would be taken away unless thy repented: that the
assembly did not, we know from scripture and fact, and these assemblies
looked at as a successive history. In Pergamos and Thyatira the
offenders are those specifically judged; in the case of Thyatira fearful
judgments on Jezebel and those connected with her: she had had time to
repent and had not; but here the change of everything is looked for at
the Lord's coming. All this shews the angels to be the representatives
of the assemblies, but morally such; Christ's warning to be addressed to
them (as we can easily understand to be the case in any who had the
interest of the assembly at heart), whom Christ trusted with this; but
to be so far identified with the assemblies that it concerned all who
composed them, while particular judgments were denounced on guilty
parties.

We may now enter on the series of particular assemblies; but briefly, in
connection with the whole structure of the book, rather than entering
into the instructive details, which I have done elsewhere in a series of
lectures.

Note \#5

There are moral reasons from the contents. We shall see, farther on,
that the structure of the book fully confirms this.

Note \#6

"erchomenos" not "o esomenos".

Note \#7

We shall find the same thing at the close when the prophecy is ended.
Here what He has been to the saints and has done: there what He is for
the future. See [Rev 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017).

Note \#8

Except in the new world, those called bishops are always bishops of a
city, shewing, historically that dioceses are a subsequent arrangement.
Angels were not chief officers of the synagogue.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 2](rev002)

</div>
