<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)

The connection of the holy city with the earth, though not on it, is
everywhere seen. The river of God refreshed the city, and the tree of
life, whose fruits ever ripe were food for the celestial inhabitants of
it, bore in its wings healing for the nations. Only the glorified ever
ate the fruit of constant growth; but what was manifested and displayed
without, as the leaves of a tree, was blessing to those on earth. We see
grace characterising the assembly in glory. The nation and kingdom that
will not serve the earthly Jerusalem shall utterly perish it preserves
its earthly royal character; the assembly its own: the leaves of the
tree it feeds on are for healing. There is no more curse. The throne of
God and the Lamb is in it. This is the source of blessing, not of curse;
and His servants serve Him; often they cannot as they would here. Note
too again here, how God and the Lamb are spoken of as one, as constantly
in John's writings. His servants shall have the fullest privilege of His
constant presence, shall see His face, and their belonging to Him as His
own be evident to all. There is no night there, nor need of light, for
the Lord God gives it; and, as to their state, they reign not for the
thousand years, as they do over the earth, but for ever and ever.

This closes the description of the heavenly city and the whole prophetic
volume. What follows consists of warning, or the final expression of the
thoughts of and relationship with, Christ of the assembly.

The angel declares the truth of these things, and that the Lord God of
the prophets not as the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, nor as
directly teaching the assembly as dwelling in it by the Spirit the Lord
God of the prophets has sent His angel to inform His servants of these
events. "Behold," says Christ, speaking as of old, in the prophetic
spirit, rising up to His own personal testimony, "Behold, I come
quickly. Blessed is he who keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this
book." The assembly is viewed, not as the subject of prophecy, but as "
the things that are," time not being counted, specially time to come.
Those that keep it are those concerned in the book, who are warned that
Christ will soon be there. No doubt we all can profit by it, but we are
not in the scenes it speaks of. John, impressed with the dignity of the
messenger, fell down and would have worshiped him. But the saints of the
assembly even if made prophets of, were not to return into the
uncertainty of ancient days. The angel was a simple angel, John's
fellow-servant, and fellow-servant of his brethren the prophets: he was
to worship God. Nor were the sayings to be sealed, as with Daniel: the
time was at hand. When it closed its testimony, men would remain in the
same state for judgment or blessing. And Christ would quickly come, and
every man receive as his work was. Verse 7 ([Rev
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007)) was a warning, in form of
blessing, to those in the circumstances referred to, to keep the sayings
of the book, but this Verse 12 ([Rev
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)) is the record of Christ's
coming to the general judgment of the quick.

Finally, Christ announces Himself, having taken up the word in Person in
Verse 12 ([Rev 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012)), as Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end God before and after all; and filling
duration. I suppose we are to take as the true reading: " Blessed are
they that wash their robes, that they may have a right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the city." The redeemed,
cleansed ones, can enter there and feed on the tree of life; for I
suppose it is the fruit here. Without are the unclean and violent, and
those who love Satanic falsehood and idolatry, sin against purity,
against their neighbor, against God, and follow Satan.

This closes the summing up. The Lord Jesus now reveals Himself in His
own Person, speaking to John and the saints, and declares who He is, in
what character He appears to say it to them. "I am the root and
offspring of David" the origin and heir of the temporal promises of
Israel; but much more than that He is the bright and morning Star. It is
what He is before He appears, in both respects; only the former regards
Israel born of the seed of David according to the flesh. But the Lord
has taken another character. He has not yet arisen as the Sun of
Righteousness on this benighted globe; but, to faith, the dawn is there,
and the assembly sees Him in the now far-spent night as the Morning
Star, knows Him, while watching according to His own word, in His bright
heavenly character a character which does not wake a sleeping world, but
is the delight and love of those who watch. When the sun arises, He will
not be thus known: the earth will never so know Him, bright as the day
may be. When Christ is in this place, the Spirit dwells in the assembly
below, and the assembly has its own relationship. It is the bride of
Christ, and her desire is toward Him.

Thus " the Spirit and the bride say, Come." It is not a warning from one
coming as a judge and a rewarder, but the revelation of Himself which
awakens the desire of the bride according to the relationship in which
grace has set her. Nor is it a mere sentiment or wish: the Spirit who
dwells in the assembly leads and suggests her thought. But the Spirit
turns also and the heart of him who enjoys the relationship, to others.
"Let him that heareth " let him who hears the voice of the Spirit in the
assembly join in the cry, and say, Come. It is one common hope, it
should be our common desire; and the sense of what is coming on the
earth and the sense of failure in things that are, ought only though it
be in truth an inferior motive, to urge the cry in all. But while still
here, the saint has another place also. Not only do his desires go after
God upwards and the heavenly Bride groom, but he reflects God's known
character, by having His nature and Spirit as manifested also in
Christ's love and in possession of the living water, though not of the
Bridegroom. He turns round and invites others "Let him that is athirst
come," and proclaims it forth then to the world, "Whosoever will, let
him take of the water of life freely." Thus the whole place of the
heavenly saint, conscious of the assembly's place, is brought out in
this Verse, from his desire of Christ's coming, to his call to whosoever
will to come.

The integrity of the book is preserved by a solemn warning of the danger
of losing a part in the tree of life \[See Note \#22\] and the holy
city. Christ then cheers the saint's heart, by assuring that He would
quickly come; and the heart of the true saint responds with unfeigned
and earnest desire, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus." And then, with the
salutation of grace, the book closes leaving the promise and the desire
as the last words of Jesus on the heart.

Let the reader note here that, in the beginning and end of the book,
before and after the prophetic statements, we have in a beautiful way
the conscious position of the saints. The first, at the opening of the
whole book, gives the individual conscious blessing through what Christ
has done; the latter, the whole position of the assembly thus
distinguishing clearly the saints under the gospel from those whose
circumstances are prophetically made known to them in this book. "Unto
him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
made us kings and priests to God and his Father." As soon as Christ is
named (and it is so in both cases), it awakens in the saints the
consciousness of Christ's love and their own place in relationship with
Him. They are already washed from their sins in His own blood, and made
kings and priests to God and His Father have their place and state
fixed, before any of the prophetic part is developed, and in the coming
kingdom will enjoy that place, not of being blessed under Christ, but of
being associated with Him. Here they have their place simply in the
kingdom and priesthood; it is individual title resulting from His first
coming. They are loved, washed in His, own blood, and associated with
Him in the kingdom.

At the end of the book, Christ is revealed as, the Morning Star, a place
forming no part of the prophecy, but that in which the assembly, who has
waited for Him, is associated with Him for herself, and the kingdom.
(Compare the promise to the overcomers in Thyatira.) \[See Note \#23\]
This draws out in active love (not as before, simply being loved and
what we are made) love first directed towards Christ in the assembly's
known relation to Himself, then to the saints who hear, then to the
thirsty, then to all the world. The desire of the assembly, as the bride
with whom the Spirit is, is directed to Christ's second coming for
herself-to the possessing the Morning Star; then the Spirit turns to the
saints, calling on them to say to Jesus, Come to join in this desire.
But we have the Spirit though not the Bridegroom; hence whoever is
athirst is called on to come and drink, and thus the gospel proclaimed
abroad, "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely." It is
love acting in the saint all round from Christ to sinners in the world.

Note \#22

The true reading here is "tree," not "book,"; but the book of life is
not life, nor our being written there final, though 'prime facie'
register, unless indeed written there before the foundation of the
world: but, even so, it is not the same thing the possession of life.

Note \#23

Compare the place of the bright cloud in Luke 9. There it is the
Father's voice.
