<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom015)  [Next](co1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)

Never having known the Roman Christians as an assembly, Paul sends many
personal salutations. This was the link which subsisted. We see how
touchingly his heart dwells upon all the details of service which
attached him to those who had rendered it. He who by grace had searched
into all the counsels of God, who had been admitted to see that which
could not be made known to man here below, remembered all that these
humble Christians these devoted women had done for him and for the Lord.
This is love; it is the real proof of the power of the Spirit of God; it
is the bond of charity.

We have also here a precious and most perfect rule for our walk, namely,
to be simple concerning evil, and wise unto that which is good.
Christianity alone could have given such a rule; for it provides a walk
that is positively good, and wisdom to walk in it. As Christians we may
be simple concerning evil. What a deliverance! While the man of the
world must needs acquaint himself with evil, in order to avoid it in
this world of snares and of artifice, he must corrupt his mind, accustom
himself to think of evil, in order not to be entrapped by it. But soon
there should be entire deliverance soon should Satan be trodden under
their feet.

We see also that the apostle did not write his letters himself, but
employed a brother to do it. Here it was one named Tertius ([Rom
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022)). Deeply concerned at the
condition of the Galatians, he wrote himself the letter addressed to
them; but the salutation at the end of this, as of other epistles, was
in his own hand in order to verify the contents of the epistle. ([Co1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021); [Th2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017), in which the feigned epistle
alluded to in 2 Thessalonians 2 gave occasion to state this proof, which
he always gave, that an epistle was truly his.) We see likewise, by this
little circumstance, that he attached a solemn and authoritative
character to his epistles, that they were not merely the effusions of a
spiritual heart, but that in writing them he knew and would have others
understand, that they were worthy of consideration and of being
preserved as authorities, as the expression and exercise of his
apostolic mission, and were to be received as such; that is to say, as
possessing the Lord's authority, with which he was furnished by the
power of the Holy Ghost. They were letters from the Lord by his means,
even as his words had also been ([Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013), and [Co1
14:37](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#037)).

We have yet to observe, with regard to the three Verses at the end of
the epistle ([Rom 16:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)), that they
are, as it were, detached from all the rest, introducing, in the form of
a doxology, the suggestion of a truth, the communication of which
distinguished the apostle's teaching. He does not develop it here. The
task which the Holy Ghost accomplished in this epistle, was the
presentation of the soul individually before God according to the divine
thoughts. Nevertheless this connects itself immediately with the
position of the body; and the doctrine respecting the body, the
assembly, cannot be separated from it. Now the apostle informs us
distinctly, that the mystery, the assembly, and the gathering together
in one of all things under Christ, had been entirely unknown: God had
been silent on that subject in the times which were defined by the word
ages, the assembly not forming a part of that course of events, and of
the ways of God on earth. But the mystery was now revealed and
communicated to the Gentiles by prophetic writings not "the writings of
the prophets." The epistles addressed to the Gentiles possessed this
character; they were prophetic writings a fresh proof of the character
of the epistles in the New Testament.

He who has understood the doctrine of this epistle, and of the writings
of Paul in general, will readily apprehend the significance of this
postscript. The epistle itself develops with divine perfection and
fulness how a soul can stand before God in this world, and the grace and
righteousness of God, maintaining withal His counsels as to Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Introduction](co1000)

</div>
