<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](act028)  [Next](rom001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Romans

The Epistle to the Romans is well placed at the head of all the others,
as laying the foundations, in a systematic way, of the relations of man
with God; reconciling, at the same time, this universal truth of man's
position, first, in responsibility, and, secondly, in grace, with the
special promises made to the Jews. It also establishes the great
principles of Christian practice, the morality, not of man, but that
which is the fruit of the light and revelation given by Christianity. It
is important to see that it always views the Christian as in this world.
He is justified and has life in Christ, but is here, and not viewed as
risen with Him.

The following is, I believe, the arrangement of the epistle. After some
introductory verses, which open his subject, several of which are of the
deepest importance and furnish the key to the whole teaching of the
epistle and man's real state with God ([Rom
1:1-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)), the apostle (to the end of
[Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)) \[See Note \#1\] shews man
to be utterly corrupt and lost, in all the circumstances in which he
stands. Without law, it was unbridled sin; with philosophy, it was
judging evil and committing it; under law, it was breaking the law,
while boasting of its possession, and dishonouring the name of Him with
whose glory those who possessed it were (so to say) identified, by
having received from Him that law as His people. From chapter 3:21 to
the end of chapter 8 we find the remedy plainly set forth in two parts.
In chapter 3:21 to the end of the chapter, in a general way, through
faith the blood of Christ is the answer to all the sin which the apostle
has just been describing; afterwards, in chapter 4, resurrection, the
seal of Christ's work, and the witness of its efficacy for our
justification. All this meets the responsibility of the child of Adam,
which the law only aggravated, according to the full grace unfolded in
[Rom 5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001). But in chapter 8, they
are assumed to be in Christ who is on high, placing him who had part in
it (that is, every believer) in a new position before God in Christ, who
thus gave him liberty and life the liberty in which Christ Himself was,
and the life which He Himself lived. It is this last which inseparably
unites justification and holiness in life.

But there is connected with this another point, which gives occasion to
notice a division yet more important of the subjects of the epistle.
From chapter 3:21 to the end of verse 11 of chapter 5, the apostle
treats the subject of our sins individual guilt is met by the blood of
Christ who (in chapter 4), delivered for our offences, is raised for our
justification. But from [Rom 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012), the
question of sin is treated not a future judgment met, but deliverance
from a present state. \[See Note \#2\] One ends in the blessing of
chapter 5:1-11, (), the other in that of chapter 8.

In chapters 9-11, the apostle reconciles these truths of the same
salvation, common to every believing man without distinction, with the
promise made to the Jews, bringing out the marvellous wisdom of God, and
the way in which these things were foreseen, and revealed in the word.

He, afterwards, sets forth (in chapter 12 et seqq.) the practical
Christian spirit. In this last part, he alludes to the assembly as a
body. Otherwise, it is in general man, the individual, before a God of
righteousness; and the work of Christ, which places him there,
individually, in peace. For the same reason, save in one passage in
chapter 8 to bring in intercession, the ascension is not spoken of in
Romans. It treats of death, and Christ's resurrection as the ground of a
new status for man before God. \[See Note \#3\]

Let us now examine the line of thought given by the Holy Ghost in this
epistle. We find in it the answer to the solemn question of Job, angry
at finding himself without resource in the presence of the judgment of
God: "I know it is so of a truth, but how should man be just with God?"
Nevertheless, that is not the first thought which presents itself to the
apostle. That is man's necessity; but the gospel comes first, revealing
and bringing Christ. It is grace and Jesus which it brings in its hands;
it speaks of God in love. This awakens the sense of need, \[See Note
\#4\] while bringing that which meets it; and gives its measure in the
grace that sets before us all the fulness of the love of God in Christ.
It is a revelation of God in the Person of Christ. It puts man in his
place before God, in the presence of Him who is revealed both in
himself, and in grace in Christ. All the promises are also accomplished
in the Person of Him who is revealed. But it is important to note that
it begins with the Person of Christ, not forgiveness or righteousness,
though this is fully developed afterwards from verse 17.

Note \#1:

After the introduction till the end of chapter 3, we find the evil, and
the remedy which God has granted in the blood of Jesus Christ: and
afterwards, in chapter 4, the resurrection of Christ (after being
delivered for our offences) for our justification, and, thus, peace with
God, our present standing in favour, and hope of glory, with all its
blessed consequences in the love of God. Abraham and David, the great
roots of promise, confirmed this principle of grace and justification
without works. This part closes with [Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011), which divides the epistle into
two distinct parts, as to its main doctrine of justification, and our
standing before God. More of this farther on.

Note \#2:

This, while the subject is sin in the flesh and death to it, involves
the question of law the means of discovering it when its spirituality is
known.

Note \#3:

See what has just been said on the division at [Rom
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011), and the fuller development of
the division of the epistle farther on.

Note \#4:

The heart and the conscience are both brought in. Law can shew man's
guilt, and even, when spiritually known, man's ruined state, to the
conscience; a sense of need proves that the heart also is brought into
action.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 1](rom001)

</div>
