<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1024)  [Next](sa1026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

At length Samuel dies. This forms an epoch, because he who was the true
link between the people and God was gone. Israel acknowledged him when
dead, although they had despised him while living.

And now David's position changes, and Abigail is brought in. Jonathan
never separated from the system in which he stood, never united himself
to David, although loving him, and never shared his sufferings. But
Abigail identifies herself with him; existing relationships do not
prevent her acknowledging David; and she is united to him after her
husband's death. Jonathan prefigures the remnant in the character of the
remnant of Israel, who acknowledge the future king, and adhere to him,
but go no farther. As regards old Israel they come to nothing with it;
they will be blessed as reigned over in the kingdom, but not be
associated with Christ on the throne. Jonathan does not suffer with
David, and does not reign with him. He remains with Saul, and, as to
that position, his career ends with Saul. Abigail, and even the
malcontents who joined David, shared his sufferings. Abigail separates
herself completely from the spirit of her husband; and it is on account
of her faith and wisdom that David spares Nabal's life. God judges the
latter, and then Abigail becomes the wife of David. Historically David
had nearly failed in his high standing. In fact it is on account of the
faithful remnant, the Abigail of the foolish nation, that Israel itself
has been spared; and the Lord's connection with the assembly is in the
character of pure grace, not in that of the avenger (as hereafter with
Israel). At this time it is that David, during his rejection, surrounds
himself with those who will be the companions and the retinue of his
glory in the kingdom. But he also takes a wife. Abigail speaks of Saul
as a man. Jehovah, she says, will make a sure house to David. This is
the intelligence of faith \[See Note \#1\]. It is the truth of God's
counsels ([Sa2 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011)), and in its
fulness, as to this. She was forming for herself, without knowing it,
the position of the assembly, in the future she was preparing for
herself \[See Note \#2\].

Note \#1

In fact, when the priesthood had been judged, nothing remained for
faith, which apprehended the mind of God, except the prophet Samuel and
the king given by God, David. Abigail understands this. The assembly
should think as God Himself thinks, in spite of existing circumstances.
Abigail thinks nothing of Saul. Samuel is dead; David is now everything
to her. "The law and the prophets were until John. Since that time the
kingdom of heaven is preached, and every man presseth into it." Where
were the high priests and all their company? Nevertheless the Lord
submitted to them as to an ordinance, as David did to Saul.

Note \#2

She takes a much more humble place than Jonathan did, and one which,
even at the time, acknowledged David much more fully. It is not a friend
like Jonathan; it is a submissive soul which, in spirit, gives David his
place according to God, taking her own place before him. It is exactly
that which distinguishes the spirit of the assembly-of the true
Christian. In Jonathan we see the remnant under the Jewish aspect. But
Abigail enters into the spirit of God's purposes respecting David,
although he was now in distress; and David, who, while thoroughly
submissive, can act according to the faith that owns him, hears her
voice, and accepts her person. Let us mark the features of Abigail's
faith. All rests upon her appreciation of David (it is this which forms
a Christian's judgment-in every respect he appreciates Christ); his
title as owned of God; his personal perfection; and that which belonged
to him according to the counsels of God. She thinks of him according to
all the good which God has spoken of him; she sees him fighting God's
battles, where others only see a rebel against Saul; and all this from
her heart. She judges Nabal, and looks upon him as already judged of God
on account of this, for with her everything is judged according to its
connection with David is. 26); a judgment which God accomplishes ten
days later, although Nabal was at peace in his own house, and David an
exile and outcast Nevertheless the relation of Abigail to Nabal is
recognised until God executes judgment. She judges Saul. He is but a
man, because, to her faith, David is king. All her desire is that David
may remember her Jonathan says, when he goes out to David, "I shall be
next unto thee" and David abides in the wood, while Jonathan returns to
his house In the order of things which God had judged (a judgment that
faith recognised) he remains with his family and shares its ruin. This
is important to a Christian. For instance, he respects, in so far as
based on God's authority, official Christianity-which, in the world, is
the religion of God while God bears with it-and does not stand up
against it. As to faith and personal walk, this Christianity is nothing
at all just as Saul was only a man to Abigail's faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](sa1026)

</div>
