<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1028)  [Next](sa1030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 29 and 30.

In chapter 29 God, in His loving-kindness, brings David out of his
difficulty by means of the jealousy of the lords of the Philistines.
Nevertheless, to maintain his credit with Achish, David falls still
lower, it seems to me, and protests that he is quite ready to fight
against the enemies of the Philistine king, that is to say, against the
people of God. This appears to me the most wretched part of David's
life-at any rate, before he was king. God makes him sensible of it; for
while he is there, the Amalekites strip him of everything and burn
Ziklag, and his followers are ready to stone him. All this is grievous;
but the grace of God raises him up again, and the effect of this
chastisement is to bring him back to God, for he was ever true to Him in
heart. David encouraged himself in Jehovah his God, and inquires of Him
what he shall do. What patience, what kindness in God! What care He
takes of His people, even while they are turning away from Him!

David is truly brought back to God, and rescued from his false position,
and he walks and acts with God. God was, unknown to him, preparing a
very different position for him, and was purifying and preparing him for
it. How dreadful would it have been, had David been with the
Philistines, and taken part in the defeat of God's people, and in the
death of him whose life he had often spared so touchingly! How far the
child of God may go astray when he puts himself under the protection of
unbelievers, instead of relying on the help of God in all the
difficulties which beset the path of faith! It is through these very
difficulties that every grace is developed. And observe the danger the
believer is in-if his faith be not simple, but fails ever so little-of
being thrown into the arms of God's enemies through the persecution of
professors. Nature grows weary, and seeks comfort afar from the narrow
path which leads through the briars. This happens whenever the people of
God, following their own will, confide their interests to those who seek
nothing but their own advantage in a less difficult position, which is
neither that of God nor that of faith. And the more glorious a work
there is for faith, the more nature grows weary, if faith becomes weak.
Ziklag is taken during David's absence, but he pursues the spoilers, and
recovers all the booty. David, upright and generous, found, in the
difficulty which arose from the selfishness of his people, an
opportunity to institute that which was conformable to the will of God;
and instead of seeking to enrich himself through his share of the spoil,
he uses it to maintain kindly relations with the elders of his people,
and to prove to them that Jehovah is still with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 30](sa1030)

</div>
