<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1020)  [Next](sa1022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001)

The elect king is now rejected. He repairs to the priest, who gives him
the hallowed bread, according to the sovereign grace of God, who rises
above the ordinances that are connected with blessing, when that
blessing is rejected-when He Himself is rejected in His chosen one, and
in the power of His testimony. When this is the case, He sets faith
above ordinances in His sovereign grace. Since God Himself and His
testimony are rejected, the shewbread was considered common. God in fact
was ordering all anew. It was precisely the case of the Lord Jesus. The
Person of the rejected One is above all the carnal ordinances, which
have lost their signification where He is. Christ submitted indeed to
all the ordinances and authorities; but the rejection of God's testimony
in Him caused it to be perceived by degrees that He was One greater than
the ordinances-One who set them aside, and replaced them by the
manifestation of the effectual and eternal grace of God. It was much
more important to give David food than to keep that which had grown old.
God cared more for him than for the bread of the tabernacle.

David then takes the sword of Goliath. It was by the power of death that
the Lord destroyed all his strength who had the power of death. Death is
the best weapon in the arsenal of God, when it is wielded by the power
of life.

David, his mind full of Saul's enmity, seeks refuge among the
Philistines. What business had he there? This time God drives him thence
without chastisement, but abundantly proving to him at the same time
that he was out of place there. We escape from the wisdom which leads us
into the midst of God's enemies, by the shame of that folly which causes
us to be driven out again.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 22](sa1022)

</div>
