<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1015)  [Next](sa1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)

In chapter 16 Samuel is sent of Jehovah to anoint this His chosen one.
All glorying in the flesh and its birthright are here set aside; and the
youngest, despised and forgotten of all, who kept the sheep, is chosen
of God; "for Jehovah seeth not as man seeth." Samuel, taught of God,
hesitates not in his decision, and can accept none of the seven who are
at home. "Are here all thy children?" At length he anoints David,
brought in from the field.

But God does not set David at once in the height of power, as He did in
the case of Saul. He must make his way by grace and faith through all
kinds of difficulties; and, although filled with the Holy Spirit, he
must act in the presence of a power devoid of the Spirit, and which God
has not yet set aside. He must be subject and be humbled, he must feel
his entire dependence on God, that God is sufficient in all
circumstances; and his faith must be developed by trial in which God is
felt to be all. Beautiful type of One who, without sin, journeyed
through far more painful circumstances! and not only a type, but at the
same time a vessel prepared by God for the Holy Spirit, who could fill
him with sentiments which, while describing so touchingly the sufferings
of Christ Himself and His sympathy with His people, exhibit, to those
who were to tread in weakness the same path as Himself, their resource
in God. For one cannot doubt that the trials of David gave rise to the
greater part of those beautiful psalms, which, depicting the
circumstances, the trials, and the complaints of the remnant of Israel
in the last days, as well as of Christ Himself (who, in Spirit, has
identified Himself with them, and has undertaken their cause), have thus
furnished so many other burdened souls with the expression and the
relief of their sorrows; and although their interpretation of these
psalms may have been incorrect, yet their hearts were not mistaken \[See
Note \#1\].

We will return to our history. The Spirit of Jehovah came upon David and
forsook Saul, who, at the same time, is troubled by an evil spirit. The
providence of God brings in David by means of one of Saul's servants who
knew him, and presents him to Saul. Saul loves him, and keeps him in his
presence; he becomes his armourbearer, and he plays on a harp when the
evil spirit troubles Saul. David, in God's sight, is the anointed king,
but he must suffer before he reigns, however great his energy may be.

Note \#1

This unintelligent use of the Psalms, however, has tended to keep pious
souls down below their privileges as Christians. A child's place with
the Father is never found in any of the Psalms, nor the spiritual
feelings generated by the consciousness of the relationship. The word
may be used as a comparison, but the relationship is never recognised,
and could not be.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa1017)

</div>
