<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](col004)  [Next](th1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to I Thessalonians

We find in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, and especially in the first
(for in the second it was already needful to guard that freshness from
the perfidious attacks of the enemy), the condition and the hope of the
Christian as such in this world in all its freshness. These two epistles
are the first that Paul wrote, unless we except that to the Galatians,
the date of which is uncertain. Already long occupied with the work, it
is only when this work was considerably advanced that in watching over
it he guards it by means of his writings writings, as we have seen,
various in character, according to the state of the churches, and
according to the divine wisdom which, by this means, deposited in the
scriptures that which would be necessary for all ages.

Newly converted, the Christians at Thessalonica suffered much from the
persecution of the world a persecution which the Jews of that place had
already previously stirred up against Paul himself. Happy at the
gracious work there, and rejoicing in the state of his dear children in
the faith (a testimony to which was borne everywhere, even by the
world), the apostle opens his heart; and the Holy Ghost sets forth by
his mouth what that christian condition was upon the earth which was the
source of his joy in the case of the Thessalonians; and what the hope
which threw its light upon the believer's existence, shining around him
through his whole life, and illumining his path in the wilderness. In a
word the christian character is unfolded to our eyes with all its
motives and its joys and that in connection with the testimony of God
and the hope which is our strength in bearing it.

We all know that the doctrine of the coming of Christ, which universally
accompanies the work of the Spirit that attaches our hearts to Him in
the first spring of a new life, is specially presented to us in these
two epistles. And it is not merely formally taught as a doctrine; it is
linked with every spiritual relationship of our souls, it is displayed
in all the circumstances of the Christian's life. We are converted in
order to wait for Him. The joy of the saints in the fruits of their
labors is realised in His presence. It is at the coming of Christ that
holiness has all its value, its measure being seen in that which is then
manifested. It is the consolation when Christians die. It is the
unexpected judgment of the world. It is unto the coming of Christ that
God preserves His own in holiness, and blameless. We shall see these
points set forth in detail in the different Chapters of the first
epistle. We only point them out here. In general we shall find that
personal relationships, and the expectation of His appearing, have a
remarkable and enlivening freshness in this epistle in every respect.
The Lord is present to the heart is its object; and christian affections
spring up in the soul, causing the fruits of the Spirit to abound.

In these two epistles only is an assembly said to be "in God the
Father," that is to say, planted in this relationship having its moral
existence its mode of being in it. The life of the assembly developed
itself in the communion that flowed from this relationship. The Spirit
of adoption characterises it. With the affection of little children the
Thessalonians knew the Father. Thus John says, when speaking of the
little children in Christ, " I write unto you because ye have known the
Father." It is the first introduction into the position of liberty in
which Christ has placed us liberty before God and in communion with Him.
Precious position! to be as children to One who loves as a Father, with
all the liberty and tender affection of that relationship, according to
divine perfection. For here it is not the adaptation of Christ's human
experience to the wants in which He acquired it (precious as that grace
is); it is our introduction into the unmingled enjoyment of the light,
and of the divine affections displayed in the character of the Father.
It is our communion, tender and confiding but pure, with Him whose love
is the source of all blessing. Nor do I doubt that, freshly brought out
of heathenism as the Thessalonians were, the apostle refers to their
knowledge of the one true God the Father in contrast with their idols.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th1001)

</div>
