<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2002)  [Next](ti1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

There is nothing very particular in the apostle's exhortations. His
great concern was the explanation which we have been considering. He
prays that God and the Lord Jesus Himself, who had given them the sure
and everlasting consolations of the gospel, would comfort their hearts
and establish them in every good word and work. He asks for their
prayers that he may be preserved in his labors. He could not but expect
to find men unreasonable and animated with enmity, for faith was not the
portion of all. It was only a case for the protecting hand of God. With
regard to them he counted for this end on the faith fullness of the
Lord. He reckoned also on their obedience, and prays God to direct their
hearts to wards these two points, of which we have spoken when studying
the First Epistle, the love of God and the patient waiting with which
the Christ waited the two points in which the whole of christian life is
summed up with regard to its objects, its moral springs. Christ Himself
was waiting sweet thought! They were to wait with Him, until the moment
when His heart and the hearts of His own should rejoice together in
their meeting.

It was this which they needed. On the one hand, they had believed that
the dead saints would not be ready to go and meet the Lord; on the
other, they had thought the day of the Lord already come. The enjoyment
of the love of God, and peace of heart in waiting for Christ, was
necessary for them.

This excitement into which they had been led had also betrayed itself in
some among them by their neglect of their ordinary labors, " working not
at all but being busybodies," intermeddling in the affairs of others.
The apostle had set them a very different example. He exhorts them to be
firm, and to withdraw from those who would not hearken to his
admonitions, but continued to walk disorderly and in idleness; not
however in such a manner as to treat them as enemies, but to admonish
them as brethren.

It will be observed here, that there is no longer the same expression of
the energy of communion and of life as previously. (compare [Th2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016) with [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023).) Nevertheless the Lord was still
the Lord of peace; but the beauty of that entire consecration to God,
which would shine forth in the day of Christ, does not present itself to
the apostle's mind and heart as in the First Epistle. He prays for them,
however, that they may have peace always and by all means.

The apostle points out the method by which he assured the faithful of
the authenticity of his letters. With the exception of that to the
Galatians he employed other persons to write them, but he attached his
own signature in order to verify their contents to the church, adding
the prayer or blessing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 1](ti1001)

</div>
