<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1001)  [Next](ti1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)

The apostle proceeds to give instructions founded on the great
principles which he had established on grace. The Jewish spirit might
look on Gentile kings as enemies, and on Gentiles in general as unworthy
of divine favour. The persecution of which Christians were the object
gave the flesh occasion to nourish these dispositions and to enter into
the spirit of the law. Grace rises above all these thoughts all these
feelings of the heart. It teaches us to think of all men with love. We
belong to a Saviour-God, who acts in the gospel towards all men with
love. Especially were they to pray for kings and those who had places in
the world, that God would dispose their hearts to allow us to live in
peace and quietness in all honesty. This was well-pleasing to a
Saviour-God, who was willing that all men should be saved and be brought
to know the truth. The subject here is not the counsels of God, but His
dealings with men under the gospel. He acts in grace. It is the
acceptable time the day of salvation. He opens the door through the
blood of Christ, and proclaims peace and a sure reception to all who
come. The work is done; His character fully glorified with regard to
sin. lf they refuse to come, that is the will of man. That God will
fulfill His counsels after all makes no change in His dealings, nor in
the responsibility of men. We have love to proclaim to all-in the spirit
of love in our ways towards them. The distinction between Jew and
Gentile totally disappears here. There is one God, and one Mediator
between God and men, a Man, Christ Jesus. These are the two great truths
which form the basis of all true religion. Judaism had already been the
revelation and testimony in the world of the first: there was one only
God. This remains eternally true, but did not suffice to bring men into
relationship with God. With regard to men He abode within the veil in
the darkness which shrouded His majesty. Christianity, while fully
revealing the one God, presents the second truth: there is one mediator
between God and men. There is one, and there is but one. It is as true
that there is but one Mediator as that there is but one God. This is the
great and distinctive truth of Christianity.

Two things here characterise the Mediator. He is a man; He gave Himself
a ransom for all. The time for this testimony was ordered of God.

Precious truth! We are in weakness, we are guilty, we could not bring
ourselves near to God. We needed a Mediator, who, while maintaining the
glory of God, should put us into such a position that He could present
us to God in righteousness according to that glory. Christ gave Himself
as a ransom. But He must be a man in order to suffer for men, and to
represent men. And this He was. But this is not all. We are weak here,
where we are to receive the revelation of God; and weak, with regard to
the use of our resources in God and our communion with Him even when our
guilt is blotted out. And, in our weakness to receive the revelation of
God, Christ has revealed God, and all that He is in His own Person, in
all the circumstances wherein man could have need either in body or in
soul. He came down into the lowest depths in order that there should be
none, even of the most wretched, who could not feel that God in His
goodness was near him and was entirely accessible to him come down to
Him His love finding its occasion in misery; and that there was no need
to which He was not present, which He could not meet.

It is thus that He made himself known on earth; and, now that He is on
high, He is still the same. Ho does not forget His human experiences:
they are perpetuated by His divine power in the sympathizing feelings of
His humanity, according to the energy of that divine love which was
their source and their motive power. He is still a man in glory, and in
divine perfection. His divinity imparts the strength of its love to His
humanity, but does not set aside the latter. Nothing could resemble such
a Mediator as this; nothing could equal the tenderness, the knowledge of
the human heart, the sympathy, the experience of need. In the measure
which divinity could give to what He did, and in the strength of its
love, He came down, took part in all the sorrows of humanity, and
entered into all the circumstances in which the human heart could be,
and was wounded, oppressed, and discouraged, bowing down under the evil.
No tenderness, no power of sympathy, no humanity like His; no human
heart that can so understand, so feel with us, whatever the burden may
be that oppresses the heart of man. It is the Man, the Christ Jesus, who
is our Mediator; none so near, none who has come down so low, and
entered with divine power into the need, and all the need, of man. The
conscience is purified by His work, the heart relieved by that which He
was, and which He is for ever.

There is but One: to think of another would be to snatch from Him His
glory and from us our perfect consolation. His coming from on high, His
divine nature, His death, His life as man in heaven, all point Him out
as the one and only Mediator.

But there is another aspect of this truth, and of the fact that He is a
Man. It is, that He is not merely a mediator as a Priest upon His
throne, between Israel and the Lord; not simply the Messiah, in order to
place Israel in relationship with their God, but a Man between God and
men. It is according to the eternal nature of God Himself and to the
need of men in His presence. It was of these truths, eternal and of
universal bearing, that Paul was the herald and the apostle.

Possessing a character that belongs to all ages and that goes beyond
them, all these facts had their time to be revealed.

All means dependent on man's use of them had been tried with men and in
vain, as to recalling him to God; and now the necessary foundations of
their relationship with God had to be set forth, laid by God Himself,
and the Gentiles were to hear the testimony of grace. And such was the
apostle's testimony, "a teacher of the Gentiles in the faith and in the
truth."

Paul has plainly now laid the foundations, and he proceeds therefore to
details. Men were to pray everywhere, lifting up pure hands, without
wrath, and without vain human reasonings. Women were to walk in modesty,
adorned with good works, and to learn in silence. A woman was forbidden
to teach or to exercise authority over men; she was to abide in
quietness and silence. The reason given for this is remarkable, and
shews how, in our relations with God, everything depends on the original
starting-point. In innocence Adam had the first place; in sin, Eve It
was she who, being deceived, brought in transgression. Adam was not
deceived, guilty as he was of disobeying God. United to his wife, he
followed her, not deceived by the enemy but weak through his affection.
Without the weakness, it was this which the second Adam did in grace; He
followed His deceived and guilty bride, but in order to redeem and
deliver her by taking her faults upon Himself. Eve suffered on earth the
penalty of her fault in a way which is a mark of the judgment of God;
but walking in modesty, with faith and love and holiness, she shall be
delivered in the hour of her trial; and that which bears the stamp of
judgment shall be an occasion of the mercy and succour of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 3](ti1003)

</div>
