<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](ti2004)  [Next](tit002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

[Titus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 1:1</span></span>

The Epistle to Titus is occupied with the maintenance of order in the
churches of God.

The especial object of those written to Timothy as the maintenance of
sound doctrine, although speaking of other things with regard to which
the apostle gives directions for the conduct of Timothy. This the
apostle himself tells us. In the First Epistle to Timothy we see that
Paul had left his beloved son in the faith at Ephesus, in order to watch
that no other doctrine was preached there; the assembly is the pillar
and support of the truth. In the Second Epistle we find the means by
which Christians are to be strengthened in the truth, when the mass have
departed from it.

Here, in Titus, the apostle says expressly that he had left him in Crete
to set in order things that wee yet wanting, and to establish elders in
every city. Although more or less the same dangers presented themselves
to the mind of Paul as when writing to Timothy, yet we find that the
apostle enters at once upon his subject with a calmness which shews that
his mind was not pre-occupied in the same way with those dangers, and
that the Spirit could engage him more entirely with the ordinary walk of
the assembly; so that this epistle is much more simple in its character.
The walk that becomes Christians, with regard to the maintenance of
order in their relationships of each other, and the great principles on
which this walk is founded, form the subject of the book. The state of
the assembly comes but little before us. Truths that flow more entirely
from the Christian revelation, and that characterize it, have more place
in this epistle than in those addressed to Timothy. On the other hand,
prophecies concerning the future condition of Christianity, and the
development of the decline that had already commenced, are not repeated
here. While stating in a remarkable way certain truths with respect to
Christianity, the tone of the epistle is more calm, more ordinary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 2](tit002)

</div>
