<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac001)  [Next](zac003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

From chapter 2 to the end of chapter 6, the Spirit presents the
circumstances, the principles, and the result of the re-establishment of
Jerusalem and of the house; and also the judgment of that which was
wicked and corrupt. Each chapter has a distinct subject-a vision
detached from the others, while forming a portion of the whole. The
present responsibility, on which the blessing depended, and the
sovereign grace that would assuredly accomplish all, are both set before
us, each in its place.

The restoration of Jerusalem is described in chapter 2 in a very
remarkable manner, which throws much light on the connection, already
spoken of, between the return from the Babylonish captivity wrought by
Cyrus, the servant, the righteous man from the east, and the deliverance
to be granted by the manifestation of the Messiah. First of all, the
full and entire restoration of Jerusalem is announced, Jehovah Himself
being her safeguard, and securing prosperity and peace to her
inhabitants, Himself, her glory, dwelling in the midst of her. We can
easily understand what an encouragement such a promise, and such an
interest on the part of Jehovah in Jerusalem, would be to them in their
then state, even if the accomplishment were not then brought about.

Jehovah calls to the people, and bids them come forth from the land of
the north, an expression used for Chaldea, for they had been scattered
to the four winds. The Babylonish captivity was the real sentence of
Lo-ammi, as the return thence (Babylon being judged) was the earnest of
a better deliverance from that which, in the last days, will represent
Babylon. Zion is delivered, from her captivity in Babylon. But if, up to
a certain point, this took place by means of Cyrus, it was by no means
the full accomplishment of God's purposes. They were continuously, and
yet are, subject to the heathen image and superscription. And, in a more
special manner, the Jews will again be in subjection to that which bears
the character of Babylon, and will be delivered from it; but it will be
in those days when Jehovah shall manifest Himself in a glory that will
admit of no resistance to His will. After the glory He will send to the
nations that have spoiled Israel. The glory of Jehovah shall appear, and
the enemies of His people shall be judged; for he who touches Israel,
the beloved of Jehovah, shall bring judgment upon himself in that which
is most dear and precious to him. The judgment of the nations shall
justify the word of God to His people Israel.

The daughter of Zion should sing with joy, for Jehovah would dwell in
the midst of her. Many nations should come and join themselves to
Jehovah in that day, and should be His people; and He would dwell in the
midst of Israel. And then the word of prophecy (the accomplishment of
which had been so long suspended that it appeared like a dream of the
night) should be justified to Israel by its entire fulfilment. Jehovah
should inherit Judah as His portion in the holy land, and should again
choose Jerusalem. Solemn period! Let all flesh then be silent; for
Jehovah has risen up from His holy habitation to accomplish all the good
pleasure of His will. We see, that, however great might be the
encouragement for the Jews in that day, the mind of the Spirit goes on
to the end of the age, and to the manifestation of the glory of Jehovah,
and the blessing of Jerusalem and of the whole earth. The return from
Babylon, already accomplished historically, was still future as the true
deliverance of Zion. All flesh should acknowledge the coming of Jehovah.
These were judgments which should take place after the glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 3](zac003)

</div>
