<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](hag002)  [Next](zac001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Zechariah

Zechariah is more occupied than either of the other two post-captivity
prophets with the Gentile kingdoms under whose yoke the Jews were
placed, and with the establishment in its perfection of the glorious
system that was to accompany the presence of the Messiah; and, on the
other hand, with the rejection of that Messiah by the remnant who had
returned from captivity; with the state of misery and unbelief in which
the people would be left, and by which they would at length be openly
characterised; and, finally, with the last attacks of the enemies of
Jehovah upon Israel, and especially those directed against Jerusalem. He
announces the destruction of these enemies by the judgment of God, and
the glory and holiness of the people after their deliverance by the arm
of Jehovah, who should thenceforth reign and be glorified in all the
earth. It is the complete history of Israel, and of the Gentiles in
relationship with Israel, from the captivity to the end, as far as
connected with Jerusalem, the restoration of which especially occupies
the prophet. For if the house was the primary object in Haggai,
Jerusalem is the central point in Zechariah; although in the course of
the prophecy the temple, and still more the Messiah, have the most
prominent place in the scene.

The date of Zechariah's prophecy is nearly the same as that of the
prophecies of Haggai. There are two in Zechariah, besides that of the
introduction; in Haggai, four. The first date in Zechariah is only a
month or two before the last two in Haggai, which were given on the same
day. At the date of the second prophecy in Zechariah (chap. 7) the
temple was not finished as a whole, but sufficiently so to serve as a
place of worship, although the dedication had not yet been celebrated.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 1](zac001)

</div>
