<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac000)  [Next](zac002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

[Zechariah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 1:1</span></span>

The Spirit of God begins with an exhortation, founded on the proofs that
the history of the people supplied of the manner in which the word of
the prophets had taken hold of them. Jehovah's displeasure, of which
these prophets had not failed to warn the people, had borne its fruit;
but God was now taking knowledge of the conduct of the Gentiles, to whom
He had committed the place of power, and who, being at ease themselves,
did not care for the misery and ruin of God's people. But Jehovah cares
for it. He is sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease, and
very jealous for Jerusalem. He is returned to Jerusalem with mercies;
and prosperity and abundance shall be the portion of His people. We may
remark here, that the judgment of Babylon, already accomplished, was in
principle the judgment executed on the oppressor among the Gentiles, the
head of the empire-of the image; and that the promise of blessing
extends to that which shall be the portion of Jerusalem, when the
oppressor shall be finally judged.

Three empires were existing in the eye of the Spirit. And the world was
at peace under the authority of the second of the four, the first of
these three. A horse is the symbol of divine energy of government in the
earth, and here, in the empires succeeding Nebuchadnezzar. There are
here three, besides the one that stands among the myrtle trees. But they
have the character of the providentially administering spirits of the
empires rather than of the empires themselves. The first of the three
horses is of the same colour as that of the man who stood among the
myrtles (perhaps because Cyrus and the Persians had delivered and
favoured the people of God, as the Lord Jesus Himself will do in the
greatness of His power). Such, then, is the import of the first part of
this prophecy: the judgment already accomplished displaying the virtue
of Jehovah's word; God returning to Jerusalem with mercies and
consolation, moved with jealousy for her, and sorely displeased with the
nations that were at ease while she was in ruins.

The vision controlled the whole action of the empires of the nations,
and shewed that everything was subject to the providential government of
God, who inquired into all for His people's sake; and who, looking on to
the end of these times of the Gentiles, announced that He was occupied
with the prosperity and blessing of His chosen city. Meanwhile, remark,
Judah had been restored provisionally to the privileges of its own
worship, and to a position in which it might be ready to receive the
Messiah for the accomplishment of the purposes of God.

The vision at the end of the chapter embraces all the empires who shall
have been in relation with Judah and Jerusalem, and have oppressed them,
until their final deliverance. The horns appear to symbolise powers; and
the carpenters, the instruments employed by God to break them to pieces.
We observe that Israel is included in [Zac
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019), as a part of the whole it
appears to me, without entering into detail. Nineveh having come under
the yoke of Babylon, and Israel being subject, as it was, to the empire,
all is put together.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 2](zac002)

</div>
