<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep001)  [Next](zep003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001)

Chapter 2, while revealing the character of the nation, addresses itself
to her, in order that all those at least who fear Jehovah may be hidden
in the day of His anger. They are called to gather themselves together,
and to seek Jehovah, before the decree of judgment should have brought
forth, and His fierce anger should overtake them. Thus the remnant are
distinguished; the meek who have wrought righteousness are called on to
seek meekness and righteousness, in order that they may be hidden,
although the testimony is addressed to the whole nation. For, after all,
God remembered the counsels of His grace. His dealings in this respect
are developed in a remarkable manner in the rest of the prophecy. The
judgment should be upon the whole territory of Israel, occupied in many
parts by strangers hostile to the people.

The effect of the consequent desolation should be (for the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance) to leave the whole land free for
the possession of Israel. For Jehovah would visit them, and would bring
again His captives; and the remnant of His people should possess it.
Jehovah would judge and famish all the gods of the earth; and all men
should worship Him, every one from his place, even all the isles of the
nations. Ethiopia, Nineveh, all the mighty ones of the nations, should
fall and be made desolate. This is the judgment of the nations of which
we have spoken, of which Nebuchadnezzar was the first instrument, but
which is here introduced in view of the last days, when the power
established by God shall be in its last rebellion against Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 3](zep003)

</div>
