[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn077)  [Next](enn079.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. The bodily Kind, in that it partakes of Matter is an evil thing.
What form is in bodies is an untrue-form: they are without life: by
their own natural disorderly movement they make away with each other;
they are hindrances to the soul in its proper Act; in their ceaseless
flux they are always slipping away from Being.

Soul, on the contrary, since not every Soul is evil, is not an evil
Kind.

What, then, is the evil Soul?

It is, we read, the Soul that has entered into the service of that in
which soul-evil is implanted by nature, in whose service the unreasoning
phase of the Soul accepts evil- unmeasure, excess and shortcoming, which
bring forth licentiousness, cowardice and all other flaws of the Soul,
all the states, foreign to the true nature, which set up false
judgements, so that the Soul comes to name things good or evil not by
their true value but by the mere test of like and dislike.

But what is the root of this evil state? how can it be brought under the
causing principle indicated?

Firstly, such a Soul is not apart from Matter, is not purely itself.
That is to say, it is touched with Unmeasure, it is shut out from the
Forming-Idea that orders and brings to measure, and this because it is
merged into a body made of Matter.

Then if the Reasoning-Faculty too has taken hurt, the Soul's seeing is
baulked by the passions and by the darkening that Matter brings to it,
by its decline into Matter, by its very attention no longer to Essence
but to Process- whose principle or source is, again, Matter, the Kind so
evil as to saturate with its own pravity even that which is not in it
but merely looks towards it.

For, wholly without part in Good, the negation of Good, unmingled Lack,
this Matter-Kind makes over to its own likeness whatsoever comes in
touch with it.

The Soul wrought to perfection, addressed towards the
Intellectual-Principle, is steadfastly pure: it has turned away from
Matter; all that is undetermined, that is outside of measure, that is
evil, it neither sees nor draws near; it endures in its purity, only,
and wholly, determined by the Intellectual-Principle.

The Soul that breaks away from this source of its reality to the
non-perfect and non-primal is, as it were, a secondary, an image, to the
loyal Soul. By its falling-away- and to the extent of the fall- it is
stripped of Determination, becomes wholly indeterminate, sees darkness.
Looking to what repels vision, as we look when we are said to see
darkness, it has taken Matter into itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn079.md)
