[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn065)  [Next](enn067.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. For, as the ancient teaching was, moral-discipline and courage and
every virtue, not even excepting Wisdom itself, all is purification.

Hence the Mysteries with good reason adumbrate the immersion of the
unpurified in filth, even in the Nether-World, since the unclean loves
filth for its very filthiness, and swine foul of body find their joy in
foulness.

What else is Sophrosyne, rightly so-called, but to take no part in the
pleasures of the body, to break away from them as unclean and unworthy
of the clean? So too, Courage is but being fearless of the death which
is but the parting of the Soul from the body, an event which no one can
dread whose delight is to be his unmingled self. And Magnanimity is but
disregard for the lure of things here. And Wisdom is but the Act of the
Intellectual-Principle withdrawn from the lower places and leading the
Soul to the Above.

The Soul thus cleansed is all Idea and Reason, wholly free of body,
intellective, entirely of that divine order from which the wellspring of
Beauty rises and all the race of Beauty.

Hence the Soul heightened to the Intellectual-Principle is beautiful to
all its power. For Intellection and all that proceeds from Intellection
are the Soul's beauty, a graciousness native to it and not foreign, for
only with these is it truly Soul. And it is just to say that in the
Soul's becoming a good and beautiful thing is its becoming like to God,
for from the Divine comes all the Beauty and all the Good in beings.

We may even say that Beauty is the Authentic-Existents and Ugliness is
the Principle contrary to Existence: and the Ugly is also the primal
evil; therefore its contrary is at once good and beautiful, or is Good
and Beauty: and hence the one method will discover to us the Beauty-Good
and the Ugliness-Evil.

And Beauty, this Beauty which is also The Good, must be posed as The
First: directly deriving from this First is the Intellectual-Principle
which is pre-eminently the manifestation of Beauty; through the
Intellectual-Principle Soul is beautiful. The beauty in things of a
lower order-actions and pursuits for instance- comes by operation of the
shaping Soul which is also the author of the beauty found in the world
of sense. For the Soul, a divine thing, a fragment as it were of the
Primal Beauty, makes beautiful to the fulness of their capacity all
things whatsoever that it grasps and moulds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn067.md)
