[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn012)  [Next](enn014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. It will be objected, that if the Soul constitutes the We \[the
personality\] and We are subject to these states then the Soul must be
subject to them, and similarly that what We do must be done by the Soul.

But it has been observed that the Couplement, too- especially before our
emancipation- is a member of this total We, and in fact what the body
experiences we say We experience. This then covers two distinct notions;
sometimes it includes the brute-part, sometimes it transcends the brute.
The body is brute touched to life; the true man is the other, going pure
of the body, natively endowed with the virtues which belong to the
Intellectual-Activity, virtues whose seat is the Separate Soul, the Soul
which even in its dwelling here may be kept apart. \[This Soul
constitutes the human being\] for when it has wholly withdrawn, that
other Soul which is a radiation \[or emanation\] from it withdraws also,
drawn after it.

Those virtues, on the other hand, which spring not from contemplative
wisdom but from custom or practical discipline belong to the Couplement:
to the Couplement, too, belong the vices; they are its repugnances,
desires, sympathies.

And Friendship?

This emotion belongs sometimes to the lower part, sometimes to the
interior man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn014.md)
