[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn067)  [Next](enn069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. But what must we do? How lies the path? How come to vision of the
inaccessible Beauty, dwelling as if in consecrated precincts, apart from
the common ways where all may see, even the profane?

He that has the strength, let him arise and withdraw into himself,
foregoing all that is known by the eyes, turning away for ever from the
material beauty that once made his joy. When he perceives those shapes
of grace that show in body, let him not pursue: he must know them for
copies, vestiges, shadows, and hasten away towards That they tell of.
For if anyone follow what is like a beautiful shape playing over water-
is there not a myth telling in symbol of such a dupe, how he sank into
the depths of the current and was swept away to nothingness? So too, one
that is held by material beauty and will not break free shall be
precipitated, not in body but in Soul, down to the dark depths loathed
of the Intellective-Being, where, blind even in the Lower-World, he
shall have commerce only with shadows, there as here.

"Let us flee then to the beloved Fatherland": this is the soundest
counsel. But what is this flight? How are we to gain the open sea? For
Odysseus is surely a parable to us when he commands the flight from the
sorceries of Circe or Calypso- not content to linger for all the
pleasure offered to his eyes and all the delight of sense filling his
days.

The Fatherland to us is There whence we have come, and There is The
Father.

What then is our course, what the manner of our flight? This is not a
journey for the feet; the feet bring us only from land to land; nor need
you think of coach or ship to carry you away; all this order of things
you must set aside and refuse to see: you must close the eyes and call
instead upon another vision which is to be waked within you, a vision,
the birth-right of all, which few turn to use.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn069)
