[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn036)  [Next](enn038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. But what of sorrows, illnesses and all else that inhibit the native
activity?

What of the suspension of consciousness which drugs or disease may bring
about? Could either welfare or happiness be present under such
conditions? And this is to say nothing of misery and disgrace, which
will certainly be urged against us, with undoubtedly also those
never-failing "Miseries of Priam."

"The Sage," we shall be told, "may bear such afflictions and even take
them lightly but they could never be his choice, and the happy life must
be one that would be chosen. The Sage, that is, cannot be thought of as
simply a sage soul, no count being taken of the bodily-principle in the
total of the being: he will, no doubt, take all bravely... until the
body's appeals come up before him, and longings and loathings penetrate
through the body to the inner man. And since pleasure must be counted in
towards the happy life, how can one that, thus, knows the misery of
ill-fortune or pain be happy, however sage he be? Such a state, of bliss
self-contained, is for the Gods; men, because of the less noble part
subjoined in them, must needs seek happiness throughout all their being
and not merely in some one part; if the one constituent be troubled, the
other, answering to its associate's distress, must perforce suffer
hindrance in its own activity. There is nothing but to cut away the body
or the body's sensitive life and so secure that self-contained unity
essential to happiness."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn038)
