[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn054)  [Next](enn056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Well, but take the unhappy man: must not increase of time bring an
increase of his unhappiness? Do not all troubles- long-lasting pains,
sorrows, and everything of that type- yield a greater sum of misery in
the longer time? And if thus in misery the evil is augmented by time why
should not time equally augment happiness when all is well?

In the matter of sorrows and pains there is, no doubt, ground for saying
that time brings increase: for example, in a lingering malady the evil
hardens into a state, and as time goes on the body is brought lower and
lower. But if the constitution did not deteriorate, if the mischief grew
no worse, then, here too, there would be no trouble but that of the
present moment: we cannot tell the past into the tale of unhappiness
except in the sense that it has gone to make up an actually existing
state- in the sense that, the evil in the sufferer's condition having
been extended over a longer time, the mischief has gained ground. The
increase of ill-being then is due to the aggravation of the malady not
to the extension of time.

It may be pointed out also that this greater length of time is not a
thing existent at any given moment; and surely a "more" is not to be
made out by adding to something actually present something that has
passed away.

No: true happiness is not vague and fluid: it is an unchanging state.

If there is in this matter any increase besides that of mere time, it is
in the sense that a greater happiness is the reward of a higher virtue:
this is not counting up to the credit of happiness the years of its
continuance; it is simply noting the high-water mark once for all
attained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn056)
