[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn029)  [Next](enn031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. But whence does this science derive its own initial laws?

The Intellectual-Principle furnishes standards, the most certain for any
soul that is able to apply them. What else is necessary, Dialectic puts
together for itself, combining and dividing, until it has reached
perfect Intellection. "For," we read, "it is the purest \[perfection\]
of Intellection and Contemplative-Wisdom." And, being the noblest method
and science that exists it must needs deal with Authentic-Existence, The
Highest there is: as Contemplative-Wisdom \[or true-knowing\] it deals
with Being, as Intellection with what transcends Being.

What, then, is Philosophy?

Philosophy is the supremely precious.

Is Dialectic, then, the same as Philosophy?

It is the precious part of Philosophy. We must not think of it as the
mere tool of the metaphysician: Dialectic does not consist of bare
theories and rules: it deals with verities; Existences are, as it were,
Matter to it, or at least it proceeds methodically towards Existences,
and possesses itself, at the one step, of the notions and of the
realities.

Untruth and sophism it knows, not directly, not of its own nature, but
merely as something produced outside itself, something which it
recognises to be foreign to the verities laid up in itself; in the
falsity presented to it, it perceives a clash with its own canon of
truth. Dialectic, that is to say, has no knowledge of propositions-
collections of words- but it knows the truth, and, in that knowledge,
knows what the schools call their propositions: it knows above all, the
operation of the soul, and, by virtue of this knowing, it knows, too,
what is affirmed and what is denied, whether the denial is of what was
asserted or of something else, and whether propositions agree or differ;
all that is submitted to it, it attacks with the directness of
sense-perception and it leaves petty precisions of process to what other
science may care for such exercises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn031)
