[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn093)  [Next](enn095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. But how explain the permanence There, while the content of this
sphere- its elements and its living things alike- are passing?

The reason is given by Plato: the celestial order is from God, the
living things of earth from the gods sprung from God; and it is law that
the offspring of God endures.

In other words, the celestial soul- and our souls with it- springs
directly next from the Creator, while the animal life of this earth is
produced by an image which goes forth from that celestial soul and may
be said to flow downwards from it.

A soul, then, of the minor degree- reproducing, indeed, that of the
Divine sphere but lacking in power inasmuch as it must exercise its
creative act upon inferior stuff in an inferior region- the substances
taken up into the fabric being of themselves repugnant to duration; with
such an origin the living things of this realm cannot be of strength to
last for ever; the material constituents are not as firmly held and
controlled as if they were ruled immediately by a Principle of higher
potency.

The heavens, on the contrary, must have persistence as a whole, and this
entails the persistence of the parts, of the stars they contain: we
could not imagine that whole to endure with the parts in flux- though,
of course, we must distinguish things sub-celestial from the heavens
themselves whose region does not in fact extend so low as to the moon.

Our own case is different: physically we are formed by that \[inferior\]
soul, given forth \[not directly from God but\] from the divine beings
in the heavens and from the heavens themselves; it is by way of that
inferior soul that we are associated with the body \[which therefore
will not be persistent\]; for the higher soul which constitutes the We
is the principle not of our existence but of our excellence or, if also
of our existence, then only in the sense that, when the body is already
constituted, it enters, bringing with it some effluence from the Divine
Reason in support of the existence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn095)
