[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn060)  [Next](enn062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Beauty addresses itself chiefly to sight; but there is a beauty for
the hearing too, as in certain combinations of words and in all kinds of
music, for melodies and cadences are beautiful; and minds that lift
themselves above the realm of sense to a higher order are aware of
beauty in the conduct of life, in actions, in character, in the pursuits
of the intellect; and there is the beauty of the virtues. What loftier
beauty there may be, yet, our argument will bring to light.

What, then, is it that gives comeliness to material forms and draws the
ear to the sweetness perceived in sounds, and what is the secret of the
beauty there is in all that derives from Soul?

Is there some One Principle from which all take their grace, or is there
a beauty peculiar to the embodied and another for the bodiless? Finally,
one or many, what would such a Principle be?

Consider that some things, material shapes for instance, are gracious
not by anything inherent but by something communicated, while others are
lovely of themselves, as, for example, Virtue.

The same bodies appear sometimes beautiful, sometimes not; so that there
is a good deal between being body and being beautiful.

What, then, is this something that shows itself in certain material
forms? This is the natural beginning of our enquiry.

What is it that attracts the eyes of those to whom a beautiful object is
presented, and calls them, lures them, towards it, and fills them with
joy at the sight? If we possess ourselves of this, we have at once a
standpoint for the wider survey.

Almost everyone declares that the symmetry of parts towards each other
and towards a whole, with, besides, a certain charm of colour,
constitutes the beauty recognized by the eye, that in visible things, as
indeed in all else, universally, the beautiful thing is essentially
symmetrical, patterned.

But think what this means.

Only a compound can be beautiful, never anything devoid of parts; and
only a whole; the several parts will have beauty, not in themselves, but
only as working together to give a comely total. Yet beauty in an
aggregate demands beauty in details; it cannot be constructed out of
ugliness; its law must run throughout.

All the loveliness of colour and even the light of the sun, being devoid
of parts and so not beautiful by symmetry, must be ruled out of the
realm of beauty. And how comes gold to be a beautiful thing? And
lightning by night, and the stars, why are these so fair?

In sounds also the simple must be proscribed, though often in a whole
noble composition each several tone is delicious in itself.

Again since the one face, constant in symmetry, appears sometimes fair
and sometimes not, can we doubt that beauty is something more than
symmetry, that symmetry itself owes its beauty to a remoter principle?

Turn to what is attractive in methods of life or in the expression of
thought; are we to call in symmetry here? What symmetry is to be found
in noble conduct, or excellent laws, in any form of mental pursuit?

What symmetry can there be in points of abstract thought?

The symmetry of being accordant with each other? But there may be
accordance or entire identity where there is nothing but ugliness: the
proposition that honesty is merely a generous artlessness chimes in the
most perfect harmony with the proposition that morality means weakness
of will; the accordance is complete.

Then again, all the virtues are a beauty of the soul, a beauty authentic
beyond any of these others; but how does symmetry enter here? The soul,
it is true, is not a simple unity, but still its virtue cannot have the
symmetry of size or of number: what standard of measurement could
preside over the compromise or the coalescence of the soul's faculties
or purposes?

Finally, how by this theory would there be beauty in the
Intellectual-Principle, essentially the solitary?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn062.md)
