[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn022)  [Next](enn024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. In all this there is no sin- there is only matter of discipline- but
our concern is not merely to be sinless but to be God.

As long as there is any such involuntary action, the nature is twofold,
God and Demi-God, or rather God in association with a nature of a lower
power: when all the involuntary is suppressed, there is God unmingled, a
Divine Being of those that follow upon The First.

For, at this height, the man is the very being that came from the
Supreme. The primal excellence restored, the essential man is There:
entering this sphere, he has associated himself with the reasoning phase
of his nature and this he will lead up into likeness with his highest
self, as far as earthly mind is capable, so that if possible it shall
never be inclined to, and at the least never adopt, any course
displeasing to its overlord.

What form, then, does virtue take in one so lofty?

It appears as Wisdom, which consists in the contemplation of all that
exists in the Intellectual-Principle, and as the immediate presence of
the Intellectual-Principle itself.

And each of these has two modes or aspects: there is Wisdom as it is in
the Intellectual-Principle and as in the Soul; and there is the
Intellectual-Principle as it is present to itself and as it is present
to the Soul: this gives what in the Soul is Virtue, in the Supreme not
Virtue.

In the Supreme, then, what is it?

Its proper Act and Its Essence.

That Act and Essence of the Supreme, manifested in a new form,
constitute the virtue of this sphere. For the Supreme is not
self-existent justice, or the Absolute of any defined virtue: it is, so
to speak, an exemplar, the source of what in the soul becomes virtue:
for virtue is dependent, seated in something not itself; the Supreme is
self-standing, independent.

But taking Rectitude to be the due ordering of faculty, does it not
always imply the existence of diverse parts?

No: There is a Rectitude of Diversity appropriate to what has parts, but
there is another, not less Rectitude than the former though it resides
in a Unity. And the authentic Absolute-Rectitude is the Act of a Unity
upon itself, of a Unity in which there is no this and that and the
other.

On this principle, the supreme Rectitude of the Soul is that it direct
its Act towards the Intellectual-Principle: its Restraint (Sophrosyne)
is its inward bending towards the Intellectual-Principle; its Fortitude
is its being impassive in the likeness of That towards which its gaze is
set, Whose nature comports an impassivity which the Soul acquires by
virtue and must acquire if it is not to be at the mercy of every state
arising in its less noble companion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn024.md)
