[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn038)  [Next](enn040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Then why are these conditions sought and their contraries repelled
by the man established in happiness?

Here is our answer:

These more pleasant conditions cannot, it is true, add any particle
towards the Sage's felicity: but they do serve towards the integrity of
his being, while the presence of the contraries tends against his Being
or complicates the Term: it is not that the Sage can be so easily
deprived of the Term achieved but simply that he that holds the highest
good desires to have that alone, not something else at the same time,
something which, though it cannot banish the Good by its incoming, does
yet take place by its side.

In any case if the man that has attained felicity meets some turn of
fortune that he would not have chosen, there is not the slightest
lessening of his happiness for that. If there were, his felicity would
be veering or falling from day to day; the death of a child would bring
him down, or the loss of some trivial possession. No: a thousand
mischances and disappointments may befall him and leave him still in the
tranquil possession of the Term.

But, they cry, great disasters, not the petty daily chances!

What human thing, then, is great, so as not to be despised by one who
has mounted above all we know here, and is bound now no longer to
anything below?

If the Sage thinks all fortunate events, however momentous, to be no
great matter- kingdom and the rule over cities and peoples,
colonisations and the founding of states, even though all be his own
handiwork- how can he take any great account of the vacillations of
power or the ruin of his fatherland? Certainly if he thought any such
event a great disaster, or any disaster at all, he must be of a very
strange way of thinking. One that sets great store by wood and stones,
or... Zeus... by mortality among mortals cannot yet be the Sage, whose
estimate of death, we hold, must be that it is better than life in the
body.

But suppose that he himself is offered a victim in sacrifice?

Can he think it an evil to die beside the altars?

But if he go unburied?

Wheresoever it lie, under earth or over earth, his body will always rot.

But if he has been hidden away, not with costly ceremony but in an
unnamed grave, not counted worthy of a towering monument?

The littleness of it!

But if he falls into his enemies' hands, into prison?

There is always the way towards escape, if none towards well-being.

But if his nearest be taken from him, his sons and daughters dragged
away to captivity?

What then, we ask, if he had died without witnessing the wrong? Could he
have quitted the world in the calm conviction that nothing of all this
could happen? He must be very shallow. Can he fail to see that it is
possible for such calamities to overtake his household, and does he
cease to be a happy man for the knowledge of what may occur? In the
knowledge of the possibility he may be at ease; so, too, when the evil
has come about.

He would reflect that the nature of this All is such as brings these
things to pass and man must bow the head.

Besides in many cases captivity will certainly prove an advantage; and
those that suffer have their freedom in their hands: if they stay,
either there is reason in their staying, and then they have no real
grievance, or they stay against reason, when they should not, and then
they have themselves to blame. Clearly the absurdities of his
neighbours, however near, cannot plunge the Sage into evil: his state
cannot hang upon the fortunes good or bad of any other men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn040)
