[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn030)  [Next](enn032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Philosophy has other provinces, but Dialectic is its precious part:
in its study of the laws of the universe, Philosophy draws on Dialectic
much as other studies and crafts use Arithmetic, though, of course, the
alliance between Philosophy and Dialectic is closer.

And in Morals, too, Philosophy uses Dialectic: by Dialectic it comes to
contemplation, though it originates of itself the moral state or rather
the discipline from which the moral state develops.

Our reasoning faculties employ the data of Dialectic almost as their
proper possession for they are mainly concerned about Matter \[whose
place and worth Dialectic establishes\].

And while the other virtues bring the reason to bear upon particular
experiences and acts, the virtue of Wisdom \[i.e., the virtue peculiarly
induced by Dialectic\] is a certain super-reasoning much closer to the
Universal; for it deals with correspondence and sequence, the choice of
time for action and inaction, the adoption of this course, the rejection
of that other: Wisdom and Dialectic have the task of presenting all
things as Universals and stripped of matter for treatment by the
Understanding.

But can these inferior kinds of virtue exist without Dialectic and
philosophy?

Yes- but imperfectly, inadequately.

And is it possible to be a Sage, Master in Dialectic, without these
lower virtues?

It would not happen: the lower will spring either before or together
with the higher. And it is likely that everyone normally possesses the
natural virtues from which, when Wisdom steps in, the perfected virtue
develops. After the natural virtues, then, Wisdom and, so the perfecting
of the moral nature. Once the natural virtues exist, both orders, the
natural and the higher, ripen side by side to their final excellence: or
as the one advances it carries forward the other towards perfection.

But, ever, the natural virtue is imperfect in vision and in strength-
and to both orders of virtue the essential matter is from what
principles we derive them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: FOURTH TRACTATE](enn032.md)
