[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn008)  [Next](enn010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. It may seem reasonable to lay down as a law that when any powers are
contained by a recipient, every action or state expressive of them must
be the action or state of that recipient, they themselves remaining
unaffected as merely furnishing efficiency.

But if this were so, then, since the Animate is the recipient of the
Causing-Principle \[i.e., the Soul\] which brings life to the
Couplement, this Cause must itself remain unaffected, all the
experiences and expressive activities of the life being vested in the
recipient, the Animate.

But this would mean that life itself belongs not to the Soul but to the
Couplement; or at least the life of the Couplement would not be the life
of the Soul; Sense-Perception would belong not to the Sensitive-Faculty
but to the container of the faculty.

But if sensation is a movement traversing the body and culminating in
Soul, how the soul lack sensation? The very presence of the
Sensitive-Faculty must assure sensation to the Soul.

Once again, where is Sense-Perception seated?

In the Couplement.

Yet how can the Couplement have sensation independently of action in the
Sensitive-Faculty, the Soul left out of count and the Soul-Faculty?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn010)
