[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn009)  [Next](enn011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. The truth lies in the Consideration that the Couplement subsists by
virtue of the Soul's presence.

This, however, is not to say that the Soul gives itself as it is in
itself to form either the Couplement or the body.

No; from the organized body and something else, let us say a light,
which the Soul gives forth from itself, it forms a distinct Principle,
the Animate; and in this Principle are vested Sense-Perception and all
the other experiences found to belong to the Animate.

But the "We"? How have We Sense-Perception?

By the fact that We are not separate from the Animate so constituted,
even though certainly other and nobler elements go to make up the entire
many-sided nature of Man.

The faculty of perception in the Soul cannot act by the immediate
grasping of sensible objects, but only by the discerning of impressions
printed upon the Animate by sensation: these impressions are already
Intelligibles while the outer sensation is a mere phantom of the other
\[of that in the Soul\] which is nearer to Authentic-Existence as being
an impassive reading of Ideal-Forms.

And by means of these Ideal-Forms, by which the Soul wields single
lordship over the Animate, we have Discursive-Reasoning, Sense-Knowledge
and Intellection. From this moment we have peculiarly the We: before
this there was only the "Ours"; but at this stage stands the WE \[the
authentic Human-Principle\] loftily presiding over the Animate.

There is no reason why the entire compound entity should not be
described as the Animate or Living-Being- mingled in a lower phase, but
above that point the beginning of the veritable man, distinct from all
that is kin to the lion, all that is of the order of the multiple brute.
And since The Man, so understood, is essentially the associate of the
reasoning Soul, in our reasoning it is this "We" that reasons, in that
the use and act of reason is a characteristic Act of the Soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn011.md)
