[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn045)  [Next](enn047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 14

14\. For man, and especially the Sage, is not the Couplement of soul and
body: the proof is that man can be disengaged from the body and disdain
its nominal goods.

It would be absurd to think that happiness begins and ends with the
living-body: happiness is the possession of the good of life: it is
centred therefore in Soul, is an Act of the Soul- and not of all the
Soul at that: for it certainly is not characteristic of the vegetative
soul, the soul of growth; that would at once connect it with the body.

A powerful frame, a healthy constitution, even a happy balance of
temperament, these surely do not make felicity; in the excess of these
advantages there is, even, the danger that the man be crushed down and
forced more and more within their power. There must be a sort of
counter-pressure in the other direction, towards the noblest: the body
must be lessened, reduced, that the veritable man may show forth, the
man behind the appearances.

Let the earth-bound man be handsome and powerful and rich, and so apt to
this world that he may rule the entire human race: still there can be no
envying him, the fool of such lures. Perhaps such splendours could not,
from the beginning even, have gathered to the Sage; but if it should
happen so, he of his own action will lower his state, if he has any care
for his true life; the tyranny of the body he will work down or wear
away by inattention to its claims; the rulership he will lay aside.
While he will safeguard his bodily health, he will not wish to be wholly
untried in sickness, still less never to feel pain: if such troubles
should not come to him of themselves, he will wish to know them, during
youth at least: in old age, it is true, he will desire neither pains nor
pleasures to hamper him; he will desire nothing of this world, pleasant
or painful; his one desire will be to know nothing of the body. If he
should meet with pain he will pit against it the powers he holds to meet
it; but pleasure and health and ease of life will not mean any increase
of happiness to him nor will their contraries destroy or lessen it.

When in the one subject, a positive can add nothing, how can the
negative take away?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](enn047)
