[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn040)  [Next](enn042.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. But when he is out of himself, reason quenched by sickness or by
magic arts?

If it be allowed that in this state, resting as it were in a slumber, he
remains a Sage, why should he not equally remain happy? No one rules him
out of felicity in the hours of sleep; no one counts up that time and so
denies that he has been happy all his life.

If they say that, failing consciousness, he is no longer the Sage, then
they are no longer reasoning about the Sage: but we do suppose a Sage,
and are enquiring whether, as long as he is the Sage, he is in the state
of felicity.

"Well, a Sage let him remain," they say, "still, having no sensation and
not expressing his virtue in act, how can he be happy?"

But a man unconscious of his health may be, none the less, healthy: a
man may not be aware of his personal attraction, but he remains handsome
none the less: if he has no sense of his wisdom, shall he be any the
less wise?

It may perhaps be urged that sensation and consciousness are essential
to wisdom and that happiness is only wisdom brought to act.

Now, this argument might have weight if prudence, wisdom, were something
fetched in from outside: but this is not so: wisdom is, in its essential
nature, an Authentic-Existence, or rather is The Authentic-Existent- and
this Existent does not perish in one asleep or, to take the particular
case presented to us, in the man out of his mind: the Act of this
Existent is continuous within him; and is a sleepless activity: the
Sage, therefore, even unconscious, is still the Sage in Act.

This activity is screened not from the man entire but merely from one
part of him: we have here a parallel to what happens in the activity of
the physical or vegetative life in us which is not made known by the
sensitive faculty to the rest of the man: if our physical life really
constituted the "We," its Act would be our Act: but, in the fact, this
physical life is not the "We"; the "We" is the activity of the
Intellectual-Principle so that when the Intellective is in Act we are in
Act.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn042.md)
