[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn082)  [Next](enn084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. But what approach have we to the knowing of Good and Evil?

And first of the Evil of soul: Virtue, we may know by the
Intellectual-Principle and by means of the philosophic habit; but Vice?

A a ruler marks off straight from crooked, so Vice is known by its
divergence from the line of Virtue.

But are we able to affirm Vice by any vision we can have of it, or is
there some other way of knowing it?

Utter viciousness, certainly not by any vision, for it is utterly
outside of bound and measure; this thing which is nowhere can be seized
only by abstraction; but any degree of evil falling short of The
Absolute is knowable by the extent of that falling short.

We see partial wrong; from what is before us we divine that which is
lacking to the entire form \[or Kind\] thus indicated; we see that the
completed Kind would be the Indeterminate; by this process we are able
to identify and affirm Evil. In the same way when we observe what we
feel to be an ugly appearance in Matter- left there because the
Reason-Principle has not become so completely the master as to cover
over the unseemliness- we recognise Ugliness by the falling-short from
Ideal-Form.

But how can we identify what has never had any touch of Form?

We utterly eliminate every kind of Form; and the object in which there
is none whatever we call Matter: if we are to see Matter we must so
completely abolish Form that we take shapelessness into our very selves.

In fact it is another Intellectual-Principle, not the true, this which
ventures a vision so uncongenial.

To see darkness the eye withdraws from the light; it is striving to
cease from seeing, therefore it abandons the light which would make the
darkness invisible; away from the light its power is rather that of
not-seeing than of seeing and this not-seeing is its nearest approach to
seeing Darkness. So the Intellectual-Principle, in order to see its
contrary \[Matter\], must leave its own light locked up within itself,
and as it were go forth from itself into an outside realm, it must
ignore its native brightness and submit itself to the very contradition
of its being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn084.md)
