[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn070)  [Next](enn072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. We can scarcely conceive that for any entity the Good can be other
than the natural Act expressing its life-force, or in the case of an
entity made up of parts the Act, appropriate, natural and complete,
expressive of that in it which is best.

For the Soul, then, the Good is its own natural Act.

But the Soul itself is natively a "Best"; if, further, its act be
directed towards the Best, the achievement is not merely the "Soul's
good" but "The Good" without qualification.

Now, given an Existent which- as being itself the best of existences and
even transcending the existences- directs its Act towards no other, but
is the object to which the Act of all else is directed, it is clear that
this must be at once the Good and the means through which all else may
participate in Good.

This Absolute Good other entities may possess in two ways- by becoming
like to It and by directing the Act of their being towards It.

Now, if all aspiration and Act whatsoever are directed towards the Good,
it follows that the Essential-Good neither need nor can look outside
itself or aspire to anything other than itself: it can but remain
unmoved, as being, in the constitution of things, the wellspring and
firstcause of all Act: whatsoever in other entities is of the nature of
Good cannot be due to any Act of the Essential-Good upon them; it is for
them on the contrary to act towards their source and cause. The Good
must, then, be the Good not by any Act, not even by virtue of its
Intellection, but by its very rest within Itself.

Existing beyond and above Being, it must be beyond and above the
Intellectual-Principle and all Intellection.

For, again, that only can be named the Good to which all is bound and
itself to none: for only thus is it veritably the object of all
aspiration. It must be unmoved, while all circles around it, as a
circumference around a centre from which all the radii proceed. Another
example would be the sun, central to the light which streams from it and
is yet linked to it, or at least is always about it, irremoveably; try
all you will to separate the light from the sun, or the sun from its
light, for ever the light is in the sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn072)
