[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn085)  [Next](enn087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 12

12\. If the existence of Matter be denied, the necessity of this
Principle must be demonstrated from the treatises "On Matter" where the
question is copiously treated.

To deny Evil a place among realities is necessarily to do away with the
Good as well, and even to deny the existence of anything desirable; it
is to deny desire, avoidance and all intellectual act; for desire has
Good for its object, aversion looks to Evil; all intellectual act, all
Wisdom, deals with Good and Bad, and is itself one of the things that
are good.

There must then be The Good- good unmixed- and the Mingled Good and Bad,
and the Rather Bad than Good, this last ending with the Utterly Bad we
have been seeking, just as that in which Evil constitutes the lesser
part tends, by that lessening, towards the Good.

What, then, must Evil be to the Soul?

What Soul could contain Evil unless by contact with the lower Kind?
There could be no desire, no sorrow, no rage, no fear: fear touches the
compounded dreading its dissolution; pain and sorrow are the
accompaniments of the dissolution; desires spring from something
troubling the grouped being or are a provision against trouble
threatened; all impression is the stroke of something unreasonable
outside the Soul, accepted only because the Soul is not devoid of parts
or phases; the Soul takes up false notions through having gone outside
of its own truth by ceasing to be purely itself.

One desire or appetite there is which does not fall under this
condemnation; it is the aspiration towards the Intellectual-Principle:
this demands only that the Soul dwell alone enshrined within that place
of its choice, never lapsing towards the lower.

Evil is not alone: by virtue of the nature of Good, the power of Good,
it is not Evil only: it appears, necessarily, bound around with bonds of
Beauty, like some captive bound in fetters of gold; and beneath these it
is hidden so that, while it must exist, it may not be seen by the gods,
and that men need not always have evil before their eyes, but that when
it comes before them they may still be not destitute of Images of the
Good and Beautiful for their Remembrance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NINTH TRACTATE](enn087.md)
