[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn083)  [Next](enn085.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. But if Matter is devoid of quality how can it be evil?

It is described as being devoid of quality in the sense only that it
does not essentially possess any of the qualities which it admits and
which enter into it as into a substratum. No one says that it has no
nature; and if it has any nature at all, why may not that nature be evil
though not in the sense of quality?

Quality qualifies something not itself: it is therefore an accidental;
it resides in some other object. Matter does not exist in some other
object but is the substratum in which the accidental resides. Matter,
then, is said to be devoid of Quality in that it does not in itself
possess this thing which is by nature an accidental. If, moreover,
Quality itself be devoid of Quality, how can Matter, which is the
unqualified, be said to have it?

Thus, it is quite correct to say at once that Matter is without Quality
and that it is evil: it is Evil not in the sense of having Quality but,
precisely, in not having it; give it Quality and in its very Evil it
would almost be a Form, whereas in Truth it is a Kind contrary to Form.

"But," it may be said, "the Kind opposed to all Form is Privation or
Negation, and this necessarily refers to something other than itself, it
is no Substantial-Existence: therefore if Evil is Privation or Negation
it must be lodged in some Negation of Form: there will be no
Self-Existent Evil."

This objection may be answered by applying the principle to the case of
Evil in the Soul; the Evil, the Vice, will be a Negation and not
anything having a separate existence; we come to the doctrine which
denies Matter or, admitting it, denies its Evil; we need not seek
elsewhere; we may at once place Evil in the Soul, recognising it as the
mere absence of Good. But if the negation is the negation of something
that ought to become present, if it is a denial of the Good by the Soul,
then the Soul produces vice within itself by the operation of its own
Nature, and is devoid of good and, therefore, Soul though it be, devoid
of life: the Soul, if it has no life, is soulless; the Soul is no Soul.

No; the Soul has life by its own nature and therefore does not, of its
own nature, contain this negation of The Good: it has much good in it;
it carries a happy trace of the Intellectual-Principle and is not
essentially evil: neither is it primally evil nor is that Primal Evil
present in it even as an accidental, for the Soul is not wholly apart
from the Good.

Perhaps Vice and Evil as in the Soul should be described not as an
entire, but as a partial, negation of good.

But if this were so, part of the Soul must possess The Good, part be
without it; the Soul will have a mingled nature and the Evil within it
will not be unblended: we have not yet lighted on the Primal, Unmingled
Evil. The Soul would possess the Good as its Essence, the Evil as an
Accidental.

Perhaps Evil is merely an impediment to the Soul like something
affecting the eye and so hindering sight.

But such an evil in the eyes is no more than an occasion of evil, the
Absolute Evil is something quite different. If then Vice is an
impediment to the Soul, Vice is an occasion of evil but not
Evil-Absolute. Virtue is not the Absolute Good, but a co-operator with
it; and if Virtue is not the Absolute Good neither is Vice the Absolute
Evil. Virtue is not the Absolute Beauty or the Absolute Good; neither,
therefore, is Vice the Essential Ugliness or the Essential Evil.

We teach that Virtue is not the Absolute Good and Beauty, because we
know that These are earlier than Virtue and transcend it, and that it is
good and beautiful by some participation in them. Now as, going upward
from virtue, we come to the Beautiful and to the Good, so, going
downward from Vice, we reach Essential Evil: from Vice as the
starting-point we come to vision of Evil, as far as such vision is
possible, and we become evil to the extent of our participation in it.
We are become dwellers in the Place of Unlikeness, where, fallen from
all our resemblance to the Divine, we lie in gloom and mud: for if the
Soul abandons itself unreservedly to the extreme of viciousness, it is
no longer a vicious Soul merely, for mere vice is still human, still
carries some trace of good: it has taken to itself another nature, the
Evil, and as far as Soul can die it is dead. And the death of Soul is
twofold: while still sunk in body to lie down in Matter and drench
itself with it; when it has left the body, to lie in the other world
until, somehow, it stirs again and lifts its sight from the mud: and
this is our "going down to Hades and slumbering there."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn085.md)
