[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn080)  [Next](enn082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. But why does the existence of the Principle of Good necessarily
comport the existence of a Principle of Evil? Is it because the All
necessarily comports the existence of Matter? Yes: for necessarily this
All is made up of contraries: it could not exist if Matter did not. The
Nature of this Kosmos is, therefore, a blend; it is blended from the
Intellectual-Principle and Necessity: what comes into it from God is
good; evil is from the Ancient Kind which, we read, is the underlying
Matter not yet brought to order by the Ideal-Form.

But, since the expression "this place" must be taken to mean the All,
how explain the words "mortal nature"?

The answer is in the passage \[in which the Father of Gods addresses the
Divinities of the lower sphere\], "Since you possess only a derivative
being, you are not immortals... but by my power you shall escape
dissolution."

The escape, we read, is not a matter of place, but of acquiring virtue,
of disengaging the self from the body; this is the escape from Matter.
Plato explains somewhere how a man frees himself and how he remains
bound; and the phrase "to live among the gods" means to live among the
Intelligible-Existents, for these are the Immortals.

There is another consideration establishing the necessary existence of
Evil.

Given that The Good is not the only existent thing, it is inevitable
that, by the outgoing from it or, if the phrase be preferred, the
continuous down-going or away-going from it, there should be produced a
Last, something after which nothing more can be produced: this will be
Evil.

As necessarily as there is Something after the First, so necessarily
there is a Last: this Last is Matter, the thing which has no residue of
good in it: here is the necessity of Evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn082)
