[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn011)  [Next](enn013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. That Soul, then, in us, will in its nature stand apart from all that
can cause any of the evils which man does or suffers; for all such evil,
as we have seen, belongs only to the Animate, the Couplement.

But there is a difficulty in understanding how the Soul can go guiltless
if our mentation and reasoning are vested in it: for all this lower kind
of knowledge is delusion and is the cause of much of what is evil.

When we have done evil it is because we have been worsted by our baser
side- for a man is many- by desire or rage or some evil image: the
misnamed reasoning that takes up with the false, in reality fancy, has
not stayed for the judgement of the Reasoning-Principle: we have acted
at the call of the less worthy, just as in matters of the sense-sphere
we sometimes see falsely because we credit only the lower perception,
that of the Couplement, without applying the tests of the
Reasoning-Faculty.

The Intellectual-Principle has held aloof from the act and so is
guiltless; or, as we may state it, all depends on whether we ourselves
have or have not put ourselves in touch with the Intellectual-Realm
either in the Intellectual-Principle or within ourselves; for it is
possible at once to possess and not to use.

Thus we have marked off what belongs to the Couplement from what stands
by itself: the one group has the character of body and never exists
apart from body, while all that has no need of body for its
manifestation belongs peculiarly to Soul: and the Understanding, as
passing judgement upon Sense-Impressions, is at the point of the vision
of Ideal-Forms, seeing them as it were with an answering sensation (i.e,
with consciousness) this last is at any rate true of the Understanding
in the Veritable Soul. For Understanding, the true, is the Act of the
Intellections: in many of its manifestations it is the assimilation and
reconciliation of the outer to the inner.

Thus in spite of all, the Soul is at peace as to itself and within
itself: all the changes and all the turmoil we experience are the issue
of what is subjoined to the Soul, and are, as have said, the states and
experiences of this elusive "Couplement."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn013)
