[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn095)  [Next](enn097.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. We can scarcely do better, in fine, than follow Plato.

Thus:

In the universe as a whole there must necessarily be such a degree of
solidity, that is to say, of resistance, as will ensure that the earth,
set in the centre, be a sure footing and support to the living beings
moving over it, and inevitably communicate something of its own density
to them: the earth will possess coherence by its own unaided quality,
but visibility by the presence of fire: it will contain water against
the dryness which would prevent the cohesion of its particles; it will
hold air to lighten its bulky matters; it will be in contact with the
celestial fire- not as being a member of the sidereal system but by the
simple fact that the fire there and our earth both belong to the ordered
universe so that something of the earth is taken up by the fire as
something of the fire by the earth and something of everything by
everything else.

This borrowing, however, does not mean that the one thing taking-up from
the other enters into a composition, becoming an element in a total of
both: it is simply a consequence of the kosmic fellowship; the
participant retains its own being and takes over not the thing itself
but some property of the thing, not air but air's yielding softness, not
fire but fire's incandescence: mixing is another process, a complete
surrender with a resultant compound not, as in this case, earth-
remaining earth, the solidity and density we know- with something of
fire's qualities superadded.

We have authority for this where we read:

"At the second circuit from the earth, God kindled a light": he is
speaking of the sun which, elsewhere, he calls the all-glowing and,
again, the all-gleaming: thus he prevents us imagining it to be anything
else but fire, though of a peculiar kind; in other words it is light,
which he distinguishes from flame as being only modestly warm: this
light is a corporeal substance but from it there shines forth that other
"light" which, though it carries the same name, we pronounce
incorporeal, given forth from the first as its flower and radiance, the
veritable "incandescent body." Plato's word earthy is commonly taken in
too depreciatory a sense: he is thinking of earth as the principle of
solidity; we are apt to ignore his distinctions and think of the
concrete clay.

Fire of this order, giving forth this purest light, belongs to the upper
realm, and there its seat is fixed by nature; but we must not, on that
account, suppose the flame of earth to be associated with the beings of
that higher sphere.

No: the flame of this world, once it has attained a certain height, is
extinguished by the currents of air opposed to it. Moreover, as it
carries an earthy element on its upward path, it is weighed downwards
and cannot reach those loftier regions. It comes to a stand somewhere
below the moon- making the air at that point subtler- and its flame, if
any flame can persist, is subdued and softened, and no longer retains
its first intensity, but gives out only what radiance it reflects from
the light above.

And it is that loftier light- falling variously upon the stars; to each
in a certain proportion- that gives them their characteristic
differences, as well in magnitude as in colour; just such light
constitutes also the still higher heavenly bodies which, however, like
clear air, are invisible because of the subtle texture and unresisting
transparency of their material substance and also by their very
distance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn097.md)
