[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn066)  [Next](enn068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Therefore we must ascend again towards the Good, the desired of
every Soul. Anyone that has seen This, knows what I intend when I say
that it is beautiful. Even the desire of it is to be desired as a Good.
To attain it is for those that will take the upward path, who will set
all their forces towards it, who will divest themselves of all that we
have put on in our descent:- so, to those that approach the Holy
Celebrations of the Mysteries, there are appointed purifications and the
laying aside of the garments worn before, and the entry in nakedness-
until, passing, on the upward way, all that is other than the God, each
in the solitude of himself shall behold that solitary-dwelling
Existence, the Apart, the Unmingled, the Pure, that from Which all
things depend, for Which all look and live and act and know, the Source
of Life and of Intellection and of Being.

And one that shall know this vision- with what passion of love shall he
not be seized, with what pang of desire, what longing to be molten into
one with This, what wondering delight! If he that has never seen this
Being must hunger for It as for all his welfare, he that has known must
love and reverence It as the very Beauty; he will be flooded with awe
and gladness, stricken by a salutary terror; he loves with a veritable
love, with sharp desire; all other loves than this he must despise, and
disdain all that once seemed fair.

This, indeed, is the mood even of those who, having witnessed the
manifestation of Gods or Supernals, can never again feel the old delight
in the comeliness of material forms: what then are we to think of one
that contemplates Absolute Beauty in Its essential integrity, no
accumulation of flesh and matter, no dweller on earth or in the heavens-
so perfect Its purity- far above all such things in that they are
non-essential, composite, not primal but descending from This?

Beholding this Being- the Choragos of all Existence, the Self-Intent
that ever gives forth and never takes- resting, rapt, in the vision and
possession of so lofty a loveliness, growing to Its likeness, what
Beauty can the soul yet lack? For This, the Beauty supreme, the
absolute, and the primal, fashions Its lovers to Beauty and makes them
also worthy of love.

And for This, the sternest and the uttermost combat is set before the
Souls; all our labour is for This, lest we be left without part in this
noblest vision, which to attain is to be blessed in the blissful sight,
which to fail of is to fail utterly.

For not he that has failed of the joy that is in colour or in visible
forms, not he that has failed of power or of honours or of kingdom has
failed, but only he that has failed of only This, for Whose winning he
should renounce kingdoms and command over earth and ocean and sky, if
only, spurning the world of sense from beneath his feet, and straining
to This, he may see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn068.md)
