[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn096)  [Next](enn098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. Now: given a light of this degree, remaining in the upper sphere at
its appointed station, pure light in purest place, what mode of outflow
from it can be conceived possible?

Such a Kind is not so constituted as to flow downwards of its own
accord; and there exists in those regions no power to force it down.
Again, body in contact with soul must always be very different from body
left to itself; the bodily substance of the heavens has that contact and
will show that difference.

Besides, the corporeal substance nearest to the heavens would be air or
fire: air has no destructive quality; fire would be powerless there
since it could not enter into effective contact: in its very rush it
would change before its attack could be felt; and, apart from that, it
is of the lesser order, no match for what it would be opposing in those
higher regions.

Again, fire acts by imparting heat: now it cannot be the source of heat
to what is already hot by nature; and anything it is to destroy must as
a first condition be heated by it, must be brought to a pitch of heat
fatal to the nature concerned.

In sum, then, no outside body is necessary to the heavens to ensure
their permanence- or to produce their circular movement, for it has
never been shown that their natural path would be the straight line; on
the contrary the heavens, by their nature, will either be motionless or
move by circle; all other movement indicates outside compulsion. We
cannot think, therefore, that the heavenly bodies stand in need of
replenishment; we must not argue from earthly frames to those of the
celestial system whose sustaining soul is not the same, whose space is
not the same, whose conditions are not those which make restoration
necessary in this realm of composite bodies always in flux: we must
recognise that the changes that take place in bodies here represent a
slipping-away from the being \[a phenomenon not incident to the
celestial sphere\] and take place at the dictate of a Principle not
dwelling in the higher regions, one not powerful enough to ensure the
permanence of the existences in which it is exhibited, one which in its
coming into being and in its generative act is but an imitation of an
antecedent Kind, and, as we have shown, cannot at every point possess
the unchangeable identity of the Intellectual Realm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: SECOND TRACTATE](enn098)
