[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn037)  [Next](enn039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Now if happiness did indeed require freedom from pain, sickness,
misfortune, disaster, it would be utterly denied to anyone confronted by
such trials: but if it lies in the fruition of the Authentic Good, why
turn away from this Term and look to means, imagining that to be happy a
man must need a variety of things none of which enter into happiness?
If, in fact, felicity were made up by heaping together all that is at
once desirable and necessary we must bid for these also. But if the Term
must be one and not many; if in other words our quest is of a Term and
not of Terms; that only can be elected which is ultimate and noblest,
that which calls to the tenderest longings of the soul.

The quest and will of the Soul are not pointed directly towards freedom
from this sphere: the reason which disciplines away our concern about
this life has no fundamental quarrel with things of this order; it
merely resents their interference; sometimes, even, it must seek them;
essentially all the aspiration is not so much away from evil as towards
the Soul's own highest and noblest: this attained, all is won and there
is rest- and this is the veritably willed state of life.

There can be no such thing as "willing" the acquirement of necessaries,
if Will is to be taken in its strict sense, and not misapplied to the
mere recognition of need.

It is certain that we shrink from the unpleasant, and such shrinking is
assuredly not what we should have willed; to have no occasion for any
such shrinking would be much nearer to our taste; but the things we seek
tell the story as soon as they are ours. For instance, health and
freedom from pain; which of these has any great charm? As long as we
possess them, we set no store upon them.

Anything which, present, has no charm and adds nothing to happiness,
which when lacking is desired because of the presence of an annoying
opposite, may reasonably be called a necessity but not a Good.

Such things can never make part of our final object: our Term must be
such that though these pleasanter conditions be absent and their
contraries present, it shall remain, still, intact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn039.md)
