[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn023)  [Next](enn025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. The virtues in the Soul run in a sequence correspondent to that
existing in the over-world, that is among their exemplars in the
Intellectual-Principle.

In the Supreme, Intellection constitutes Knowledge and Wisdom;
self-concentration is Sophrosyne; Its proper Act is Its Dutifulness; Its
Immateriality, by which It remains inviolate within Itself is the
equivalent of Fortitude.

In the Soul, the direction of vision towards the Intellectual-Principle
is Wisdom and Prudence, soul-virtues not appropriate to the Supreme
where Thinker and Thought are identical. All the other virtues have
similar correspondences.

And if the term of purification is the production of a pure being, then
the purification of the Soul must produce all the virtues; if any are
lacking, then not one of them is perfect.

And to possess the greater is potentially to possess the minor, though
the minor need not carry the greater with them.

Thus we have indicated the dominant note in the life of the Sage; but
whether his possession of the minor virtues be actual as well as
potential, whether even the greater are in Act in him or yield to
qualities higher still, must be decided afresh in each several case.

Take, for example, Contemplative-Wisdom. If other guides of conduct must
be called in to meet a given need, can this virtue hold its ground even
in mere potentiality?

And what happens when the virtues in their very nature differ in scope
and province? Where, for example, Sophrosyne would allow certain acts or
emotions under due restraint and another virtue would cut them off
altogether? And is it not clear that all may have to yield, once
Contemplative-Wisdom comes into action?

The solution is in understanding the virtues and what each has to give:
thus the man will learn to work with this or that as every several need
demands. And as he reaches to loftier principles and other standards
these in turn will define his conduct: for example, Restraint in its
earlier form will no longer satisfy him; he will work for the final
Disengagement; he will live, no longer, the human life of the good man-
such as Civic Virtue commends- but, leaving this beneath him, will take
up instead another life, that of the Gods.

For it is to the Gods, not to the Good, that our Likeness must look: to
model ourselves upon good men is to produce an image of an image: we
have to fix our gaze above the image and attain Likeness to the Supreme
Exemplar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THIRD TRACTATE](enn025.md)
