[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn032)  [Next](enn034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Are we to make True Happiness one and the same thing with Welfare or
Prosperity and therefore within the reach of the other living beings as
well as ourselves?

There is certainly no reason to deny well-being to any of them as long
as their lot allows them to flourish unhindered after their kind.

Whether we make Welfare consist in pleasant conditions of life, or in
the accomplishment of some appropriate task, by either account it may
fall to them as to us. For certainly they may at once be pleasantly
placed and engaged about some function that lies in their nature: take
for an instance such living beings as have the gift of music; finding
themselves well-off in other ways, they sing, too, as their nature is,
and so their day is pleasant to them.

And if, even, we set Happiness in some ultimate Term pursued by inborn
tendency, then on this head, too, we must allow it to animals from the
moment of their attaining this Ultimate: the nature in them comes to a
halt, having fulfilled its vital course from a beginning to an end.

It may be a distasteful notion, this bringing-down of happiness so low
as to the animal world- making it over, as then we must, even to the
vilest of them and not withholding it even from the plants, living they
too and having a life unfolding to a Term.

But, to begin with, it is surely unsound to deny that good of life to
animals only because they do not appear to man to be of great account.
And as for plants, we need not necessarily allow to them what we accord
to the other forms of life, since they have no feeling. It is true
people might be found to declare prosperity possible to the very plants:
they have life, and life may bring good or evil; the plants may thrive
or wither, bear or be barren.

No: if Pleasure be the Term, if here be the good of life, it is
impossible to deny the good of life to any order of living things; if
the Term be inner-peace, equally impossible; impossible, too, if the
good of life be to live in accordance with the purpose of nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn034)
