[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn039)  [Next](enn041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. As for violent personal sufferings, he will carry them off as well
as he can; if they overpass his endurance they will carry him off.

And so in all his pain he asks no pity: there is always the radiance in
the inner soul of the man, untroubled like the light in a lantern when
fierce gusts beat about it in a wild turmoil of wind and tempest.

But what if he be put beyond himself? What if pain grow so intense and
so torture him that the agony all but kills? Well, when he is put to
torture he will plan what is to be done: he retains his freedom of
action.

Besides we must remember that the Sage sees things very differently from
the average man; neither ordinary experiences nor pains and sorrows,
whether touching himself or others, pierce to the inner hold. To allow
them any such passage would be a weakness in our soul.

And it is a sign of weakness, too, if we should think it gain not to
hear of miseries, gain to die before they come: this is not concern for
others' welfare but for our own peace of mind. Here we see our
imperfection: we must not indulge it, we must put it from us and cease
to tremble over what perhaps may be.

Anyone that says that it is in human nature to grieve over misfortune to
our household must learn that this is not so with all, and that,
precisely, it is virtue's use to raise the general level of nature
towards the better and finer, above the mass of men. And the finer is to
set at nought what terrifies the common mind.

We cannot be indolent: this is an arena for the powerful combatant
holding his ground against the blows of fortune, and knowing that, sore
though they be to some natures, they are little to his, nothing
dreadful, nursery terrors.

So, the Sage would have desired misfortune?

It is precisely to meet the undesired when it appears that he has the
virtue which gives him, to confront it, his passionless and unshakeable
soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn041.md)
