[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn100)  [Next](enn102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. The truth may be resumed in this way:

There is a lowest power of the Soul, a nearest to earth, and this is
interwoven throughout the entire universe: another phase possesses
sensation, while yet another includes the Reason which is concerned with
the objects of sensation: this higher phase holds itself to the spheres,
poised towards the Above but hovering over the lesser Soul and giving
forth to it an effluence which makes it more intensely vital.

The lower Soul is moved by the higher which, besides encircling and
supporting it, actually resides in whatsoever part of it has thrust
upwards and attained the spheres. The lower then, ringed round by the
higher and answering its call, turns and tends towards it; and this
upward tension communicates motion to the material frame in which it is
involved: for if a single point in a spheric mass is in any degree
moved, without being drawn away from the rest, it moves the whole, and
the sphere is set in motion. Something of the same kind happens in the
case of our bodies: the unspatial movement of the Soul- in happiness,
for instance, or at the idea of some pleasant event- sets up a spatial
movement in the body: the Soul, attaining in its own region some good
which increases its sense of life, moves towards what pleases it; and
so, by force of the union established in the order of nature, it moves
the body, in the body's region, that is in space.

As for that phase of the Soul in which sensation is vested, it, too,
takes its good from the Supreme above itself and moves, rejoicingly, in
quest of it: and since the object of its desire is everywhere, it too
ranges always through the entire scope of the universe.

The Intellectual-Principle has no such progress in any region; its
movement is a stationary act, for it turns upon itself.

And this is why the All, circling as it does, is at the same time at
rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THIRD TRACTATE](enn102)
