[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn099)  [Next](enn101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. And what of lower things? \[Why have they not this motion?\]

\[Their case is very different\]: the single thing here is not an all
but a part and limited to a given segment of space; that other realm is
all, is space, so to speak, and is subject to no hindrance or control,
for in itself it is all that is.

And men?

As a self, each is a personal whole, no doubt; but as member of the
universe, each is a partial thing.

But if, wherever the circling body be, it possesses the Soul, what need
of the circling?

Because everywhere it finds something else besides the Soul \[which it
desires to possess alone\].

The circular movement would be explained, too, if the Soul's power may
be taken as resident at its centre.

Here, however, we must distinguish between a centre in reference to the
two different natures, body and Soul.

In body, centre is a point of place; in Soul it is a source, the source
of some other nature. The word, which without qualification would mean
the midpoint of a spheric mass, may serve in the double reference; and,
as in a material mass so in the Soul, there must be a centre, that
around which the object, Soul or material mass, revolves.

The Soul exists in revolution around God to whom it clings in love,
holding itself to the utmost of its power near to Him as the Being on
which all depends; and since it cannot coincide with God it circles
about Him.

Why then do not all souls \[i.e., the lower, also, as those of men and
animals\] thus circle about the Godhead?

Every Soul does in its own rank and place.

And why not our very bodies, also?

Because the forward path is characteristic of body and because all the
body's impulses are to other ends and because what in us is of this
circling nature is hampered in its motion by the clay it bears with it,
while in the higher realm everything flows on its course, lightly and
easily, with nothing to check it, once there is any principle of motion
in it at all.

And it may very well be that even in us the Spirit which dwells with the
Soul does thus circle about the divinity. For since God is omnipresent
the Soul desiring perfect union must take the circular course: God is
not stationed.

Similarly Plato attributes to the stars not only the spheric movement
belonging to the universe as a whole but also to each a revolution
around their common centre; each- not by way of thought but by links of
natural necessity- has in its own place taken hold of God and exults.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn101.md)
