[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn115)  [Next](enn117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 14

14\. What of poverty and riches, glory and power?

In the case of inherited fortune, the stars merely announce a rich man,
exactly as they announce the high social standing of the child born to a
distinguished house.

Wealth may be due to personal activity: in this case if the body has
contributed, part of the effect is due to whatever has contributed
towards the physical powers, first the parents and then, if place has
had its influence, sky and earth; if the body has borne no part of the
burden, then the success, and all the splendid accompaniments added by
the Recompensers, must be attributed to virtue exclusively. If fortune
has come by gift from the good, then the source of the wealth is, again,
virtue: if by gift from the evil, but to a meritorious recipient, then
the credit must be given to the action of the best in them: if the
recipient is himself unprincipled, the wealth must be attributed
primarily to the very wickedness and to whatsoever is responsible for
the wickedness, while the givers bear an equal share in the wrong.

When the success is due to labour, tillage for example, it must be put
down to the tiller, with all his environment as contributory. In the
case of treasure-trove, something from the All has entered into action;
and if this be so, it will be foreshown- since all things make a chain,
so that we can speak of things universally. Money is lost: if by
robbery, the blame lies with the robber and the native principle guiding
him: if by shipwreck, the cause is the chain of events. As for good
fame, it is either deserved and then is due to the services done and to
the merit of those appraising them, or it is undeserved, and then must
be attributed to the injustice of those making the award. And the same
principle holds is regards power- for this also may be rightly or
unrightly placed- it depends either upon the merit of the dispensers of
place or upon the man himself who has effected his purpose by the
organization of supporters or in many other possible ways. Marriages,
similarly, are brought about either by choice or by chance interplay of
circumstance. And births are determined by marriages: the child is
moulded true to type when all goes well; otherwise it is marred by some
inner detriment, something due to the mother personally or to an
environment unfavourable to that particular conception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](enn117.md)
