[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn107)  [Next](enn109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. But that this same Mars, or Aphrodite, in certain aspects should
cause adulteries- as if they could thus, through the agency of human
incontinence, satisfy their own mutual desires- is not such a notion the
height of unreason? And who could accept the fancy that their happiness
comes from their seeing each other in this or that relative position and
not from their own settled nature?

Again: countless myriads of living beings are born and continue to be:
to minister continuously to every separate one of these; to make them
famous, rich, poor, lascivious; to shape the active tendencies of every
single one- what kind of life is this for the stars, how could they
possibly handle a task so huge?

They are to watch, we must suppose, the rising of each several
constellation and upon that signal to act; such a one, they see, has
risen by so many degrees, representing so many of the periods of its
upward path; they reckon on their fingers at what moment they must take
the action which, executed prematurely, would be out of order: and in
the sum, there is no One Being controlling the entire scheme; all is
made over to the stars singly, as if there were no Sovereign Unity,
standing as source of all the forms of Being in subordinate association
with it, and delegating to the separate members, in their appropriate
Kinds, the task of accomplishing its purposes and bringing its latent
potentiality into act.

This is a separatist theory, tenable only by minds ignorant of the
nature of a Universe which has a ruling principle and a first cause
operative downwards through every member.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn109.md)
