[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn118)  [Next](enn120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 17

17\. But these Reason-Principles, contained in the Soul, are they
Thoughts?

And if so, by what process does the Soul create in accordance with these
Thoughts?

It is upon Matter that this act of the Reason is exercised; and what
acts physically is not an intellectual operation or a vision, but a
power modifying matter, not conscious of it but merely acting upon it:
the Reason-Principle, in other words, acts much like a force producing a
figure or pattern upon water- that of a circle, suppose, where the
formation of the ring is conditioned by something distinct from that
force itself.

If this is so, the prior puissance of the Soul \[that which conveys the
Reason-Principles\] must act by manipulating the other Soul, that which
is united with Matter and has the generative function.

But is this handling the result of calculation?

Calculation implies reference. Reference, then, to something outside or
to something contained within itself? If to its own content, there is no
need of reasoning, which could not itself perform the act of creation;
creation is the operation of that phase of the Soul which contains
Ideal-Principles; for that is its stronger puissance, its creative part.

It creates, then, on the model of the Ideas; for, what it has received
from the Intellectual-Principle it must pass on in turn.

In sum, then, the Intellectual-Principle gives from itself to the Soul
of the All which follows immediately upon it: this again gives forth
from itself to its next, illuminated and imprinted by it; and that
secondary Soul at once begins to create, as under order, unhindered in
some of its creations, striving in others against the repugnance of
Matter.

It has a creative power, derived; it is stored with Reason-Principles
not the very originals: therefore it creates, but not in full accordance
with the Principles from which it has been endowed: something enters
from itself; and, plainly, this is inferior. The issue then is something
living, yes; but imperfect, hindering its own life, something very poor
and reluctant and crude, formed in a Matter that is the fallen sediment
of the Higher Order, bitter and embittering. This is the Soul's
contribution to the All.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](enn120)
