[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn191)  [Next](enn193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. As for the disregard of desert- the good afflicted, the unworthy
thriving- it is a sound explanation no doubt that to the good nothing is
evil and to the evil nothing can be good: still the question remains why
should what essentially offends our nature fall to the good while the
wicked enjoy all it demands? How can such an allotment be approved?

No doubt since pleasant conditions add nothing to true happiness and the
unpleasant do not lessen the evil in the wicked, the conditions matter
little: as well complain that a good man happens to be ugly and a bad
man handsome.

Still, under such a dispensation, there would surely be a propriety, a
reasonableness, a regard to merit which, as things are, do not appear,
though this would certainly be in keeping with the noblest Providence:
even though external conditions do not affect a man's hold upon good or
evil, none the less it would seem utterly unfitting that the bad should
be the masters, be sovereign in the state, while honourable men are
slaves: a wicked ruler may commit the most lawless acts; and in war the
worst men have a free hand and perpetrate every kind of crime against
their prisoners.

We are forced to ask how such things can be, under a Providence.
Certainly a maker must consider his work as a whole, but none the less
he should see to the due ordering of all the parts, especially when
these parts have Soul, that is, are Living and Reasoning Beings: the
Providence must reach to all the details; its functioning must consist
in neglecting no point.

Holding, therefore, as we do, despite all, that the Universe lies under
an Intellectual Principle whose power has touched every existent, we
cannot be absolved from the attempt to show in what way the detail of
this sphere is just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn193.md)
