[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn176)  [Next](enn178.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. But to halt at these nearest determinants, not to be willing to
penetrate deeper, indicates a sluggish mind, a dullness to all that
calls us towards the primal and transcendent causes.

How comes it that the same surface causes produce different results?
There is moonshine, and one man steals and the other does not: under the
influence of exactly similar surroundings one man falls sick and the
other keeps well; an identical set of operations makes one rich and
leaves another poor. The differences amongst us in manners, in
characters, in success, force us to go still further back.

Men therefore have never been able to rest at the surface causes.

One school postulates material principles, such as atoms; from the
movement, from the collisions and combinations of these, it derives the
existence and the mode of being of all particular phenomena, supposing
that all depends upon how these atoms are agglomerated, how they act,
how they are affected; our own impulses and states, even, are supposed
to be determined by these principles.

Such teaching, then, obtrudes this compulsion, an atomic Anagke, even
upon Real Being. Substitute, for the atoms, any other material entities
as principles and the cause of all things, and at once Real Being
becomes servile to the determination set up by them.

Others rise to the first-principle of all that exists and from it derive
all they tell of a cause penetrating all things, not merely moving all
but making each and everything; but they pose this as a fate and a
supremely dominating cause; not merely all else that comes into being,
but even our own thinking and thoughts would spring from its movement,
just as the several members of an animal move not at their own choice
but at the dictation of the leading principle which animal life
presupposes.

Yet another school fastens on the universal Circuit as embracing all
things and producing all by its motion and by the positions and mutual
aspect of the planets and fixed stars in whose power of foretelling they
find warrant for the belief that this Circuit is the universal
determinant.

Finally, there are those that dwell on the interconnection of the
causative forces and on their linked descent- every later phenomenon
following upon an earlier, one always leading back to others by which it
arose and without which it could not be, and the latest always
subservient to what went before them- but this is obviously to bring in
fate by another path. This school may be fairly distinguished into two
branches; a section which makes all depend upon some one principle and a
section which ignores such a unity.

Of this last opinion we will have something to say, but for the moment
we will deal with the former, taking the others in their turn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn178.md)
