[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn153)  [Next](enn155.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. The explanation by lesser angle of vision has been elsewhere
dismissed; one point, however, we may urge here.

Those attributing the reduced appearance to the lesser angle occupied
allow by their very theory that the unoccupied portion of the eye still
sees something beyond or something quite apart from the object of
vision, if only air-space.

Now consider some very large object of vision, that mountain for
example. No part of the eye is unoccupied; the mountain adequately fills
it so that it can take in nothing beyond, for the mountain as seen
either corresponds exactly to the eye-space or stretches away out of
range to right and to left. How does the explanation by lesser angle of
vision hold good in this case, where the object still appears smaller,
far, than it is and yet occupies the eye entire?

Or look up to the sky and no hesitation can remain. Of course we cannot
take in the entire hemisphere at one glance; the eye directed to it
could not cover so vast an expanse. But suppose the possibility: the
entire eye, then, embraces the hemisphere entire; but the expanse of the
heavens is far greater than it appears; how can its appearing far less
than it is be explained by a lessening of the angle of vision?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NINTH TRACTATE](enn155.md)
