[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn123)  [Next](enn125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. Now it may be observed, first of all, that we cannot hold utterly
cheap either the indeterminate, or even a Kind whose very idea implies
absence of form, provided only that it offer itself to its Priors and
\[through them\] to the Highest Beings. We have the parallel of the Soul
itself in its relation to the Intellectual-Principle and the Divine
Reason, taking shape by these and led so to a nobler principle of form.

Further, a compound in the Intellectual order is not to be confounded
with a compound in the realm of Matter; the Divine Reasons are compounds
and their Act is to produce a compound, namely that \[lower\] Nature
which works towards Idea. And there is not only a difference of
function; there is a still more notable difference of source. Then, too,
the Matter of the realm of process ceaselessly changes its form: in the
eternal, Matter is immutably one and the same, so that the two are
diametrically opposites. The Matter of this realm is all things in turn,
a new entity in every separate case, so that nothing is permanent and
one thing ceaselessly pushes another out of being: Matter has no
identity here. In the Intellectual it is all things at once: and
therefore has nothing to change into: it already and ever contains all.
This means that not even in its own Sphere is the Matter there at any
moment shapeless: no doubt that is true of the Matter here as well; but
shape is held by a very different right in the two orders of Matter.

As to whether Matter is eternal or a thing of process, this will be
clear when we are sure of its precise nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn125)
