[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn188)  [Next](enn190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. Nor would it be sound to condemn this Kosmos as less than beautiful,
as less than the noblest possible in the corporeal; and neither can any
charge be laid against its source.

The world, we must reflect, is a product of Necessity, not of deliberate
purpose: it is due to a higher Kind engendering in its own likeness by a
natural process. And none the less, a second consideration, if a
considered plan brought it into being it would still be no disgrace to
its maker- for it stands a stately whole, complete within itself,
serving at once its own purpose and that of all its parts which, leading
and lesser alike, are of such a nature as to further the interests of
the total. It is, therefore, impossible to condemn the whole on the
merits of the parts which, besides, must be judged only as they enter
harmoniously or not into the whole, the main consideration, quite
overpassing the members which thus cease to have importance. To linger
about the parts is to condemn not the Kosmos but some isolated appendage
of it; in the entire living Being we fasten our eyes on a hair or a toe
neglecting the marvellous spectacle of the complete Man; we ignore all
the tribes and kinds of animals except for the meanest; we pass over an
entire race, humanity, and bring forward- Thersites.

No: this thing that has come into Being is the Kosmos complete: do but
survey it, and surely this is the pleading you will hear:

I am made by a God: from that God I came perfect above all forms of
life, adequate to my function, self-sufficing, lacking nothing: for I am
the container of all, that is, of every plant and every animal, of all
the Kinds of created things, and many Gods and nations of Spirit-Beings
and lofty souls and men happy in their goodness.

And do not think that, while earth is ornate with all its growths and
with living things of every race, and while the very sea has answered to
the power of Soul, do not think that the great air and the ether and the
far-spread heavens remain void of it: there it is that all good Souls
dwell, infusing life into the stars and into that orderly eternal
circuit of the heavens which in its conscious movement ever about the
one Centre, seeking nothing beyond, is a faithful copy of the divine
Mind. And all that is within me strives towards the Good; and each, to
the measure of its faculty, attains. For from that Good all the heavens
depend, with all my own Soul and the Gods that dwell in my every part,
and all that lives and grows, and even all in me that you may judge
inanimate.

But there are degrees of participation: here no more than Existence,
elsewhere Life; and, in Life, sometimes mainly that of Sensation, higher
again that of Reason, finally Life in all its fullness. We have no right
to demand equal powers in the unequal: the finger is not to be asked to
see; there is the eye for that; a finger has its own business- to be
finger and have finger power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn190)
