[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn116)  [Next](enn118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 15

15\. According to Plato, lots and choice play a part \[in the
determination of human conditions\] before the Spindle of Necessity is
turned; that once done, only the Spindle-destiny is valid; it fixes the
chosen conditions irretrievably since the elected guardian-spirit
becomes accessory to their accomplishment.

But what is the significance of the Lots?

By the Lots we are to understand birth into the conditions actually
existent in the All at the particular moment of each entry into body,
birth into such and such a physical frame, from such and such parents,
in this or that place, and generally all that in our phraseology is the
External.

For Particulars and Universals alike it is established that to the first
of those known as the Fates, to Clotho the Spinner, must be due the
unity and as it were interweaving of all that exists: Lachesis presides
over the Lots: to Atropos must necessarily belong the conduct of mundane
events.

Of men, some enter into life as fragments of the All, bound to that
which is external to themselves: they are victims of a sort of
fascination, and are hardly, or not at all, themselves: but others
mastering all this- straining, so to speak, by the head towards the
Higher, to what is outside even the Soul- preserve still the nobility
and the ancient privilege of the Soul's essential being.

For certainly we cannot think of the Soul as a thing whose nature is
just a sum of impressions from outside- as if it, alone, of all that
exists, had no native character.

No: much more than all else, the Soul, possessing the Idea which belongs
to a Principle, must have as its native wealth many powers serving to
the activities of its Kind. It is an Essential-Existent and with this
Existence must go desire and act and the tendency towards some good.

While body and soul stand one combined thing, there is a joint nature, a
definite entity having definite functions and employments; but as soon
as any Soul is detached, its employments are kept apart, its very own:
it ceases to take the body's concerns to itself: it has vision now: body
and soul stand widely apart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](enn118.md)
