[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn104)  [Next](enn106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. Possibly, however, they act not by choice but under stress of their
several positions and collective figures?

But if position and figure determined their action each several one
would necessarily cause identical effects with every other on entering
any given place or pattern.

And that raises the question what effect for good or bad can be produced
upon any one of them by its transit in the parallel of this or that
section of the Zodiac circle- for they are not in the Zodiacal figure
itself but considerably beneath it especially since, whatever point they
touch, they are always in the heavens.

It is absurd to think that the particular grouping under which a star
passes can modify either its character or its earthward influences. And
can we imagine it altered by its own progression as it rises, stands at
centre, declines? Exultant when at centre; dejected or enfeebled in
declension; some raging as they rise and growing benignant as they set,
while declension brings out the best in one among them; surely this
cannot be?

We must not forget that invariably every star, considered in itself, is
at centre with regard to some one given group and in decline with regard
to another and vice versa; and, very certainly, it is not at once happy
and sad, angry and kindly. There is no reasonable escape in representing
some of them as glad in their setting, others in their rising: they
would still be grieving and glad at one and the same time.

Further, why should any distress of theirs work harm to us?

No: we cannot think of them as grieving at all or as being cheerful upon
occasions: they must be continuously serene, happy in the good they
enjoy and the Vision before them. Each lives its own free life; each
finds its Good in its own Act; and this Act is not directed towards us.

Like the birds of augury, the living beings of the heavens, having no
lot or part with us, may serve incidentally to foreshow the future, but
they have absolutely no main function in our regard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn106.md)
