[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn180)  [Next](enn182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. But in fact everything follows its own Kind; the birth is a horse
because it comes from the Horse Kind, a man by springing from the Human
Kind; offspring answers to species. Allow the kosmic circuit its part, a
very powerful influence upon the thing brought into being: allow the
stars a wide material action upon the bodily part of the man, producing
heat and cold and their natural resultants in the physical constitution;
still does such action explain character, vocation and especially all
that seems quite independent of material elements, a man taking to
letters, to geometry, to gambling, and becoming an originator in any of
these pursuits? And can we imagine the stars, divine beings, bestowing
wickedness? And what of a doctrine that makes them wreak vengeance, as
for a wrong, because they are in their decline or are being carried to a
position beneath the earth- as if a decline from our point of view
brought any change to themselves, as if they ever ceased to traverse the
heavenly spheres and to make the same figure around the earth.

Nor may we think that these divine beings lose or gain in goodness as
they see this one or another of the company in various aspects, and that
in their happier position they are benignant to us and, less pleasantly
situated, turn maleficent. We can but believe that their circuit is for
the protection of the entirety of things while they furnish the
incidental service of being letters on which the augur, acquainted with
that alphabet, may look and read the future from their pattern- arriving
at the thing signified by such analogies as that a soaring bird tells of
some lofty event.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn182)
