[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn164)  [Next](enn166.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. Under detailed investigation, many other tenets of this school-
indeed we might say all- could be corrected with an abundance of proof.
But I am withheld by regard for some of our own friends who fell in with
this doctrine before joining our circle and, strangely, still cling to
it.

The school, no doubt, is free-spoken enough- whether in the set purpose
of giving its opinions a plausible colour of verity or in honest belief-
but we are addressing here our own acquaintances, not those people with
whom we could make no way. We have spoken in the hope of preventing our
friends from being perturbed by a party which brings, not proof- how
could it?- but arbitrary, tyrannical assertion; another style of address
would be applicable to such as have the audacity to flout the noble and
true doctrines of the august teachers of antiquity.

That method we will not apply; anyone that has fully grasped the
preceding discussion will know how to meet every point in the system.

Only one other tenet of theirs will be mentioned before passing the
matter; it is one which surpasses all the rest in sheer folly, if that
is the word.

They first maintain that the Soul and a certain "Wisdom" \[Sophia\]
declined and entered this lower sphere though they leave us in doubt of
whether the movement originated in Soul or in this Sophia of theirs, or
whether the two are the same to them- then they tell us that the other
Souls came down in the descent and that these members of Sophia took to
themselves bodies, human bodies, for example.

Yet in the same breath, that very Soul which was the occasion of descent
to the others is declared not to have descended. "It knew no decline,"
but merely illuminated the darkness in such a way that an image of it
was formed upon the Matter. Then, they shape an image of that image
somewhere below- through the medium of Matter or of Materiality or
whatever else of many names they choose to give it in their frequent
change of terms, invented to darken their doctrine- and so they bring
into being what they call the Creator or Demiurge, then this lower is
severed from his Mother \[Sophia\] and becomes the author of the Kosmos
down to the latest of the succession of images constituting it.

Such is the blasphemy of one of their writers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn166.md)
