[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn138)  [Next](enn140.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. A distinction is made between things existing actually and things
existing potentially; a certain Actuality, also, is spoken of as a
really existent entity. We must consider what content there is in these
terms.

Can we distinguish between Actuality \[an absolute, abstract Principle\]
and the state of being-in-act? And if there is such an Actuality, is
this itself in Act, or are the two quite distinct so that this actually
existent thing need not be, itself, an Act?

It is indubitable that Potentiality exists in the Realm of Sense: but
does the Intellectual Realm similarly include the potential or only the
actual? and if the potential exists there, does it remain merely
potential for ever? And, if so, is this resistance to actualization due
to its being precluded \[as a member of the Divine or Intellectual
world\] from time-processes?

First we must make clear what potentiality is.

We cannot think of potentiality as standing by itself; there can be no
potentiality apart from something which a given thing may be or become.
Thus bronze is the potentiality of a statue: but if nothing could be
made out of the bronze, nothing wrought upon it, if it could never be
anything as a future to what it has been, if it rejected all change, it
would be bronze and nothing else: its own character it holds already as
a present thing, and that would be the full of its capacity: it would be
destitute of potentiality. Whatsoever has a potentiality must first have
a character of its own; and its potentiality will consist in its having
a reach beyond that character to some other.

Sometimes after it has turned its potentiality into actuality it will
remain what it was; sometimes it will sink itself to the fullest extent
in the new form and itself disappear: these two different modes are
exemplified in (1) bronze as potentially a statue and (2) water \[=
primal-liquid\] as potentially bronze or, again, air as potentially
fire.

But if this be the significance of potentiality, may we describe it as a
Power towards the thing that is to be? Is the Bronze a power towards a
statue?

Not in the sense of an effectively productive force: such a power could
not be called a potentiality. Of course Potentiality may be a power, as,
for instance, when we are referring not merely to a thing which may be
brought into actualization but to Actuality itself \[the Principle or
Abstract in which potentiality and the power of realizing potentiality
may be thought of as identical\]: but it is better, as more conducive to
clarity, to use "Potentiality" in regard to the process of Actualization
and "Power" in regard to the Principle, Actuality.

Potentiality may be thought of as a Substratum to states and shapes- and
forms which are to be received, which it welcomes by its nature and even
strives for- sometimes in gain but sometimes, also, to loss, to the
annulling of some distinctive manner of Being already actually achieved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn140.md)
