[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn194)  [Next](enn196) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. It would not be just, because Providence cannot be a something
reducing us to nothingness: to think of Providence as everything, with
no other thing in existence, is to annihilate the Universe; such a
providence could have no field of action; nothing would exist except the
Divine. As things are, the Divine, of course, exists, but has reached
forth to something other- not to reduce that to nothingness but to
preside over it; thus in the case of Man, for instance, the Divine
presides as the Providence, preserving the character of human nature,
that is the character of a being under the providential law, which,
again, implies subjection to what that law may enjoin.

And that law enjoins that those who have made themselves good shall know
the best of life, here and later, the bad the reverse. But the law does
not warrant the wicked in expecting that their prayers should bring
others to sacrifice themselves for their sakes; or that the gods should
lay aside the divine life in order to direct their daily concerns; or
that good men, who have chosen a path nobler than all earthly rule,
should become their rulers. The perverse have never made a single effort
to bring the good into authority, nor do they take any steps to improve
themselves; they are all spite against anyone that becomes good of his
own motion, though if good men were placed in authority the total of
goodness would be increased.

In sum: Man has come into existence, a living being but not a member of
the noblest order; he occupies by choice an intermediate rank; still, in
that place in which he exists, Providence does not allow him to be
reduced to nothing; on the contrary he is ever being led upwards by all
those varied devices which the Divine employs in its labour to increase
the dominance of moral value. The human race, therefore, is not deprived
by Providence of its rational being; it retains its share, though
necessarily limited, in wisdom, intelligence, executive power and right
doing, the right doing, at least, of individuals to each other- and even
in wronging others people think they are doing right and only paying
what is due.

Man is, therefore, a noble creation, as perfect as the scheme allows; a
part, no doubt, in the fabric of the All, he yet holds a lot higher than
that of all the other living things of earth.

Now, no one of any intelligence complains of these others, man's
inferiors, which serve to the adornment of the world; it would be feeble
indeed to complain of animals biting man, as if we were to pass our days
asleep. No: the animal, too, exists of necessity, and is serviceable in
many ways, some obvious and many progressively discovered- so that not
one lives without profit to itself and even to humanity. It is
ridiculous, also, to complain that many of them are dangerous- there are
dangerous men abroad as well- and if they distrust us, and in their
distrust attack, is that anything to wonder at?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn196)
