[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn110)  [Next](enn112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. This brings us to the Spindle-destiny, spun according to the
ancients by the Fates. To Plato the Spindle represents the co-operation
of the moving and the stable elements of the kosmic circuit: the Fates
with Necessity, Mother of the Fates, manipulate it and spin at the birth
of every being, so that all comes into existence through Necessity.

In the Timaeus, the creating God bestows the essential of the Soul, but
it is the divinities moving in the kosmos \[the stars\] that infuse the
powerful affections holding from Necessity our impulse and our desire,
our sense of pleasure and of pain- and that lower phase of the Soul in
which such experiences originate. By this statement our personality is
bound up with the stars, whence our Soul \[as total of Principle and
affections\] takes shape; and we are set under necessity at our very
entrance into the world: our temperament will be of the stars' ordering,
and so, therefore, the actions which derive from temperament, and all
the experiences of a nature shaped to impressions.

What, after all this, remains to stand for the "We"?

The "We" is the actual resultant of a Being whose nature includes, with
certain sensibilities, the power of governing them. Cut off as we are by
the nature of the body, God has yet given us, in the midst of all this
evil, virtue the unconquerable, meaningless in a state of tranquil
safety but everything where its absence would be peril of fall.

Our task, then, is to work for our liberation from this sphere, severing
ourselves from all that has gathered about us; the total man is to be
something better than a body ensouled- the bodily element dominant with
a trace of Soul running through it and a resultant life-course mainly of
the body- for in such a combination all is, in fact, bodily. There is
another life, emancipated, whose quality is progression towards the
higher realm, towards the good and divine, towards that Principle which
no one possesses except by deliberate usage but so may appropriate,
becoming, each personally, the higher, the beautiful, the Godlike, and
living, remote, in and by It- unless one choose to go bereaved of that
higher Soul and therefore, to live fate-bound, no longer profiting,
merely, by the significance of the sidereal system but becoming as it
were a part sunken in it and dragged along with the whole thus adopted.

For every human Being is of twofold character; there is that
compromise-total and there is the Authentic Man: and it is so with the
Kosmos as a whole; it is in the one phase a conjunction of body with a
certain form of the Soul bound up in body; in the other phase it is the
Universal Soul, that which is not itself embodied but flashes down its
rays into the embodied Soul: and the same twofold quality belongs to the
Sun and the other members of the heavenly system.

To the remoter Soul, the pure, sun and stars communicate no baseness. In
their efficacy upon the \[material\] All, they act as parts of it, as
ensouled bodies within it; and they act only upon what is partial; body
is the agent while, at the same time, it becomes the vehicle through
which is transmitted something of the star's will and of that authentic
Soul in it which is steadfastly in contemplation of the Highest.

But \[with every allowance to the lower forces\] all follows either upon
that Highest or rather upon the Beings about It- we may think of the
Divine as a fire whose outgoing warmth pervades the Universe- or upon
whatsoever is transmitted by the one Soul \[the divine first Soul\] to
the other, its Kin \[the Soul of any particular being\]. All that is
graceless is admixture. For the Universe is in truth a thing of blend,
and if we separate from it that separable Soul, the residue is little.
The All is a God when the divine Soul is counted in with it; "the rest,"
we read, "is a mighty spirit and its ways are subdivine."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn112)
