[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn131)  [Next](enn133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. "But, given Magnitude and the properties we know, what else can be
necessary to the existence of body?"

Some base to be the container of all the rest.

"A certain mass then; and if mass, then Magnitude? Obviously if your
Base has no Magnitude it offers no footing to any entrant. And suppose
it sizeless; then, what end does it serve? It never helped Idea or
quality; now it ceases to account for differentiation or for magnitude,
though the last, wheresoever it resides, seems to find its way into
embodied entities by way of Matter."

"Or, taking a larger view, observe that actions, productive operations,
periods of time, movements, none of these have any such substratum and
yet are real things; in the same way the most elementary body has no
need of Matter; things may be, all, what they are, each after its own
kind, in their great variety, deriving the coherence of their being from
the blending of the various Ideal-Forms. This Matter with its
sizelessness seems, then, to be a name without a content."

Now, to begin with: extension is not an imperative condition of being a
recipient; it is necessary only where it happens to be a property
inherent to the recipient's peculiar mode of being. The Soul, for
example, contains all things but holds them all in an unextended unity;
if magnitude were one of its attributes it would contain things in
extension. Matter does actually contain in spatial extension what it
takes in; but this is because itself is a potential recipient of spatial
extension: animals and plants, in the same way, as they increase in
size, take quality in parallel development with quantity, and they lose
in the one as the other lessens.

No doubt in the case of things as we know them there is a certain mass
lying ready beforehand to the shaping power: but that is no reason for
expecting bulk in Matter strictly so called; for in such cases Matter is
not the absolute; it is that of some definite object; the Absolute
Matter must take its magnitude, as every other property, from outside
itself.

A thing then need not have magnitude in order to receive form: it may
receive mass with everything else that comes to it at the moment of
becoming what it is to be: a phantasm of mass is enough, a primary
aptness for extension, a magnitude of no content- whence the
identification that has been made of Matter with The Void.

But I prefer to use the word phantasm as hinting the indefiniteness into
which the Soul spills itself when it seeks to communicate with Matter,
finding no possibility of delimiting it, neither encompassing it nor
able to penetrate to any fixed point of it, either of which achievements
would be an act of delimitation.

In other words, we have something which is to be described not as small
or great but as the great-and-small: for it is at once a mass and a
thing without magnitude, in the sense that it is the Matter on which
Mass is based and that, as it changes from great to small and small to
great, it traverses magnitude. Its very undeterminateness is a mass in
the same sense that of being a recipient of Magnitude- though of course
only in the visible object.

In the order of things without Mass, all that is Ideal-Principle
possesses delimitation, each entity for itself, so that the conception
of Mass has no place in them: Matter, not delimited, having in its own
nature no stability, swept into any or every form by turns, ready to go
here, there and everywhere, becomes a thing of multiplicity: driven into
all shapes, becoming all things, it has that much of the character of
mass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn133)
