[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn190)  [Next](enn192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. Now, once Happiness is possible at all to Souls in this Universe, if
some fail of it, the blame must fall not upon the place but upon the
feebleness insufficient to the staunch combat in the one arena where the
rewards of excellence are offered. Men are not born divine; what wonder
that they do not enjoy a divine life. And poverty and sickness mean
nothing to the good- only to the evil are they disastrous- and where
there is body there must be ill health.

Besides, these accidents are not without their service in the
co-ordination and completion of the Universal system.

One thing perishes, and the Kosmic Reason- whose control nothing
anywhere eludes- employs that ending to the beginning of something new;
and, so, when the body suffers and the Soul, under the affliction, loses
power, all that has been bound under illness and evil is brought into a
new set of relations, into another class or order. Some of these
troubles are helpful to the very sufferers- poverty and sickness, for
example- and as for vice, even this brings something to the general
service: it acts as a lesson in right doing, and, in many ways even,
produces good; thus, by setting men face to face with the ways and
consequences of iniquity, it calls them from lethargy, stirs the deeper
mind and sets the understanding to work; by the contrast of the evil
under which wrong-doers labour it displays the worth of the right. Not
that evil exists for this purpose; but, as we have indicated, once the
wrong has come to be, the Reason of the Kosmos employs it to good ends;
and, precisely, the proof of the mightiest power is to be able to use
the ignoble nobly and, given formlessness, to make it the material of
unknown forms.

The principle is that evil by definition is a falling short in good, and
good cannot be at full strength in this Sphere where it is lodged in the
alien: the good here is in something else, in something distinct from
the Good, and this something else constitutes the falling short for it
is not good. And this is why evil is ineradicable: there is, first, the
fact that in relation to this principle of Good, thing will always stand
less than thing, and, besides, all things come into being through it and
are what they are by standing away from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn192)
