[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn195)  [Next](enn197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. But: if the evil in men is involuntary, if their own will has not
made them what they are, how can we either blame wrong-doers or even
reproach their victims with suffering through their own fault?

If there is a Necessity, bringing about human wickedness either by force
of the celestial movement or by a rigorous sequence set up by the First
Cause, is not the evil a thin rooted in Nature? And if thus the
Reason-Principle of the universe is the creator of evil, surely all is
injustice?

No: Men are no doubt involuntary sinners in the sense that they do not
actually desire to sin; but this does not alter the fact that
wrongdoers, of their own choice, are, themselves, the agents; it is
because they themselves act that the sin is in their own; if they were
not agents they could not sin.

The Necessity \[held to underlie human wickedness\] is not an outer
force \[actually compelling the individual\], but exists only in the
sense of a universal relationship.

Nor is the force of the celestial Movement such as to leave us
powerless: if the universe were something outside and apart from us it
would stand as its makers willed so that, once the gods had done their
part, no man, however impious, could introduce anything contrary to
their intention. But, as things are, efficient act does come from men:
given the starting Principle, the secondary line, no doubt, is
inevitably completed; but each and every principle contributes towards
the sequence. Now Men are Principles, or, at least, they are moved by
their characteristic nature towards all that is good, and that nature is
a Principle, a freely acting cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn197.md)
