[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn181)  [Next](enn183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. It remains to notice the theory of the one Causing-Principle alleged
to interweave everything with everything else, to make things into a
chain, to determine the nature and condition of each phenomenon- a
Principle which, acting through seminal Reason-Forms- Logoi Spermatikoi-
elaborates all that exists and happens.

The doctrine is close to that which makes the Soul of the Universe the
source and cause of all condition and of all movement whether without
or- supposing that we are allowed as individuals some little power
towards personal act- within ourselves.

But it is the theory of the most rigid and universal Necessity: all the
causative forces enter into the system, and so every several phenomenon
rises necessarily; where nothing escapes Destiny, nothing has power to
check or to change. Such forces beating upon us, as it were, from one
general cause leave us no resource but to go where they drive. All our
ideas will be determined by a chain of previous causes; our doings will
be determined by those ideas; personal action becomes a mere word. That
we are the agents does not save our freedom when our action is
prescribed by those causes; we have precisely what belongs to everything
that lives, to infants guided by blind impulses, to lunatics; all these
act; why, even fire acts; there is act in everything that follows the
plan of its being, servilely.

No one that sees the implications of this theory can hesitate: unable to
halt at such a determinant principle, we seek for other explanations of
our action.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn183.md)
