[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn171)  [Next](enn173.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 17

17\. Perhaps the hate of this school for the corporeal is due to their
reading of Plato who inveighs against body as a grave hindrance to Soul
and pronounces the corporeal to be characteristically the inferior.

Then let them for the moment pass over the corporeal element in the
Universe and study all that still remains.

They will think of the Intellectual Sphere which includes within itself
the Ideal-Form realized in the Kosmos. They will think of the Souls, in
their ordered rank, that produce incorporeal magnitude and lead the
Intelligible out towards spatial extension, so that finally the thing of
process becomes, by its magnitude, as adequate a representation as
possible of the principle void of parts which is its model- the
greatness of power there being translated here into greatness of bulk.
Then whether they think of the Kosmic Sphere \[the All-Soul\] as already
in movement under the guidance of that power of God which holds it
through and through, beginning and middle and end, or whether they
consider it as in rest and exercising as yet no outer governance: either
approach will lead to a true appreciation of the Soul that conducts this
Universe.

Now let them set body within it- not in the sense that Soul suffers any
change but that, since "In the Gods there can be no grudging," it gives
to its inferior all that any partial thing has strength to receive and
at once their conception of the Kosmos must be revised; they cannot deny
that the Soul of the Kosmos has exercised such a weight of power as to
have brought the corporeal-principle, in itself unlovely, to partake of
good and beauty to the utmost of its receptivity- and to a pitch which
stirs Souls, beings of the divine order.

These people may no doubt say that they themselves feel no such
stirring, and that they see no difference between beautiful and ugly
forms of body; but, at that, they can make no distinction between the
ugly and the beautiful in conduct; sciences can have no beauty; there
can be none in thought; and none, therefore, in God. This world descends
from the Firsts: if this world has no beauty, neither has its Source;
springing thence, this world, too, must have its beautiful things. And
while they proclaim their contempt for earthly beauty, they would do
well to ignore that of youths and women so as not to be overcome by
incontinence.

In fine, we must consider that their self-satisfaction could not turn
upon a contempt for anything indisputably base; theirs is the perverse
pride of despising what was once admired.

We must always keep in mind that the beauty in a partial thing cannot be
identical with that in a whole; nor can any several objects be as
stately as the total.

And we must recognize, that, even in the world of sense and part, there
are things of a loveliness comparable to that of the Celestials- forms
whose beauty must fill us with veneration for their creator and convince
us of their origin in the divine, forms which show how ineffable is the
beauty of the Supreme since they cannot hold us but we must, though in
all admiration, leave these for those. Further, wherever there is
interior beauty, we may be sure that inner and outer correspond; where
the interior is vile, all is brought low by that flaw in the dominants.

Nothing base within can be beautiful without- at least not with an
authentic beauty, for there are examples of a good exterior not sprung
from a beauty dominant within; people passing as handsome but
essentially base have that, a spurious and superficial beauty: if anyone
tells me he has seen people really fine-looking but interiorly vile, I
can only deny it; we have here simply a false notion of personal beauty;
unless, indeed, the inner vileness were an accident in a nature
essentially fine; in this Sphere there are many obstacles to
self-realization.

In any case the All is beautiful, and there can be no obstacle to its
inner goodness: where the nature of a thing does not comport perfection
from the beginning, there may be a failure in complete expression; there
may even be a fall to vileness, but the All never knew a childlike
immaturity; it never experienced a progress bringing novelty into it; it
never had bodily growth: there was nowhere from whence it could take
such increment; it was always the All-Container.

And even for its Soul no one could imagine any such a path of process:
or, if this were conceded, certainly it could not be towards evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](enn173.md)
