[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn126)  [Next](enn128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. We are led thus to the question of receptivity in things of body.

An additional proof that bodies must have some substratum different from
themselves is found in the changing of the basic-constituents into one
another. Notice that the destruction of the elements passing over is not
complete- if it were we would have a Principle of Being wrecked in
Non-being- nor does an engendered thing pass from utter non-being into
Being: what happens is that a new form takes the place of an old. There
is, then, a stable element, that which puts off one form to receive the
form of the incoming entity.

The same fact is clearly established by decay, a process implying a
compound object; where there is decay there is a distinction between
Matter and Form.

And the reasoning which shows the destructible to be a compound is borne
out by practical examples of reduction: a drinking vessel is reduced to
its gold, the gold to liquid; analogy forces us to believe that the
liquid too is reducible.

The basic-constituents of things must be either their Form-Idea or that
Primal Matter \[of the Intelligible\] or a compound of the Form and
Matter.

Form-Idea, pure and simple, they cannot be: for without Matter how could
things stand in their mass and magnitude?

Neither can they be that Primal Matter, for they are not indestructible.

They must, therefore, consist of Matter and Form-Idea- Form for quality
and shape, Matter for the base, indeterminate as being other than Idea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn128)
