[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn105)  [Next](enn107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. It is again not in reason that a particular star should be gladdened
by seeing this or that other while, in a second couple, such an aspect
is distressing: what enmities can affect such beings? what causes of
enmity can there be among them?

And why should there be any difference as a given star sees certain
others from the corner of a triangle or in opposition or at the angle of
a square?

Why, again, should it see its fellow from some one given position and
yet, in the next Zodiacal figure, not see it, though the two are
actually nearer?

And, the cardinal question; by what conceivable process could they
affect what is attributed to them? How explain either the action of any
single star independently or, still more perplexing, the effect of their
combined intentions?

We cannot think of them entering into compromises, each renouncing
something of its efficiency and their final action in our regard
amounting to a concerted plan.

No one star would suppress the contribution of another, nor would star
yield to star and shape its conduct under suasion.

As for the fancy that while one is glad when it enters another's region,
the second is vexed when in its turn it occupies the place of the first,
surely this is like starting with the supposition of two friends and
then going on to talk of one being attracted to the other who, however,
abhors the first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn107.md)
