[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn276)  [Next](enn278.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. "The Intellectual-Principle" \[= the Divine Mind\]- we read \[in the
Timaeus\]- "looks upon the Ideas indwelling in that Being which is the
Essentially Living \[= according to Plotinus, the Intellectual Realm\],
"and then"- the text proceeds- "the Creator judged that all the content
of that essentially living Being must find place in this lower universe
also."

Are we meant to gather that the Ideas came into being before the
Intellectual-Principle so that it "sees them" as previously existent?

The first step is to make sure whether the "Living Being" of the text is
to be distinguished from the Intellectual-Principle as another thing
than it.

It might be argued that the Intellectual-Principle is the Contemplator
and therefore that the Living-Being contemplated is not the
Intellectual-Principle but must be described as the Intellectual Object
so that the Intellectual-Principle must possess the Ideal realm as
something outside of itself.

But this would mean that it possesses images and not the realities,
since the realities are in the Intellectual Realm which it contemplates:
Reality- we read- is in the Authentic Existent which contains the
essential form of particular things.

No: even though the Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Object
are distinct, they are not apart except for just that distinction.

Nothing in the statement cited is inconsistent with the conception that
these two constitute one substance- though, in a unity, admitting that
distinction, of the intellectual act \[as against passivity\], without
which there can be no question of an Intellectual-Principle and an
Intellectual Object: what is meant is not that the contemplatory Being
possesses its vision as in some other principle, but that it contains
the Intellectual Realm within itself.

The Intelligible Object is the Intellectual-Principle itself in its
repose, unity, immobility: the Intellectual-Principle, contemplator of
that object- of the Intellectual-Principle thus in repose is an active
manifestation of the same Being, an Act which contemplates its unmoved
phase and, as thus contemplating, stands as Intellectual-Principle to
that of which it has the intellection: it is Intellectual-Principle in
virtue of having that intellection, and at the same time is Intellectual
Object, by assimilation.

This, then, is the Being which planned to create in the lower Universe
what it saw existing in the Supreme, the four orders of living beings.

No doubt the passage: \[of the Timaeus\] seems to imply tacitly that
this planning Principle is distinct from the other two: but the three-
the Essentially-Living, the Intellectual-Principle and this planning
Principle will, to others, be manifestly one: the truth is that, by a
common accident, a particular trend of thought has occasioned the
discrimination.

We have dealt with the first two; but the third- this Principle which
decides to work upon the objects \[the Ideas\] contemplated by the
Intellectual-Principle within the Essentially-Living, to create them, to
establish them in their partial existence- what is this third?

It is possible that in one aspect the Intellectual-Principle is the
principle of partial existence, while in another aspect it is not.

The entities thus particularized from the unity are products of the
Intellectual-Principle which thus would be, to that extent, the
separating agent. On the other hand it remains in itself, indivisible;
division begins with its offspring which, of course, means with Souls:
and thus a Soul- with its particular Souls- may be the separative
principle.

This is what is conveyed where we are told that the separation is the
work of the third Principle and begins within the Third: for to this
Third belongs the discursive reasoning which is no function of the
Intellectual-Principle but characteristic of its secondary, of Soul, to
which precisely, divided by its own Kind, belongs the Act of division.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn278.md)
