[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn248)  [Next](enn250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. The Ideal Principle possessing the Intellection \[= Idea, Noesis\]
of Magnitude- assuming that this Intellection is of such power as not
merely to subsist within itself but to be urged outward as it were by
the intensity of its life- will necessarily realize itself in a Kind \[=
Matter\] not having its being in the Intellective Principle, not
previously possessing the Idea of Magnitude or any trace of that Idea or
any other.

What then will it produce \[in this Matter\] by virtue of that power?

Not horse or cow: these are the product of other Ideas.

No: this Principle comes from the source of Magnitude \[= is primal
"Magnitude"\] and therefore Matter can have no extension, in which to
harbour the Magnitude of the Principle, but can take in only its
reflected appearance.

To the thing which does not enjoy Magnitude in the sense of having
mass-extension in its own substance and parts, the only possibility is
that it present some partial semblance of Magnitude, such as being
continuous, not here and there and everywhere, that its parts be related
within it and ungapped. An adequate reflection of a great mass cannot be
produced in a small space- mere size prevents- but the greater, pursuing
the hope of that full self-presentment, makes progress towards it and
brings about a nearer approach to adequate mirroring in the parallel
from which it can never withhold its radiation: thus it confers
Magnitude upon that \[= Matter\] which has none and cannot even muster
up the appearance of having any, and the visible resultant exhibits the
Magnitude of mass.

Matter, then, wears Magnitude as a dress thrown about it by its
association with that Absolute Magnitude to whose movement it must
answer; but it does not, for that, change its Kind; if the Idea which
has clothed it were to withdraw, it would once again be what it
permanently is, what it is by its own strength, or it would have
precisely the Magnitude lent to it by any other form that happens to be
present in it.

The \[Universal\] Soul- containing the Ideal Principles of Real-Beings,
and itself an Ideal Principle- includes all in concentration within
itself, just as the Ideal Principle of each particular entity is
complete and self-contained: it, therefore, sees these principles of
sensible things because they are turned, as it were, towards it and
advancing to it: but it cannot harbour them in their plurality, for it
cannot depart from its Kind; it sees them, therefore, stripped of Mass.
Matter, on the contrary, destitute of resisting power since it has no
Act of its own and is a mere shadow, can but accept all that an active
power may choose to send. In what is thus sent, from the
Reason-Principle in the Intellectual Realm, there is already contained a
degree of the partial object that is to be formed: in the image-making
impulse within the Reason-Principle there is already a step \[towards
the lower manifestation\] or we may put it that the downward movement
from the Reason-Principle is a first form of the partial: utter absence
of partition would mean no movement but \[sterile\] repose. Matter
cannot be the home of all things in concentration as the Soul is: if it
were so, it would belong to the Intellective Sphere. It must be
all-recipient but not in that partless mode. It is to be the Place of
all things, and it must therefore extend universally, offer itself to
all things, serve to all interval: thus it will be a thing unconfined to
any moment \[of space or time\] but laid out in submission to all that
is to be.

But would we not expect that some one particularized form should occupy
Matter \[at once\] and so exclude such others as are not able to enter
into combination?

No: for there is no first Idea except the Ideal Principle of the
Universe- and, by this Idea, Matter is \[the seat of\] all things at
once and of the particular thing in its parts- for the Matter of a
living being is disparted according to the specific parts of the
organism: if there were no such partition nothing would exist but the
Reason-Principle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](enn250)
