[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn208)  [Next](enn210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. If man were all of one piece- I mean, if he were nothing more than a
made thing, acting and acted upon according to a fixed nature- he could
be no more subject to reproach and punishment than the mere animals. But
as the scheme holds, man is singled out for condemnation when he does
evil; and this with justice. For he is no mere thing made to rigid plan;
his nature contains a Principle apart and free.

This does not, however, stand outside of Providence or of the Reason of
the All; the Over-World cannot be dependent upon the World of Sense. The
higher shines down upon the lower, and this illumination is Providence
in its highest aspect: The Reason-Principle has two phases, one which
creates the things of process and another which links them with the
higher beings: these higher beings constitute the over-providence on
which depends that lower providence which is the secondary
Reason-Principle inseparably united with its primal: the two- the Major
and Minor Providence- acting together produce the universal woof, the
one all-comprehensive Providence.

Men possess, then, a distinctive Principle: but not all men turn to
account all that is in their Nature; there are men that live by one
Principle and men that live by another or, rather, by several others,
the least noble. For all these Principles are present even when not
acting upon the man- though we cannot think of them as lying idle;
everything performs its function.

"But," it will be said, "what reason can there be for their not acting
upon the man once they are present; inaction must mean absence?"

We maintain their presence always, nothing void of them.

But surely not where they exercise no action? If they necessarily reside
in all men, surely they must be operative in all- this Principle of free
action, especially.

First of all, this free Principle is not an absolute possession of the
animal Kinds and is not even an absolute possession to all men.

So this Principle is not the only effective force in all men?

There is no reason why it should not be. There are men in whom it alone
acts, giving its character to the life while all else is but Necessity
\[and therefore outside of blame\].

For \[in the case of an evil life\] whether it is that the constitution
of the man is such as to drive him down the troubled paths or whether
\[the fault is mental or spiritual in that\] the desires have gained
control, we are compelled to attribute the guilt to the substratum
\[something inferior to the highest principle in Man\]. We would be
naturally inclined to say that this substratum \[the responsible source
of evil\] must be Matter and not, as our argument implies, the
Reason-Principle; it would appear that not the Reason-Principle but
Matter were the dominant, crude Matter at the extreme and then Matter as
shaped in the realized man: but we must remember that to this free
Principle in man \[which is a phase of the All Soul\] the Substratum
\[the direct inferior to be moulded\] is \[not Matter but\] the
Reason-Principle itself with whatever that produces and moulds to its
own form, so that neither crude Matter nor Matter organized in our human
total is sovereign within us.

The quality now manifested may be probably referred to the conduct of a
former life; we may suppose that previous actions have made the
Reason-Principle now governing within us inferior in radiance to that
which ruled before; the Soul which later will shine out again is for the
present at a feebler power.

And any Reason-Principle may be said to include within itself the
Reason-Principle of Matter which therefore it is able to elaborate to
its own purposes, either finding it consonant with itself or bestowing
upon it the quality which makes it so. The Reason-Principle of an ox
does not occur except in connection with the Matter appropriate to the
ox-Kind. It must be by such a process that the transmigration, of which
we read takes place; the Soul must lose its nature, the Reason-Principle
be transformed; thus there comes the ox-soul which once was Man.

The degradation, then, is just.

Still, how did the inferior Principle ever come into being, and how does
the higher fall to it?

Once more- not all things are Firsts; there are Secondaries and
Tertiaries, of a nature inferior to that of their Priors; and a slight
tilt is enough to determine the departure from the straight course.
Further, the linking of any one being with any other amounts to a
blending such as to produce a distinct entity, a compound of the two; it
is not that the greater and prior suffers any diminution of its own
nature; the lesser and secondary is such from its very beginning; it is
in its own nature the lesser thing it becomes, and if it suffers the
consequences, such suffering is merited: all our reasonings on these
questions must take account of previous living as the source from which
the present takes its rise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn210)
