[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn272)  [Next](enn274.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. From this basis we proceed:

In the advancing stages of Contemplation rising from that in Nature, to
that in the Soul and thence again to that in the Intellectual-Principle
itself- the object contemplated becomes progressively a more and more
intimate possession of the Contemplating Beings, more and more one thing
with them; and in the advanced Soul the objects of knowledge, well on
the way towards the Intellectual-Principle, are close to identity with
their container.

Hence we may conclude that, in the Intellectual-Principle Itself, there
is complete identity of Knower and Known, and this not by way of
domiciliation, as in the case of even the highest soul, but by Essence,
by the fact that, there, no distinction exists between Being and
Knowing; we cannot stop at a principle containing separate parts; there
must always be a yet higher, a principle above all such diversity.

The Supreme must be an entity in which the two are one; it will,
therefore, be a Seeing that lives, not an object of vision like things
existing in something other than themselves: what exists in an outside
element is some mode of living-thing; it is not the Self-Living.

Now admitting the existence of a living thing that is at once a Thought
and its object, it must be a Life distinct from the vegetative or
sensitive life or any other life determined by Soul.

In a certain sense no doubt all lives are thoughts- but qualified as
thought vegetative, thought sensitive and thought psychic.

What, then, makes them thoughts?

The fact that they are Reason-Principles. Every life is some form of
thought, but of a dwindling clearness like the degrees of life itself.
The first and clearest Life and the first Intelligence are one Being.
The First Life, then, is an Intellection and the next form of Life is
the next Intellection and the last form of Life is the last form of
Intellection. Thus every Life, of the order strictly so called, is an
Intellection.

But while men may recognize grades in life they reject grade in thought;
to them there are thoughts \[full and perfect\] and anything else is no
thought.

This is simply because they do not seek to establish what Life is.

The essential is to observe that, here again, all reasoning shows that
whatever exists is a bye-work of visioning: if, then, the truest Life is
such by virtue of an Intellection and is identical with the truest
Intellection, then the truest Intellection is a living being;
Contemplation and its object constitute a living thing, a Life, two
inextricably one.

The duality, thus, is a unity; but how is this unity also a plurality?

The explanation is that in a unity there can be no seeing \[a pure unity
has no room for vision and an object\]; and in its Contemplation the One
is not acting as a Unity; if it were, the Intellectual-Principle cannot
exist. The Highest began as a unity but did not remain as it began; all
unknown to itself, it became manifold; it grew, as it were, pregnant:
desiring universal possession, it flung itself outward, though it were
better had it never known the desire by which a Secondary came into
being: it is like a Circle \[in the Idea\] which in projection becomes a
figure, a surface, a circumference, a centre, a system of radii, of
upper and lower segments. The Whence is the better; the Whither is less
good: the Whence is not the same as the Whence-followed-by-a-Whither;
the Whence all alone is greater than with the Whither added to it.

The Intellectual-Principle on the other hand was never merely the
Principle of an inviolable unity; it was a universal as well and, being
so, was the Intellectual-Principle of all things. Being, thus, all
things and the Principle of all, it must essentially include this part
of itself \[this element-of-plurality\] which is universal and is all
things: otherwise, it contains a part which is not
Intellectual-Principle: it will be a juxtaposition of non-Intellectuals,
a huddled heap waiting to be made over from the mass of things into the
Intellectual-Principle!

We conclude that this Being is limitless and that, in all the outflow
from it, there is no lessening either in its emanation, since this also
is the entire universe, nor in itself, the starting point, since it is
no assemblage of parts \[to be diminished by any outgo\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn274.md)
