[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn254)  [Next](enn256.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. We must, however, avoid thinking of it as an accidental from outside
grafted upon that Nature: it is native to it, integral to it.

It is discerned as present essentially in that Nature like everything
else that we can predicate There- all immanent, springing from that
Essence and inherent to that Essence. For whatsoever has primal Being
must be immanent to the Firsts and be a First-Eternity equally with The
Good that is among them and of them and equally with the truth that is
among them.

In one aspect, no doubt, Eternity resides in a partial phase of the
All-Being; but in another aspect it is inherent in the All taken as a
totality, since that Authentic All is not a thing patched up out of
external parts, but is authentically an all because its parts are
engendered by itself. It is like the truthfulness in the Supreme which
is not an agreement with some outside fact or being but is inherent in
each member about which it is the truth. To an authentic All it is not
enough that it be everything that exists: it must possess allness in the
full sense that nothing whatever is absent from it. Then nothing is in
store for it: if anything were to come, that thing must have been
lacking to it, and it was, therefore, not All. And what, of a Nature
contrary to its own, could enter into it when it is \[the Supreme and
therefore\] immune? Since nothing can accrue to it, it cannot seek
change or be changed or ever have made its way into Being.

Engendered things are in continuous process of acquisition; eliminate
futurity, therefore, and at once they lose their being; if the
non-engendered are made amenable to futurity they are thrown down from
the seat of their existence, for, clearly, existence is not theirs by
their nature if it appears only as a being about to be, a becoming, an
advancing from stage to stage.

The essential existence of generated things seems to lie in their
existing from the time of their generation to the ultimate of time after
which they cease to be: but such an existence is compact of futurity,
and the annulment of that futurity means the stopping of the life and
therefore of the essential existence.

Such a stoppage would be true, also, of the \[generated\] All in so far
as it is a thing of process and change: for this reason it keeps
hastening towards its future, dreading to rest, seeking to draw Being to
itself by a perpetual variety of production and action and by its
circling in a sort of ambition after Essential Existence.

And here we have, incidentally, lighted upon the cause of the Circuit of
the All; it is a movement which seeks perpetuity by way of futurity.

The Primals, on the contrary, in their state of blessedness have no such
aspiration towards anything to come: they are the whole, now; what life
may be thought of as their due, they possess entire; they, therefore,
seek nothing, since there is nothing future to them, nothing external to
them in which any futurity could find lodgement.

Thus the perfect and all-comprehensive essence of the Authentic Existent
does not consist merely in the completeness inherent in its members; its
essence includes, further, its established immunity from all lack with
the exclusion, also, of all that is without Being- for not only must all
things be contained in the All and Whole, but it can contain nothing
that is, or was ever, non-existent- and this State and Nature of the
Authentic Existent is Eternity: in our very word, Eternity means
Ever-Being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn256.md)
