[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn223)  [Next](enn225.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. Does each individual Soul, then, contain within itself such a Love
in essence and substantial reality?

Since not only the pure All-Soul but also that of the Universe contain
such a Love, it would be difficult to explain why our personal Soul
should not. It must be so, even, with all that has life.

This indwelling love is no other than the Spirit which, as we are told,
walks with every being, the affection dominant in each several nature.
It implants the characteristic desire; the particular Soul, strained
towards its own natural objects, brings forth its own Eros, the guiding
spirit realizing its worth and the quality of its Being.

As the All-Soul contains the Universal Love, so must the single Soul be
allowed its own single Love: and as closely as the single Soul holds to
the All-Soul, never cut off but embraced within it, the two together
constituting one principle of life, so the single separate Love holds to
the All-Love. Similarly, the individual love keeps with the individual
Soul as that other, the great Love, goes with the All-Soul; and the Love
within the All permeates it throughout so that the one Love becomes
many, showing itself where it chooses at any moment of the Universe,
taking definite shape in these its partial phases and revealing itself
at its will.

In the same way we must conceive many Aphrodites in the All, Spirits
entering it together with Love, all emanating from an Aphrodite of the
All, a train of particular Aphrodites dependent upon the first, and each
with the particular Love in attendance: this multiplicity cannot be
denied, if Soul be the mother of Love, and Aphrodite mean Soul, and Love
be an act of a Soul seeking good.

This Love, then, leader of particular Souls to The Good, is twofold: the
Love in the loftier Soul would be a god ever linking the Soul to the
divine; the Love in the mingling Soul will be a celestial spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn225.md)
