[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn290)  [Next](enn292) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. But what place is left for the particular souls, yours and mine and
another's?

May we suppose the Soul to be appropriated on the lower ranges to some
individual, but to belong on the higher to that other sphere?

At this there would be a Socrates as long as Socrates' soul remained in
body; but Socrates ceases to exist, precisely on attainment of the
highest.

Now nothing of Real Being is ever annulled.

In the Supreme, the Intellectual-Principles are not annulled, for in
their differentiation there is no bodily partition, no passing of each
separate phase into a distinct unity; every such phase remains in full
possession of that identical being. It is exactly so with the souls.

By their succession they are linked to the several
Intellectual-Principles, for they are the expression, the Logos, of the
Intellectual-Principles, of which they are the unfolding; brevity has
opened out to multiplicity; by that point of their being which least
belongs to the partial order, they are attached each to its own
Intellectual original: they have already chosen the way of division; but
to the extreme they cannot go; thus they keep, at once, identification
and difference; each soul is permanently a unity \[a self\] and yet all
are, in their total, one being.

Thus the gist of the matter is established: one soul the source of all;
those others, as a many founded in that one, are, on the analogy of the
Intellectual-Principle, at once divided and undivided; that Soul which
abides in the Supreme is the one expression or Logos of the
Intellectual-Principle, and from it spring other Reason-Principles,
partial but immaterial, exactly as in the differentiation of the
Supreme.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn292)
