[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn238)  [Next](enn240.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. It is a general principle that, to be modified, an object must be
opposed in faculty, and in quality to the forces that enter and act upon
it.

Thus where heat is present, the change comes by something that chills,
where damp by some drying agency: we say a subject is modified when from
warm it becomes cold, from dry wet.

A further evidence is in our speaking of a fire being burned out, when
it has passed over into another element; we do not say that the Matter
has been burned out: in other words, modification affects what is
subject to dissolution; the acceptance of modification is the path
towards dissolution; susceptibility to modification and susceptibility
to dissolution go necessarily together. But Matter can never be
dissolved. What into? By what process?

Still: Matter harbours heat, cold, qualities beyond all count; by these
it is differentiated; it holds them as if they were of its very
substance and they blend within it- since no quality is found isolated
to itself- Matter lies there as the meeting ground of all these
qualities with their changes as they act and react in the blend: how,
then, can it fail to be modified in keeping? The only escape would be to
declare Matter utterly and for ever apart from the qualities it
exhibits; but the very notion of Substance implies that any and every
thing present in it has some action upon it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn240.md)
