[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn255)  [Next](enn257.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. This Ever-Being is realized when upon examination of an object I am
able to say- or rather, to know- that in its very Nature it is incapable
of increment or change; anything that fails by that test is no
Ever-Existent or, at least, no Ever-All-Existent.

But is perpetuity enough in itself to constitute an Eternal?

No: the object must, farther, include such a Nature-Principle as to give
the assurance that the actual state excludes all future change, so that
it is found at every observation as it always was.

Imagine, then, the state of a being which cannot fall away from the
vision of this but is for ever caught to it, held by the spell of its
grandeur, kept to it by virtue of a nature itself unfailing- or even the
state of one that must labour towards Eternity by directed effort, but
then to rest in it, immoveable at any point assimilated to it,
co-eternal with it, contemplating Eternity and the Eternal by what is
Eternal within the self.

Accepting this as a true account of an eternal, a perdurable Existent-
one which never turns to any Kind outside itself, that possesses life
complete once for all, that has never received any accession, that is
now receiving none and will never receive any- we have, with the
statement of a perduring Being, the statement also of perdurance and of
Eternity: perdurance is the corresponding state arising from the
\[divine\] substratum and inherent in it; Eternity \[the Principle as
distinguished from the property of everlastingness\] is that substratum
carrying that state in manifestation.

Eternity, thus, is of the order of the supremely great; it proves on
investigation to be identical with God: it may fitly be described as God
made manifest, as God declaring what He is, as existence without jolt or
change, and therefore as also the firmly living.

And it should be no shock that we find plurality in it; each of the
Beings of the Supreme is multiple by virtue of unlimited force; for to
be limitless implies failing at no point, and Eternity is pre-eminently
the limitless since (having no past or future) it spends nothing of its
own substance.

Thus a close enough definition of Eternity would be that it is a life
limitless in the full sense of being all the life there is and a life
which, knowing nothing of past or future to shatter its completeness,
possesses itself intact for ever. To the notion of a Life (a
Living-Principle) all-comprehensive add that it never spends itself, and
we have the statement of a Life instantaneously infinite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn257.md)
