[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn271)  [Next](enn273) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Certain Principles, then, we may take to be established- some
self-evident, others brought out by our treatment above:

All the forms of Authentic Existence spring from vision and are a
vision. Everything that springs from these Authentic Existences in their
vision is an object of vision-manifest to sensation or to true knowledge
or to surface-awareness. All act aims at this knowing; all impulse is
towards knowledge, all that springs from vision exists to produce
Ideal-Form, that is a fresh object of vision, so that universally, as
images of their engendering principles, they all produce objects of
vision, Ideal-forms. In the engendering of these sub-existences,
imitations of the Authentic, it is made manifest that the creating
powers operate not for the sake of creation and action but in order to
produce an object of vision. This same vision is the ultimate purpose of
all the acts of the mind and, even further downward, of all sensation,
since sensation also is an effort towards knowledge; lower still,
Nature, producing similarly its subsequent principle, brings into being
the vision and Idea that we know in it. It is certain, also, that as the
Firsts exist in vision all other things must be straining towards the
same condition; the starting point is, universally, the goal.

When living things reproduce their Kind, it is that the
Reason-Principles within stir them; the procreative act is the
expression of a contemplation, a travail towards the creation of many
forms, many objects of contemplation, so that the universe may be filled
full with Reason-Principles and that contemplation may be, as nearly as
possible, endless: to bring anything into being is to produce an
Idea-Form and that again is to enrich the universe with contemplation:
all the failures, alike in being and in doing, are but the swerving of
visionaries from the object of vision: in the end the sorriest craftsman
is still a maker of forms, ungracefully. So Love, too, is vision with
the pursuit of Ideal-Form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn273)
