[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn232)  [Next](enn234.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. Let us begin with virtue and vice in the Soul. What has really
occurred when, as we say, vice is present? In speaking of extirpating
evil and implanting goodness, of introducing order and beauty to replace
a former ugliness, we talk in terms of real things in the Soul.

Now when we make virtue a harmony, and vice a breach of harmony, we
accept an opinion approved by the ancients; and the theory helps us
decidedly to our solution. For if virtue is simply a natural concordance
among the phases of the Soul, and vice simply a discord, then there is
no further question of any foreign presence; harmony would be the result
of every distinct phase or faculty joining in, true to itself; discord
would mean that not all chimed in at their best and truest. Consider,
for example, the performers in a choral dance; they sing together though
each one has his particular part, and sometimes one voice is heard while
the others are silent; and each brings to the chorus something of his
own; it is not enough that all lift their voices together; each must
sing, choicely, his own part to the music set for him. Exactly so in the
case of the Soul; there will be harmony when each faculty performs its
appropriate part.

Yes: but this very harmony constituting the virtue of the Soul must
depend upon a previous virtue, that of each several faculty within
itself; and before there can be the vice of discord there must be the
vice of the single parts, and these can be bad only by the actual
presence of vice as they can be good only by the presence of virtue. It
is true that no presence is affirmed when vice is identified with
ignorance in the reasoning faculty of the Soul; ignorance is not a
positive thing; but in the presence of false judgements- the main cause
of vice- must it not be admitted that something positive has entered
into the Soul, something perverting the reasoning faculty? So, the
initiative faculty; is it not, itself, altered as one varies between
timidity and boldness? And the desiring faculty, similarly, as it runs
wild or accepts control?

Our teaching is that when the particular faculty is sound it performs
the reasonable act of its essential nature, obeying the reasoning
faculty in it which derives from the Intellectual Principle and
communicates to the rest. And this following of reason is not the
acceptance of an imposed shape; it is like using the eyes; the Soul sees
by its act, that of looking towards reason. The faculty of sight in the
performance of its act is essentially what it was when it lay latent;
its act is not a change in it, but simply its entering into the relation
that belongs to its essential character; it knows- that is, sees-
without suffering any change: so, precisely, the reasoning phase of the
Soul stands towards the Intellectual Principle; this it sees by its very
essence; this vision is its knowing faculty; it takes in no stamp, no
impression; all that enters it is the object of vision- possessed, once
more, without possession; it possesses by the fact of knowing but
"without possession" in the sense that there is no incorporation of
anything left behind by the object of vision, like the impression of the
seal on sealing-wax.

And note that we do not appeal to stored-up impressions to account for
memory: we think of the mind awakening its powers in such a way as to
possess something not present to it.

Very good: but is it not different before and after acquiring the
memory?

Be it so; but it has suffered no change- unless we are to think of the
mere progress from latency to actuality as change- nothing has been
introduced into the mind; it has simply achieved the Act dictated by its
nature.

It is universally true that the characteristic Act of immaterial
entities is performed without any change in them- otherwise they would
at last be worn away- theirs is the Act of the unmoving; where act means
suffering change, there is Matter: an immaterial Being would have no
ground of permanence if its very Act changed it.

Thus in the case of Sight, the seeing faculty is in act but the material
organ alone suffers change: judgements are similar to visual
experiences.

But how explain the alternation of timidity and daring in the initiative
faculty?

Timidity would come by the failure to look towards the Reason-Principle
or by looking towards some inferior phase of it or by some defect in the
organs of action- some lack or flaw in the bodily equipment- or by
outside prevention of the natural act or by the mere absence of adequate
stimulus: boldness would arise from the reverse conditions: neither
implies any change, or even any experience, in the Soul.

So with the faculty of desire: what we call loose living is caused by
its acting unaccompanied; it has done all of itself; the other
faculties, whose business it is to make their presence felt in control
and to point the right way, have lain in abeyance; the Seer in the Soul
was occupied elsewhere, for, though not always at least sometimes, it
has leisure for a certain degree of contemplation of other concerns.

Often, moreover, the vice of the desiring faculty will be merely some
ill condition of the body, and its virtue, bodily soundness; thus there
would again be no question of anything imported into the Soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn234.md)
