[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn273)  [Next](enn275.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. Clearly a Being of this nature is not the primal existent; there
must exist that which transcends it, that Being \[the Absolute\], to
which all our discussion has been leading.

In the first place, Plurality is later than Unity. The
Intellectual-Principle is a number \[= the expression of a plurality\];
and number derives from unity: the source of a number such as this must
be the authentically One. Further, it is the sum of an
Intellectual-Being with the object of its Intellection, so that it is a
duality; and, given this duality, we must find what exists before it.

What is this?

The Intellectual-Principle taken separately, perhaps?

No: an Intellect is always inseparable from an intelligible object;
eliminate the intelligible, and the Intellectual-Principle disappears
with it. If, then, what we are seeking cannot be the
Intellectual-Principle but must be something that rejects the duality
there present, then the Prior demanded by that duality must be something
on the further side of the Intellectual-Principle.

But might it not be the Intelligible object itself?

No: for the Intelligible makes an equally inseparable duality with the
Intellectual-Principle.

If, then, neither the Intellectual-Principle nor the Intelligible Object
can be the First Existent, what is?

Our answer can only be:

The source of both.

What will This be; under what character can we picture It?

It must be either Intellective or without Intellection: if Intellective
it is the Intellectual-Principle; if not, it will be without even
knowledge of itself- so that, either way, what is there so august about
it?

If we define it as The Good and the wholly simplex, we will, no doubt,
be telling the truth, but we will not be giving any certain and lucid
account of it as long as we have in mind no entity in which to lodge the
conception by which we define it.

Yet: our knowledge of everything else comes by way of our intelligence;
our power is that of knowing the intelligible by means of the
intelligence: but this Entity transcends all of the intellectual nature;
by what direct intuition, then, can it be brought within our grasp?

To this question the answer is that we can know it only in the degree of
human faculty: we indicate it by virtue of what in ourselves is like it.

For in us, also, there is something of that Being; nay, nothing, ripe
for that participation, can be void of it.

Wherever you be, you have only to range over against this omnipresent
Being that in you which is capable of drawing from It, and you have your
share in it: imagine a voice sounding over a vast waste of land, and not
only over the emptiness alone but over human beings; wherever you be in
that great space you have but to listen and you take the voice entire-
entire though yet with a difference.

And what do we take when we thus point the Intelligence?

The Intellectual-Principle in us must mount to its origins: essentially
a thing facing two ways, it must deliver itself over to those powers
within it which tend upward; if it seeks the vision of that Being, it
must become something more than Intellect.

For the Intellectual-Principle is the earliest form of Life: it is the
Activity presiding over the outflowing of the universal Order- the
outflow, that is, of the first moment, not that of the continuous
process.

In its character as Life, as emanation, as containing all things in
their precise forms and not merely in the agglomerate mass- for this
would be to contain them imperfectly and inarticulately- it must of
necessity derive from some other Being, from one that does not emanate
but is the Principle of Emanation, of Life, of Intellect and of the
Universe.

For the Universe is not a Principle and Source: it springs from a
source, and that source cannot be the All or anything belonging to the
All, since it is to generate the All, and must be not a plurality but
the Source of plurality, since universally a begetting power is less
complex than the begotten. Thus the Being that has engendered the
Intellectual-Principle must be more simplex than the
Intellectual-Principle.

We may be told that this engendering Principle is the One-and-All.

But, at that, it must be either each separate entity from among all or
it will be all things in the one mass.

Now if it were the massed total of all, it must be of later origin than
any of the things of which it is the sum; if it precedes the total, it
differs from the things that make up the total and they from it: if it
and the total of things constitute a co-existence, it is not a Source.
But what we are probing for must be a Source; it must exist before all,
that all may be fashioned as sequel to it.

As for the notion that it may be each separate entity of the All, this
would make a self-Identity into a what you like, where you like,
indifferently, and would, besides, abolish all distinction in things
themselves.

Once more we see that this can be no thing among things but must be
prior to all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn275.md)
