[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn296)  [Next](enn298.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. I think, therefore, that those ancient sages, who sought to secure
the presence of divine beings by the erection of shrines and statues,
showed insight into the nature of the All; they perceived that, though
this Soul is everywhere tractable, its presence will be secured all the
more readily when an appropriate receptacle is elaborated, a place
especially capable of receiving some portion or phase of it, something
reproducing it, or representing it, and serving like a mirror to catch
an image of it.

It belongs to the nature of the All to make its entire content
reproduce, most felicitously, the Reason-Principles in which it
participates; every particular thing is the image within matter of a
Reason-Principle which itself images a pre-material Reason-Principle:
thus every particular entity is linked to that Divine Being in whose
likeness it is made, the divine principle which the soul contemplated
and contained in the act of each creation. Such mediation and
representation there must have been since it was equally impossible for
the created to be without share in the Supreme, and for the Supreme to
descend into the created.

The Intellectual-Principle in the Supreme has ever been the sun of that
sphere- let us accept that as the type of the creative Logos- and
immediately upon it follows the Soul depending from it, stationary Soul
from stationary Intelligence. But the Soul borders also upon the sun of
this sphere, and it becomes the medium by which all is linked to the
overworld; it plays the part of an interpreter between what emanates
from that sphere down to this lower universe, and what rises- as far as,
through soul, anything can- from the lower to the highest.

Nothing, in fact, is far away from anything; things are not remote:
there is, no doubt, the aloofness of difference and of mingled natures
as against the unmingled; but selfhood has nothing to do with spatial
position, and in unity itself there may still be distinction.

These Beings \[the Reason-Principles of this sphere\] are divine in
virtue of cleaving to the Supreme, because, by the medium of the Soul
thought of as descending they remain linked with the Primal Soul, and
through it are veritably what they are called and possess the vision of
the Intellectual Principle, the single object of contemplation to that
soul in which they have their being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn298.md)
