[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn292)  [Next](enn294) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. So far, so good: but what of the passage in the Philebus taken to
imply that the other souls are parts of the All-Soul?

The statement there made does not bear the meaning read into it; it
expresses only, what the author was then concerned with, that the
heavens are ensouled- a teaching which he maintains in the observation
that it is preposterous to make the heavens soulless when we, who
contain a part of the body of the All, have a soul; how, he asks, could
there be soul in the part and none in the total.

He makes his teaching quite clear in the Timaeus, where he shows us the
other souls brought into existence after the All-Soul, but compounded
from the same mixing bowl"; secondary and tertiary are duly marked off
from the primal but every form of soul is presented as being of
identical ideal-nature with the All-Soul.

As for saying of the Phaedrus. "All that is soul cares for all that is
soulless," this simply tells us that the corporeal kind cannot be
controlled- fashioned, set in place or brought into being- by anything
but the Soul. And we cannot think that there is one soul whose nature
includes this power and another without it. "The perfect soul, that of
the All," we read, "going its lofty journey, operates upon the kosmos
not by sinking into it, but, as it were, by brooding over it"; and
"every perfect soul exercises this governance"; he distinguishes the
other, the soul in this sphere as "the soul when its wing is broken."

As for our souls being entrained in the kosmic circuit, and taking
character and condition thence; this is no indication that they are
parts: soul-nature may very well take some tincture from even the
qualities of place, from water and from air; residence in this city or
in that, and the varying make-up of the body may have their influence
\[upon our human souls which, yet, are no parts of place or of body\].

We have always admitted that as members of the universe we take over
something from the All-Soul; we do not deny the influence of the Kosmic
Circuit; but against all this we oppose another soul in us \[the
Intellectual as distinguished from the merely vitalizing\] proven to be
distinct by that power of opposition.

As for our being begotten children of the kosmos, we answer that in
motherhood the entrant soul is distinct, is not the mother's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn294)
