[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn221)  [Next](enn223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. The existence of such a being is no demand of the ordinary man,
merely; it is supported by Theologians and, over and over again, by
Plato to whom Eros is child of Aphrodite, minister of beautiful
children, inciter of human souls towards the supernal beauty or
quickener of an already existing impulse thither. All this requires
philosophical examination. A cardinal passage is that in the Symposium
where we are told Eros was not a child of Aphrodite but born on the day
of Aphrodite's birth, Penia, Poverty, being the mother, and Poros,
Possession, the father.

The matter seems to demand some discussion of Aphrodite, since in any
case Eros is described as being either her son or in some association
with her. Who then is Aphrodite, and in what sense is Love either her
child or born with her or in some way both her child and her
birth-fellow?

To us Aphrodite is twofold; there is the heavenly Aphrodite, daughter of
Ouranos or Heaven: and there is the other the daughter of Zeus and
Dione, this is the Aphrodite who presides over earthly unions; the
higher was not born of a mother and has no part in marriages for in
Heaven there is no marrying.

The Heavenly Aphrodite, daughter of Kronos who is no other than the
Intellectual Principle- must be the Soul at its divinest: unmingled as
the immediate emanation of the unmingled; remaining ever Above, as
neither desirous nor capable of descending to this sphere, never having
developed the downward tendency, a divine Hypostasis essentially aloof,
so unreservedly an Authentic Being as to have no part with Matter- and
therefore mythically "the unmothered" justly called not Celestial Spirit
but God, as knowing no admixture, gathered cleanly within itself.

Any Nature springing directly from the Intellectual Principle must be
itself also a clean thing: it will derive a resistance of its own from
its nearness to the Highest, for all its tendency, no less than its
fixity, centres upon its author whose power is certainly sufficient to
maintain it Above.

Soul then could never fall from its sphere; it is closer held to the
divine Mind than the very sun could hold the light it gives forth to
radiate about it, an outpouring from itself held firmly to it, still.

But following upon Kronos- or, if you will, upon Heaven, the father of
Kronos- the Soul directs its Act towards him and holds closely to him
and in that love brings forth the Eros through whom it continues to look
towards him. This Act of the Soul has produced an Hypostasis, a
Real-Being; and the mother and this Hypostasis- her offspring, noble
Love gaze together upon Divine Mind. Love, thus, is ever intent upon
that other loveliness, and exists to be the medium between desire and
that object of desire. It is the eye of the desirer; by its power what
loves is enabled to see the loved thing. But it is first; before it
becomes the vehicle of vision, it is itself filled with the sight; it is
first, therefore, and not even in the same order- for desire attains to
vision only through the efficacy of Love, while Love, in its own Act,
harvests the spectacle of beauty playing immediately above it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn223.md)
