[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn251)  [Next](enn253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Eternity and Time; two entirely separate things, we explain "the one
having its being in the everlasting Kind, the other in the realm of
Process, in our own Universe"; and, by continually using the words and
assigning every phenomenon to the one or the other category, we come to
think that, both by instinct and by the more detailed attack of thought,
we hold an adequate experience of them in our minds without more ado.

When, perhaps, we make the effort to clarify our ideas and close into
the heart of the matter we are at once unsettled: our doubts throw us
back upon ancient explanations; we choose among the various theories, or
among the various interpretations of some one theory, and so we come to
rest, satisfied, if only we can counter a question with an approved
answer, and glad to be absolved from further enquiry.

Now, we must believe that some of the venerable philosophers of old
discovered the truth; but it is important to examine which of them
really hit the mark and by what guiding principle we can ourselves
attain to certitude.

What, then, does Eternity really mean to those who describe it as
something different from Time? We begin with Eternity, since when the
standing Exemplar is known, its representation in image- which Time is
understood to be- will be clearly apprehended- though it is of course
equally true, admitting this relationship to Time as image to Eternity
the original, that if we chose to begin by identifying Time we could
thence proceed upwards by Recognition \[the Platonic Anamnesis\] and
become aware of the Kind which it images.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn253)
