[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn211)  [Next](enn213) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. And since the higher exists, there must be the lower as well. The
Universe is a thing of variety, and how could there be an inferior
without a superior or a superior without an inferior? We cannot complain
about the lower in the higher; rather, we must be grateful to the higher
for giving something of itself to the lower.

In a word, those that would like evil driven out from the All would
drive out Providence itself.

What would Providence have to provide for? Certainly not for itself or
for the Good: when we speak of a Providence above, we mean an act upon
something below.

That which resumes all under a unity is a Principle in which all things
exist together and the single thing is All. From this Principle, which
remains internally unmoved, particular things push forth as from a
single root which never itself emerges. They are a branching into part,
into multiplicity, each single outgrowth bearing its trace of the common
source. Thus, phase by phase, there in finally the production into this
world; some things close still to the root, others widely separate in
the continuous progression until we have, in our metaphor, bough and
crest, foliage and fruit. At the one side all is one point of unbroken
rest, on the other is the ceaseless process, leaf and fruit, all the
things of process carrying ever within themselves the Reason-Principles
of the Upper Sphere, and striving to become trees in their own minor
order and producing, if at all, only what is in strict gradation from
themselves.

As for the abandoned spaces in what corresponds to the branches these
two draw upon the root, from which, despite all their variance, they
also derive; and the branches again operate upon their own furthest
extremities: operation is to be traced only from point to next point,
but, in the fact, there has been both inflow and outgo \[of creative or
modifying force\] at the very root which, itself again, has its priors.

The things that act upon each other are branchings from a far-off
beginning and so stand distinct; but they derive initially from the one
source: all interaction is like that of brothers, resemblant as drawing
life from the same parents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: FOURTH TRACTATE](enn213)
