[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn259)  [Next](enn261) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. "A Number, a Measure, belonging to Movement?"

This, at least, is plausible since Movement is a continuous thin; but
let us consider.

To begin with, we have the doubt which met us when we probed its
identification with extent of Movement: is Time the measure of any and
every Movement?

Have we any means of calculating disconnected and lawless Movement? What
number or measure would apply? What would be the principle of such a
Measure?

One Measure for movement slow and fast, for any and every movement: then
that number and measure would be like the decade, by which we reckon
horses and cows, or like some common standard for liquids and solids. If
Time is this Kind of Measure, we learn, no doubt, of what objects it is
a Measure- of Movements- but we are no nearer understanding what it is
in itself.

Or: we may take the decade and think of it, apart from the horses or
cows, as a pure number; this gives us a measure which, even though not
actually applied, has a definite nature. Is Time, perhaps, a Measure in
this sense?

No: to tell us no more of Time in itself than that it is such a number
is merely to bring us back to the decade we have already rejected, or to
some similar collective figure.

If, on the other hand, Time is \[not such an abstraction but\] a Measure
possessing a continuous extent of its own, it must have quantity, like a
foot-rule; it must have magnitude: it will, clearly, be in the nature of
a line traversing the path of Movement. But, itself thus sharing in the
movement, how can it be a Measure of Movement? Why should the one of the
two be the measure rather than the other? Besides an accompanying
measure is more plausibly considered as a measure of the particular
movement it accompanies than of Movement in general. Further, this
entire discussion assumes continuous movement, since the accompanying
principle; Time, is itself unbroken \[but a full explanation implies
justification of Time in repose\].

The fact is that we are not to think of a measure outside and apart, but
of a combined thing, a measured Movement, and we are to discover what
measures it.

Given a Movement measured, are we to suppose the measure to be a
magnitude?

If so, which of these two would be Time, the measured movement or the
measuring magnitude? For Time \[as measure\] must be either the movement
measured by magnitude, or the measuring magnitude itself or something
using the magnitude like a yard-stick to appraise the movement. In all
three cases, as we have indicated, the application is scarcely plausible
except where continuous movement is assumed: unless the Movement
proceeds smoothly, and even unintermittently and as embracing the entire
content of the moving object, great difficulties arise in the
identification of Time with any kind of measure.

Let us, then, suppose Time to be this "measured Movement," measured by
quantity. Now the Movement if it is to be measured requires a measure
outside itself; this was the only reason for raising the question of the
accompanying measure. In exactly the same way the measuring magnitude,
in turn, will require a measure, because only when the standard shows
such and such an extension can the degree of movement be appraised. Time
then will be, not the magnitude accompanying the Movement, but that
numerical value by which the magnitude accompanying the Movement is
estimated. But that number can be only the abstract figure which
represents the magnitude, and it is difficult to see how an abstract
figure can perform the act of measuring.

And, supposing that we discover a way in which it can, we still have not
Time, the measure, but a particular quantity of Time, not at all the
same thing: Time means something very different from any definite
period: before all question as to quantity is the question as to the
thing of which a certain quantity is present.

Time, we are told, is the number outside Movement and measuring it, like
the tens applied to the reckoning of the horses and cows but not
inherent in them: we are not told what this Number is; yet, applied or
not, it must, like that decade, have some nature of its own.

Or "it is that which accompanies a Movement and measures it by its
successive stages"; but we are still left asking what this thing
recording the stages may be.

In any case, once a thing- whether by point or standard or any other
means- measures succession, it must measure according to time: this
number appraising movement degree by degree must, therefore, if it is to
serve as a measure at all, be something dependent upon time and in
contact with it: for, either, degree is spatial, merely- the beginning
and end of the Stadium, for example- or in the only alternative, it is a
pure matter of Time: the succession of early and late is stage of Time,
Time ending upon a certain Now or Time beginning from a Now.

Time, therefore, is something other than the mere number measuring
Movement, whether Movement in general or any particular tract of
Movement.

Further: Why should the mere presence of a number give us Time- a number
measuring or measured; for the same number may be either- if Time is not
given us by the fact of Movement itself, the Movement which inevitably
contains in itself a succession of stages? To make the number essential
to Time is like saying that magnitude has not its full quantity unless
we can estimate that quantity.

Again, if Time is, admittedly, endless, how can number apply to it?

Are we to take some portion of Time and find its numerical statement?
That simply means that Time existed before number was applied to it.

We may, therefore, very well think that it existed before the Soul or
Mind that estimates it- if, indeed, it is not to be thought to take its
origin from the Soul- for no measurement by anything is necessary to its
existence; measured or not, it has the full extent of its being.

And suppose it to be true that the Soul is the appraiser, using
Magnitude as the measuring standard, how does this help us to the
conception of Time?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn261)
