[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn200)  [Next](enn202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 15

15\. These considerations apply very well to things considered as
standing alone: but there is a stumbling-block, a new problem, when we
think of all these forms, permanent and ceaselessly produced, in mutual
relationship.

The animals devour each other: men attack each other: all is war without
rest, without truce: this gives new force to the question how Reason can
be author of the plan and how all can be declared well done.

This new difficulty is not met by the former answer; that all stands as
well as the nature of things allows; that the blame for their condition
falls on Matter dragging them down; that, given the plan as we know it,
evil cannot be eliminated and should not be; that the Matter making its
presence felt is still not supreme but remains an element taken in from
outside to contribute to a definite total, or rather to be itself
brought to order by Reason.

The Divine Reason is the beginning and the end; all that comes into
being must be rational and fall at its coming into an ordered scheme
reasonable at every point. Where, then, is the necessity of this bandit
war of man and beast?

This devouring of Kind by Kind is necessary as the means to the
transmutation of living things which could not keep form for ever even
though no other killed them: what grievance is it that when they must go
their despatch is so planned as to be serviceable to others?

Still more, what does it matter when they are devoured only to return in
some new form? It comes to no more than the murder of one of the
personages in a play; the actor alters his make-up and enters in a new
role. The actor, of course, was not really killed; but if dying is but
changing a body as the actor changes a costume, or even an exit from the
body like the exit of the actor from the boards when he has no more to
say or do, what is there so very dreadful in this transformation of
living beings one into another?

Surely it is much better so than if they had never existed: that way
would mean the bleak quenching of life, precluded from passing outside
itself; as the plan holds, life is poured copiously throughout a
Universe, engendering the universal things and weaving variety into
their being, never at rest from producing an endless sequence of
comeliness and shapeliness, a living pastime.

Men directing their weapons against each other- under doom of death yet
neatly lined up to fight as in the pyrrhic sword-dances of their sport-
this is enough to tell us that all human intentions are but play, that
death is nothing terrible, that to die in a war or in a fight is but to
taste a little beforehand what old age has in store, to go away earlier
and come back the sooner. So for misfortunes that may accompany life,
the loss of property, for instance; the loser will see that there was a
time when it was not his, that its possession is but a mock boon to the
robbers, who will in their turn lose it to others, and even that to
retain property is a greater loss than to forfeit it.

Murders, death in all its guises, the reduction and sacking of cities,
all must be to us just such a spectacle as the changing scenes of a
play; all is but the varied incident of a plot, costume on and off,
acted grief and lament. For on earth, in all the succession of life, it
is not the Soul within but the Shadow outside of the authentic man, that
grieves and complains and acts out the plot on this world stage which
men have dotted with stages of their own constructing. All this is the
doing of man knowing no more than to live the lower and outer life, and
never perceiving that, in his weeping and in his graver doings alike, he
is but at play; to handle austere matters austerely is reserved for the
thoughtful: the other kind of man is himself a futility. Those incapable
of thinking gravely read gravity into frivolities which correspond to
their own frivolous Nature. Anyone that joins in their trifling and so
comes to look on life with their eyes must understand that by lending
himself to such idleness he has laid aside his own character. If
Socrates himself takes part in the trifling, he trifles in the outer
Socrates.

We must remember, too, that we cannot take tears and laments as proof
that anything is wrong; children cry and whimper where there is nothing
amiss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](enn202.md)
