[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn233)  [Next](enn235) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. But how do we explain likings and aversions? Sorrow, too, and anger
and pleasure, desire and fear- are these not changes, affectings,
present and stirring within the Soul?

This question cannot be ignored. To deny that changes take place and are
intensely felt is in sharp contradiction to obvious facts. But, while we
recognize this, we must make very sure what it is that changes. To
represent the Soul or Mind as being the seat of these emotions is not
far removed from making it blush or turn pale; it is to forget that
while the Soul or Mind is the means, the effect takes place in the
distinct organism, the animated body.

At the idea of disgrace, the shame is in the Soul; but the body is
occupied by the Soul- not to trouble about words- is, at any rate, close
to it and very different from soulless matter; and so, is affected in
the blood, mobile in its nature. Fear begins in the mind; the pallor is
simply the withdrawal of the blood inwards. So in pleasure, the elation
is mental, but makes itself felt in the body; the purely mental phase
has not reached the point of sensation: the same is true of pain. So
desire is ignored in the Soul where the impulse takes its rise; what
comes outward thence, the Sensibility knows.

When we speak of the Soul or Mind being moved- as in desire, reasoning,
judging- we do not mean that it is driven into its act; these movements
are its own acts.

In the same way when we call Life a movement we have no idea of a
changing substance; the naturally appropriate act of each member of the
living thing makes up the Life, which is, therefore, not a shifting
thing.

To bring the matter to the point: put it that life, tendency, are no
changements; that memories are not forms stamped upon the mind, that
notions are not of the nature of impressions on sealing-wax; we thence
draw the general conclusion that in all such states and movements the
Soul, or Mind, is unchanged in substance and in essence, that virtue and
vice are not something imported into the Soul- as heat and cold,
blackness or whiteness are importations into body- but that, in all this
relation, matter and spirit are exactly and comprehensively contraries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn235)
