[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn245)  [Next](enn247.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 15

15\. Now the objects attracting the sun-rays to themselves- illuminated
by a fire of the sense-order- are necessarily of the sense-order; there
is perceptibility because there has been a union of things at once
external to each other and continuous, contiguous, in direct contact,
two extremes in one line. But the Reason-Principle operating upon Matter
is external to it only in a very different mode and sense: exteriority
in this case is amply supplied by contrariety of essence and can
dispense with any opposite ends \[any question of lineal position\]; or,
rather, the difference is one that actually debars any local extremity;
sheer incongruity of essence, the utter failure in relationship,
inhibits admixture \[between Matter and any form of Being\].

The reason, then, of the immutability of Matter is that the entrant
principle neither possesses it nor is possessed by it. Consider, as an
example, the mode in which an opinion or representation is present in
the mind; there is no admixture; the notion that came goes in its time,
still integrally itself alone, taking nothing with it, leaving nothing
after it, because it has not been blended with the mind; there is no
"outside" in the sense of contact broken, and the distinction between
base and entrant is patent not to the senses but to the reason.

In that example, no doubt, the mental representation- though it seems to
have a wide and unchecked control- is an image, while the Soul \[Mind\]
is in its nature not an image \[but a Reality\]: none the less the Soul
or Mind certainly stands to the concept as Matter, or in some analogous
relation. The representation, however, does not cover the Mind over; on
the contrary it is often expelled by some activity there; however
urgently it presses in, it never effects such an obliteration as to be
taken for the Soul; it is confronted there by indwelling powers, by
Reason-Principles, which repel all such attack.

Matter- feebler far than the Soul for any exercise of power, and
possessing no phase of the Authentic Existents, not even in possession
of its own falsity- lacks the very means of manifesting itself, utter
void as it is; it becomes the means by which other things appear, but it
cannot announce its own presence. Penetrating thought may arrive at it,
discriminating it from Authentic Existence; then, it is discerned as
something abandoned by all that really is, by even the dimmest semblants
of being, as a thing dragged towards every shape and property and
appearing to follow- yet in fact not even following.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](enn247.md)
