[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn394)  [Next](enn396.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 12

12\. (17) A further consideration is that if every soul is to be held
dissoluble the universe must long since have ceased to be: if it is
pretended that one kind of soul, our own for example, is mortal, and
another, that of the All, let us suppose, is immortal, we demand to know
the reason of the difference alleged.

Each is a principle of motion, each is self-living, each touches the
same sphere by the same tentacles, each has intellection of the
celestial order and of the super-celestial, each is seeking to win to
what has essential being, each is moving upwards to the primal source.

Again: the soul's understanding of the Absolute Forms by means of the
visions stored up in it is effected within itself; such perception is
reminiscence; the soul then must have its being before embodiment, and
drawing on an eternal science, must itself be eternal.

Every dissoluble entity, that has come to be by way of groupment, must
in the nature of things be broken apart by that very mode which brought
it together: but the soul is one and simplex, living not in the sense of
potential reception of life but by its own energy; and this can be no
cause of dissolution.

But, we will be told, it tends to destruction by having been divided (in
the body) and so becoming fragmentary.

No: the soul, as we have shown, is not a mass, not a quantity.

May not it change and so come to destruction?

No: the change that destroys annuls the form but leaves the underlying
substance: and that could not happen to anything except a compound.

If it can be destroyed in no such ways, it is necessarily
indestructible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](enn396.md)
