[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn357)  [Next](enn359.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 39

39\. We cannot, then, refer all that exists to Reason-Principles
inherent in the seed of things \[Spermatic Reasons\]; the universe is to
be traced further back, to the more primal forces, to the principles by
which that seed itself takes shape. Such spermatic principles cannot be
the containers of things which arise independently of them, such as what
enters from Matter \[the reasonless\] into membership of the All, or
what is due to the mere interaction of existences.

No: the Reason-Principle of the universe would be better envisaged as a
wisdom uttering order and law to a state, in full knowledge of what the
citizens will do and why, and in perfect adaptation of law to custom;
thus the code is made to thread its way in and out through all their
conditions and actions with the honour or infamy earned by their
conduct; and all coalesces by a kind of automatism.

The signification which exists is not a first intention; it arises
incidentally by the fact that in a given collocation the members will
tell something of each other: all is unity sprung of unity and therefore
one thing is known by way of another other, a cause in the light of the
caused, the sequent as rising from its precedent, the compound from the
constituents which must make themselves known in the linked total.

If all this is sound, at once our doubts fall and we need no longer ask
whether the transmission of any evil is due to the gods.

For, in sum: Firstly, intentions are not to be considered as the
operative causes; necessities inherent in the nature of things account
for all that comes from the other realm; it is a matter of the
inevitable relation of parts, and, besides, all is the sequence to the
living existence of a unity. Secondly, there is the large contribution
made by the individual. Thirdly, each several communication, good in
itself, takes another quality in the resultant combination. Fourthly,
the life in the kosmos does not look to the individual but to the whole.
Finally, there is Matter, the underlie, which being given one thing
receives it as something else, and is unable to make the best of what it
takes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 40](enn359.md)
