[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn348)  [Next](enn350.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 30

30\. We have declared acts of memory unnecessary to the stars, but we
allow them perceptions, hearing as well as seeing; for we said that
prayers to them were heard- our supplications to the sun, and those,
even, of certain other men to the stars. It has moreover been the belief
that in answer to prayer they accomplish many human wishes, and this so
lightheartedly that they become not merely helpers towards good but even
accomplices in evil. Since this matter lies in our way, it must be
considered, for it carries with it grave difficulties that very much
trouble those who cannot think of divine beings as, thus, authors or
auxiliaries in unseemliness even including the connections of loose
carnality.

In view of all this it is especially necessary to study the question
with which we began, that of memory in the heavenly bodies.

It is obvious that, if they act on our prayers and if this action is not
immediate, but with delay and after long periods of time, they remember
the prayers men address to them. This is something that our former
argument did not concede; though it appeared plausible that, for their
better service of mankind, they might have been endowed with such a
memory as we ascribed to Demeter and Hestia- or to the latter alone if
only the earth is to be thought of as beneficent to man.

We have, then, to attempt to show: firstly, how acts implying memory in
the heavenly bodies are to be reconciled with our system as
distinguished from those others which allow them memory as a matter of
course; secondly, what vindication of those gods of the heavenly spheres
is possible in the matter of seemingly anomalous acts- a question which
philosophy cannot ignore- then too, since the charge goes so far, we
must ask whether credence is to be given to those who hold that the
entire heavenly system can be put under spell by man's skill and
audacity: our discussion will also deal with the spirit-beings and how
they may be thought to minister to these ends- unless indeed the part
played by the Celestials prove to be settled by the decision upon the
first questions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 31](enn350.md)
