[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn383)  [Next](enn385.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. It is easy to show that if the Soul were a corporeal entity, there
could be no sense-perception, no mental act, no knowledge, no moral
excellence, nothing of all that is noble.

There can be no perception without a unitary percipient whose identity
enables it to grasp an object as an entirety.

The several senses will each be the entrance point of many diverse
perceptions; in any one object there may be many characteristics; any
one organ may be the channel of a group of objects, as for instance a
face is known not by a special sense for separate features, nose, eyes;
etc., but by one sense observing all in one act.

When sight and hearing gather their varying information, there must be
some central unity to which both report. How could there be any
statement of difference unless all sense-impressions appeared before a
common identity able to take the sum of all?

This there must be, as there is a centre to a circle; the
sense-impressions converging from every point of occurrence will be as
lines striking from a circumference to what will be a true centre of
perception as being a veritable unity.

If this centre were to break into separate points- so that the
sense-impressions fell upon the two ends of a line- then, either it must
reknit itself to unity and identity, perhaps at the mid-point of the
line, or all remains unrelated, every end receiving the report of its
particular field exactly as you and I have our distinct sense
experiences.

Suppose the sense-object be such a unity as a face: all the points of
observation must be brought together in one visual total, as is obvious
since there could be no panorama of great expanses unless the detail
were compressed to the capacity of the pupils.

Much more must this be true in the case of thoughts, partless entities
as they are, impinging upon the centre of consciousness which \[to
receive them\] must itself be void of part.

Either this or, supposing the centre of consciousness to be a thing of
quantity and extension, the sensible object will coincide with it point
by point of their co-expansion so that any given point in the faculty
will perceive solely what coincides with it in the object: and thus
nothing in us could perceive any thing as a whole.

This cannot be: the faculty entire must be a unity; no such dividing is
possible; this is no matter in which we can think of equal sections
coinciding; the centre of consciousness has no such relation of equality
with any sensible object. The only possible ratio of divisibility would
be that of the number of diverse elements in the impinging sensation:
are we then to suppose that each part of the soul, and every part of
each part, will have perception? Or will the part of the parts have
none? That is impossible: every part, then, has perception; the
\[hypothetical\] magnitude, of soul and each part of soul, is infinitely
divisible; there will therefore be in each part an infinite number of
perceptions of the object, and therefore an infinitude of
representations of it at our centre of consciousness.

If the sentient be a material entity sensation could only be of the
order of seal-impressions struck by a ring on wax, in this case by
sensible objects on the blood or on the intervenient air.

If, at this, the impression is like one made in liquids- as would be
reasonable- it will be confused and wavering as upon water, and there
can be no memory. If the impressions are permanent, then either no fresh
ones can be stamped upon the occupied ground- and there can be no change
of sensations- or, others being made, the former will be obliterated;
and all record of the past is done away with.

If memory implies fresh sensations imposed upon former ones, the earlier
not barring their way, the soul cannot be a material entity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn385.md)
