[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn354)  [Next](enn356.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 36

36\. The Universe is immensely varied, the container of all the
Reason-Principles and of infinite and diverse efficacies. In man, we are
told, the eye has its power, and the bones have their varied powers, and
so with each separate part of hand and of foot; and there is no member
or organ without its own definite function, some separate power of its
own- a diversity of which we can have no notion unless our studies take
that direction. What is true of man must be true of the universe, and
much more, since all this order is but a representation of the higher:
it must contain an untellably wonderful variety of powers, with which,
of course, the bodies moving through the heavens will be most richly
endowed.

We cannot think of the universe as a soulless habitation, however vast
and varied, a thing of materials easily told off, kind by kind- wood and
stone and whatever else there be, all blending into a kosmos: it must be
alert throughout, every member living by its own life, nothing that can
have existence failing to exist within it.

And here we have the solution of the problem, "How an ensouled living
form can include the soulless": for this account allows grades of living
within the whole, grades to some of which we deny life only because they
are not perceptibly self-moved: in the truth, all of these have a hidden
life; and the thing whose life is patent to sense is made up of things
which do not live to sense, but, none the less, confer upon their
resultant total wonderful powers towards living. Man would never have
reached to his actual height if the powers by which he acts were the
completely soulless elements of his being; similarly the All could not
have its huge life unless its every member had a life of its own; this
however does not necessarily imply a deliberate intention; the All has
no need of intention to bring about its acts: it is older than
intention, and therefore its powers have many servitors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 37](enn356.md)
