[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn317)  [Next](enn319) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 32

32\. But the memory of friends, children, wife? Country too, and all
that the better sort of man may reasonably remember?

All these, the one \[the lower man\] retains with emotion, the authentic
man passively: for the experience, certainly, was first felt in that
lower phase from which, however, the best of such impressions pass over
to the graver soul in the degree in which the two are in communication.

The lower soul must be always striving to attain to memory of the
activities of the higher: this will be especially so when it is itself
of a fine quality, for there will always be some that are better from
the beginning and bettered here by the guidance of the higher.

The loftier, on the contrary, must desire to come to a happy
forgetfulness of all that has reached it through the lower: for one
reason, there is always the possibility that the very excellence of the
lower prove detrimental to the higher, tending to keep it down by sheer
force of vitality. In any case the more urgent the intention towards the
Supreme, the more extensive will be the soul's forgetfulness, unless
indeed, when the entire living has, even here, been such that memory has
nothing but the noblest to deal with: in this world itself, all is best
when human interests have been held aloof; so, therefore, it must be
with the memory of them. In this sense we may truly say that the good
soul is the forgetful. It flees multiplicity; it seeks to escape the
unbounded by drawing all to unity, for only thus is it free from
entanglement, light-footed, self-conducted. Thus it is that even in this
world the soul which has the desire of the other is putting away, amid
its actual life, all that is foreign to that order. It brings there very
little of what it has gathered here; as long as it is in the heavenly
regions only, it will have more than it can retain.

The Hercules of the heavenly regions would still tell of his feats: but
there is the other man to whom all of that is trivial; he has been
translated to a holier place; he has won his way to the Intellectual
Realm; he is more than Hercules, proven in the combats in which the
combatants are the wise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: FOURTH TRACTATE](enn319)
