[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn322)  [Next](enn324) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. In that realm it has also vision, through the
Intellectual-Principle, of The Good which does not so hold to itself as
not to reach the soul; what intervenes between them is not body and
therefore is no hindrance- and, indeed, where bodily forms do intervene
there is still access in many ways from the primal to the tertiaries.

If, on the contrary, the soul gives itself to the inferior, the same
principle of penetration comes into play, and it possesses itself, by
memory and imagination, of the thing it desired: and hence the memory,
even dealing with the highest, is not the highest. Memory, of course,
must be understood not merely of what might be called the sense of
remembrance, but so as to include a condition induced by the past
experience or vision. There is such a thing as possessing more
powerfully without consciousness than in full knowledge; with full
awareness the possession is of something quite distinct from the self;
unconscious possession runs very close to identity, and any such
approach to identification with the lower means the deeper fall of the
soul.

If the soul, on abandoning its place in the Supreme, revives its
memories of the lower, it must have in some form possessed them even
there though the activity of the beings in that realm kept them in
abeyance: they could not be in the nature of impressions permanently
adopted- a notion which would entail absurdities- but were no more than
a potentiality realized after return. When that energy of the
Intellectual world ceases to tell upon the soul, it sees what it saw in
the earlier state before it revisited the Supreme.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn324)
