[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn387)  [Next](enn389.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. B. (10) If the soul is body and permeates the entire body-mass,
still even in this entire permeation the blending must be in accord with
what occurs in all cases of bodily admixing.

Now: if in the admixing of bodies neither constituent can retain its
efficacy, the soul too could no longer be effective within the bodies;
it could but be latent; it will have lost that by which it is soul, just
as in an admixture of sweet and bitter the sweet disappears: we have,
thus, no soul.

Two bodies \[i.e., by hypothesis, the soul and the human body\] are
blended, each entire through the entirety of the other; where the one
is, the other is also; each occupies an equal extension and each the
whole extension; no increase of size has been caused by the juncture:
the one body thus inblended can have left in the other nothing
undivided. This is no case of mixing in the sense of considerable
portions alternating; that would be described as collocation; no; the
incoming entity goes through the other to the very minutest point- an
impossibility, of course; the less becoming equal to the greater; still,
all is traversed throughout and divided throughout. Now if, thus, the
inblending is to occur point by point, leaving no undivided material
anywhere, the division of the body concerned must have been a division
into (geometrical) points: an impossibility. The division is an infinite
series- any material particle may be cut in two- and the infinities are
not merely potential, they are actual.

Therefore body cannot traverse anything as a whole traversing a whole.
But soul does this. It is therefore incorporeal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn389.md)
