[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn391)  [Next](enn393) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. (14) Over against that body, stands the principle which is
self-caused, which is all that neither enters into being nor passes
away, the principle whose dissolution would mean the end of all things
never to be restored if once this had ceased to be, the sustaining
principle of things individually, and of this kosmos, which owes its
maintenance and its ordered system to the soul.

This is the starting point of motion and becomes the leader and provider
of motion to all else: it moves by its own quality, and every living
material form owes life to this principle, which of itself lives in a
life that, being essentially innate, can never fail.

Not all things can have a life merely at second hand; this would give an
infinite series: there must be some nature which, having life primally,
shall be of necessity indestructible, immortal, as the source of life to
all else that lives. This is the point at which all that is divine and
blessed must be situated, living and having being of itself, possessing
primal being and primal life, and in its own essence rejecting all
change, neither coming to be nor passing away.

Whence could such a being arise or into what could it disappear: the
very word, strictly used, means that the thing is perdurable. Similarly
white, the colour, cannot be now white and now not white: if this
"white" were a real being it would be eternal as well as being white:
the colour is merely white but whatsoever possesses being, indwelling by
nature and primal, will possess also eternal duration. In such an entity
this primal and eternal Being cannot be dead like stone or plank: it
must be alive, and that with a life unalloyed as long as it remains
self-gathered: when the primal Being blends with an inferior principle,
it is hampered in its relation to the highest, but without suffering the
loss of its own nature since it can always recover its earliest state by
turning its tendency back to its own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn393)
