[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn308)  [Next](enn310.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 23

23\. I explain: A living body is illuminated by soul: each organ and
member participates in soul after some manner peculiar to itself; the
organ is adapted to a certain function, and this fitness is the vehicle
of the soul-faculty under which the function is performed; thus the
seeing faculty acts through the eyes, the hearing faculty through the
ears, the tasting faculty through the tongue, the faculty of smelling
through the nostrils, and the faculty of sentient touch is present
throughout, since in this particular form of perception the entire body
is an instrument in the soul's service.

The vehicles of touch are mainly centred in the nerves- which moreover
are vehicles of the faculty by which the movements of the living being
are affected- in them the soul-faculty concerned makes itself present;
the nerves start from the brain. The brain therefore has been considered
as the centre and seat of the principle which determines feeling and
impulse and the entire act of the organism as a living thing; where the
instruments are found to be linked, there the operating faculty is
assumed to be situated. But it would be wiser to say only that there is
situated the first activity of the operating faculty: the power to be
exercised by the operator- in keeping with the particular instrument-
must be considered as concentrated at the point at which the instrument
is to be first applied; or, since the soul's faculty is of universal
scope the sounder statement is that the point of origin of the
instrument is the point of origin of the act.

Now, the faculty presiding over sensation and impulse is vested in the
sensitive and representative soul; it draws upon the Reason-Principle
immediately above itself; downward, it is in contact with an inferior of
its own: on this analogy the uppermost member of the living being was
taken by the ancients to be obviously its seat; they lodged it in the
brain, or not exactly in the brain but in that sensitive part which is
the medium through which the Reason-Principle impinges upon the brain.
They saw that something must be definitely allocated to body- at the
point most receptive of the act of reason- while something, utterly
isolated from body must be in contact with that superior thing which is
a form of soul \[and not merely of the vegetative or other
quasi-corporeal forms but\] of that soul apt to the appropriation of the
perceptions originating in the Reason-Principle.

Such a linking there must be, since in perception there is some element
of judging, in representation something intuitional, and since impulse
and appetite derive from representation and reason. The reasoning
faculty, therefore, is present where these experiences occur, present
not as in a place but in the fact that what is there draws upon it. As
regards perception we have already explained in what sense it is local.

But every living being includes the vegetal principle, that principle of
growth and nourishment which maintains the organism by means of the
blood; this nourishing medium is contained in the veins; the veins and
blood have their origin in the liver: from observation of these facts
the power concerned was assigned a place; the phase of the soul which
has to do with desire was allocated to the liver. Certainly what brings
to birth and nourishes and gives growth must have the desire of these
functions. Blood- subtle, light, swift, pure- is the vehicle most apt to
animal spirit: the heart, then, its well-spring, the place where such
blood is sifted into being, is taken as the fixed centre of the
ebullition of the passionate nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 24](enn310.md)
