[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn334)  [Next](enn336.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 16

16\. But if in the soul thing follows thing, if there is earlier and
later in its productions, if it engenders or creates in time, then it
must be looking towards the future; and if towards the future, then
towards the past as well?

No: prior and past are in the things its produces; in itself nothing is
past; all, as we have said, is one simultaneous grouping of
Reason-Principles. In the engendered, dissimilarity is not compatible
with unity, though in the Reason-Principles supporting the engendered
such unity of dissimilars does occur- hand and foot are in unity in the
Reason-Principle \[of man\], but apart in the realm of sense. Of course,
even in that ideal realm there is apartness, but in a characteristic
mode, just as in a mode, there is priority.

Now, apartness may be explained as simply differentiation: but how
account for priority unless on the assumption of some ordering principle
arranging from above, and in that disposal necessarily affirming a
serial order?

There must be such a principle, or all would exist simultaneously; but
the indicated conclusion does not follow unless order and ordering
principle are distinct; if the ordering principle is Primal Order, there
is no such affirmation of series; there is simply making, the making of
this thing after that thing. The affirmation would imply that the
ordering principle looks away towards Order and therefore is not,
itself, Order.

But how are Order and this orderer one and the same?

Because the ordering principle is no conjoint of matter and idea but is
soul, pure idea, the power and energy second only to the
Intellectual-Principle: and because the succession is a fact of the
things themselves, inhibited as they are from this comprehensive unity.
The ordering soul remains august, a circle, as we may figure it, in
complete adaptation to its centre, widening outward, but fast upon it
still, an outspreading without interval.

The total scheme may be summarized in the illustration of The Good as a
centre, the Intellectual-Principle as an unmoving circle, the Soul as a
circle in motion, its moving being its aspiration: the
Intellectual-Principle possesses and has ever embraced that which is
beyond being; the soul must seek it still: the sphere of the universe,
by its possession of the soul thus aspirant, is moved to the aspiration
which falls within its own nature; this is no more than such power as
body may have, the mode of pursuit possible where the object pursued is
debarred from entrance; it is the motion of coiling about, with
ceaseless return upon the same path- in other words, it is circuit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 17](enn336.md)
