[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn374)  [Next](enn376.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Perceptions are no imprints, we have said, are not to be thought of
as seal-impressions on soul or mind: accepting this statement, there is
one theory of memory which must be definitely rejected.

Memory is not to be explained as the retaining of information in virtue
of the lingering of an impression which in fact was never made; the two
things stand or fall together; either an impression is made upon the
mind and lingers when there is remembrance, or, denying the impression,
we cannot hold that memory is its lingering. Since we reject equally the
impression and the retention we are obliged to seek for another
explanation of perception and memory, one excluding the notions that the
sensible object striking upon soul or mind makes a mark upon it, and
that the retention of this mark is memory.

If we study what occurs in the case of the most vivid form of
perception, we can transfer our results to the other cases, and so solve
our problem.

In any perception we attain by sight, the object is grasped there where
it lies in the direct line of vision; it is there that we attack it;
there, then, the perception is formed; the mind looks outward; this is
ample proof that it has taken and takes no inner imprint, and does not
see in virtue of some mark made upon it like that of the ring on the
wax; it need not look outward at all if, even as it looked, it already
held the image of the object, seeing by virtue of an impression made
upon itself. It includes with the object the interval, for it tells at
what distance the vision takes place: how could it see as outlying an
impression within itself, separated by no interval from itself? Then,
the point of magnitude: how could the mind, on this hypothesis, define
the external size of the object or perceive that it has any- the
magnitude of the sky, for instance, whose stamped imprint would be too
vast for it to contain? And, most convincing of all, if to see is to
accept imprints of the objects of our vision, we can never see these
objects themselves; we see only vestiges they leave within us, shadows:
the things themselves would be very different from our vision of them.
And, for a conclusive consideration, we cannot see if the living object
is in contact with the eye, we must look from a certain distance; this
must be more applicable to the mind; supposing the mind to be stamped
with an imprint of the object, it could not grasp as an object of vision
what is stamped upon itself. For vision demands a duality, of seen and
seeing: the seeing agent must be distinct and act upon an impression
outside it, not upon one occupying the same point with it: sight can
deal only with an object not inset but outlying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn376.md)
