[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn323)  [Next](enn325) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. But this power which determines memory is it also the principle by
which the Supreme becomes effective in us?

At any time when we have not been in direct vision of that sphere,
memory is the source of its activity within us; when we have possessed
that vision, its presence is due to the principle by which we enjoyed
it: this principle awakens where it wakens; and it alone has vision in
that order; for this is no matter to be brought to us by way of analogy,
or by the syllogistic reasoning whose grounds lie elsewhere; the power
which, even here, we possess of discoursing upon the Intellectual Beings
is vested, as we show, in that principle which alone is capable of their
contemplation. That, we must awaken, so to speak, and thus attain the
vision of the Supreme, as one, standing on some lofty height and lifting
his eyes, sees what to those that have not mounted with him is
invisible.

Memory, by this account, commences after the soul has left the higher
spheres; it is first known in the celestial period.

A soul that has descended from the Intellectual region to the celestial
and there comes to rest, may very well be understood to recognize many
other souls known in its former state supposing that, as we have said,
it retains recollection of much that it knew here. This recognition
would be natural if the bodies with which those souls are vested in the
celestial must reproduce the former appearance; supposing the spherical
form \[of the stars inhabited by souls in the mid-realm\] means a change
of appearance, recognition would go by character, by the distinctive
quality of personality: this is not fantastic; conditions changing need
not mean a change of character. If the souls have mutual conversation,
this too would mean recognition.

But those whose descent from the Intellectual is complete, how is it
with them?

They will recall their memories, of the same things, but with less force
than those still in the celestial, since they have had other experiences
to remember, and the lapse of time will have utterly obliterated much of
what was formerly present to them.

But what way of remembering the Supreme is left if the souls have turned
to the sense-known kosmos, and are to fall into this sphere of process?

They need not fall to the ultimate depth: their downward movement may be
checked at some one moment of the way; and as long as they have not
touched the lowest of the region of process \[the point at which
non-being begins\] there is nothing to prevent them rising once more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn325)
