[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn384)  [Next](enn386.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. We come to the same result by examining the sense of pain. We say
there is pain in the finger: the trouble is doubtless in the finger, but
our opponents must admit that the sensation of the pain is in the centre
of consciousness. The suffering member is one thing, the sense of
suffering is another: how does this happen?

By transmission, they will say: the psychic pneuma \[= the semi-material
principle of life\] stationed at the finger suffers first; and stage by
stage the trouble is passed on until at last it reaches the centre of
consciousness.

But on this theory, there must be a sensation in the spot first
suffering pain, and another sensation at a second point of the line of
transmission, another in the third and so on; many sensations, in fact
an unlimited series, to deal with one pain; and at the last moment the
centre of consciousness has the sensation of all these sensations and of
its own sensation to boot. Or to be exact, these serial sensations will
not be of the pain in the finger: the sensation next in succession to
the suffering finger will be of pain at the joint, a third will tell of
a pain still higher up: there will be a series of separate pains: The
centre of consciousness will not feel the pain seated at the finger, but
only that impinging upon itself: it will know this alone, ignore the
rest and so have no notion that the finger is in pain.

Thus: Transmission would not give sensation of the actual condition at
the affected spot: it is not in the nature of body that where one part
suffers there should be knowledge in another part; for body is a
magnitude, and the parts of every magnitude are distinct parts;
therefore we need, as the sentient, something of a nature to be
identical to itself at any and every spot; this property can belong only
to some other form of being than body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn386.md)
