[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn312)  [Next](enn314.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 27

27\. But of what soul; of that which we envisage as the more divine, by
which we are human beings, or that other which springs from the All?

Memory must be admitted in both of these, personal memories and shared
memories; and when the two souls are together, the memories also are as
one; when they stand apart, assuming that both exist and endure, each
soon for gets the other's affairs, retaining for a longer time its own.
Thus it is that the Shade of Hercules in the lower regions- this
"Shade," as I take it, being the characteristically human part-
remembers all the action and experience of the life, since that career
was mainly of the hero's personal shaping; the other souls
\[soulphases\] going to constitute the joint-being could, for all their
different standing, have nothing to recount but the events of that same
life, doings which they knew from the time of their association: perhaps
they would add also some moral judgement.

What the Hercules standing outside the Shade spoke of we are not told:
what can we think that other, the freed and isolated, soul would
recount?

The soul, still a dragged captive, will tell of all the man did and
felt; but upon death there will appear, as time passes, memories of the
lives lived before, some of the events of the most recent life being
dismissed as trivial. As it grows away from the body, it will revive
things forgotten in the corporeal state, and if it passes in and out of
one body after another, it will tell over the events of the discarded
life, it will treat as present that which it has just left, and it will
remember much from the former existence. But with lapse of time it will
come to forgetfulness of many things that were mere accretion.

Then free and alone at last, what will it have to remember?

The answer to that question depends on our discovering in what faculty
of the soul memory resides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 28](enn314.md)
