[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn303)  [Next](enn305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. There remains still something to be said on the question whether
the soul uses deliberate reason before its descent and again when it has
left the body.

Reasoning is for this sphere; it is the act of the soul fallen into
perplexity, distracted with cares, diminished in strength: the need of
deliberation goes with the less self-sufficing intelligence; craftsmen
faced by a difficulty stop to consider; where there is no problem their
art works on by its own forthright power.

But if souls in the Supreme operate without reasoning, how can they be
called reasoning souls?

One answer might be that they have the power of deliberating to happy
issue, should occasion arise: but all is met by repudiating the
particular kind of reasoning intended \[the earthly and discursive
type\]; we may represent to ourselves a reasoning that flows
uninterruptedly from the Intellectual-Principle in them, an inherent
state, an enduring activity, an assertion that is real; in this way they
would be users of reason even when in that overworld. We certainly
cannot think of them, it seems to me, as employing words when, though
they may occupy bodies in the heavenly region, they are essentially in
the Intellectual: and very surely the deliberation of doubt and
difficulty which they practise here must be unknown to them There; all
their act must fall into place by sheer force of their nature; there can
be no question of commanding or of taking counsel; they will know, each,
what is to be communicated from another, by present consciousness. Even
in our own case here, eyes often know what is not spoken; and There all
is pure, every being is, as it were, an eye, nothing is concealed or
sophisticated, there is no need of speech, everything is seen and known.
As for the Celestials \[the Daimones\] and souls in the air, they may
well use speech; for all such are simply Animate \[= Beings\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](enn305)
