[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn339)  [Next](enn341.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 21

21\. That this is the phase of the human being in which desire takes its
origin is shown by observation of the different stages of life; in
childhood, youth, maturity, the bodily desires differ; health or
sickness also may change them, while the \[psychic\] faculty is of
course the same through all: the evidence is clear that the variety of
desire in the human being results from the fact that he is a corporeal
entity, a living body subject to every sort of vicissitude.

The total movement of desire is not always stirred simultaneously with
what we call the impulses to the satisfaction even of the lasting bodily
demands; it may refuse assent to the idea of eating or drinking until
reason gives the word: this shows us desire- the degree of it existing
in the living body- advancing towards some object, with Nature \[the
lower soul-phase\] refusing its co-operation and approval, and as sole
arbiter between what is naturally fit and unfit, rejecting what does not
accord with the natural need.

We may be told that the changing state of the body is sufficient
explanation of the changing desires in the faculty; but that would
require the demonstration that the changing condition of a given entity
could effect a change of desire in another, in one which cannot itself
gain by the gratification; for it is not the desiring faculty that
profits by food, liquid, warmth, movement, or by any relief from
overplenty or any filling of a void; all such services touch the body
only.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 22](enn341.md)
