[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn346)  [Next](enn348.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 28

28\. Thus much established, we may return on our path: we have to
discuss the seat of the passionate element in the human being.

Pleasures and pains- the conditions, that is, not the perception of
them- and the nascent stage of desire, we assigned to the body as a
determined thing, the body brought, in some sense, to life: are we
entitled to say the same of the nascent stage of passion? Are we to
consider passion in all its forms as vested in the determined body or in
something belonging to it, for instance in the heart or the bile
necessarily taking condition within a body not dead? Or are we to think
that just as that which bestows the vestige of the soul is a distinct
entity, so we may reason in this case- the passionate element being one
distinct thing, itself, and not deriving from any passionate or
percipient faculty?

Now in the first case the soul-principle involved, the vegetal, pervades
the entire body, so that pain and pleasure and nascent desire for the
satisfaction of need are present all over it- there is possibly some
doubt as to the sexual impulse, which, however, it may suffice to assign
to the organs by which it is executed- but in general the region about
the liver may be taken to be the starting point of desire, since it is
the main acting point of the vegetal principle which transmits the
vestige phase of the soul to the liver and body- the seat, because the
spring.

But in this other case, of passion, we have to settle what it is, what
form of soul it represents: does it act by communicating a lower phase
of itself to the regions round the heart, or is it set in motion by the
higher soul-phase impinging upon the Conjoint \[the animate-total\], or
is there, in such conditions no question of soul-phase, but simply
passion itself producing the act or state of \[for example\] anger?

Evidently the first point for enquiry is what passion is.

Now we all know that we feel anger not only over our own bodily
suffering, but also over the conduct of others, as when some of our
associates act against our right and due, and in general over any
unseemly conduct. It is at once evident that anger implies some subject
capable of sensation and of judgement: and this consideration suffices
to show that the vegetal nature is not its source, that we must look for
its origin elsewhere.

On the other hand, anger follows closely upon bodily states; people in
whom the blood and the bile are intensely active are as quick to anger
as those of cool blood and no bile are slow; animals grow angry though
they pay attention to no outside combinations except where they
recognize physical danger; all this forces us again to place the seat of
anger in the strictly corporeal element, the principle by which the
animal organism is held together. Similarly, that anger or its first
stirring depends upon the condition of the body follows from the
consideration that the same people are more irritable ill than well,
fasting than after food: it would seem that the bile and the blood,
acting as vehicles of life, produce these emotions.

Our conclusion \[reconciling with these corporeal facts the psychic or
mental element indicated\] will identify, first, some suffering in the
body answered by a movement in the blood or in the bile: sensation
ensues and the soul, brought by means of the representative faculty to
partake in the condition of the affected body, is directed towards the
cause of the pain: the reasoning soul, in turn, from its place above the
phase not inbound with body-acts in its own mode when the breach of
order has become manifest to it: it calls in the alliance of that ready
passionate faculty which is the natural combatant of the evil disclosed.

Thus anger has two phases; there is firstly that which, rising apart
from all process of reasoning, draws reason to itself by the medium of
the imaging faculty, and secondly that which, rising in reason, touches
finally upon the specific principle of the emotion. Both these depend
upon the existence of that principle of vegetal life and generation by
which the body becomes an organism aware of pleasure and pain: this
principle it was that made the body a thing of bile and bitterness, and
thus it leads the indwelling soul-phase to corresponding states-
churlish and angry under stress of environment- so that being wronged
itself, it tries, as we may put it, to return the wrong upon its
surroundings, and bring them to the same condition.

That this soul-vestige, which determines the movements of passion is of
one essence \[con-substantial\] with the other is evident from the
consideration that those of us less avid of corporeal pleasures,
especially those that wholly repudiate the body, are the least prone to
anger and to all experiences not rising from reason.

That this vegetal principle, underlying anger, should be present in
trees and yet passion be lacking in them cannot surprise us since they
are not subject to the movements of blood and bile. If the occasions of
anger presented themselves where there is no power of sensation there
could be no more than a physical ebullition with something approaching
to resentment \[an unconscious reaction\]; where sensation exists there
is at once something more; the recognition of wrong and of the necessary
defence carries with it the intentional act.

But the division of the unreasoning phase of the soul into a desiring
faculty and a passionate faculty- the first identical with the vegetal
principle, the second being a lower phase of it acting upon the blood or
bile or upon the entire living organism- such a division would not give
us a true opposition, for the two would stand in the relation of earlier
phase to derivative.

This difficulty is reasonably met by considering that both faculties are
derivatives and making the division apply to them in so far as they are
new productions from a common source; for the division applies to
movements of desire as such, not to the essence from which they rise.

That essence is not, of its own nature, desire; it is, however, the
force which by consolidating itself with the active manifestation
proceeding from it makes the desire a completed thing. And that
derivative which culminates in passion may not unreasonably be thought
of as a vestige-phase lodged about the heart, since the heart is not the
seat of the soul, but merely the centre to that portion of the blood
which is concerned in the movements of passion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 29](enn348.md)
