[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn352)  [Next](enn354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 34

34\. For ourselves, while whatever in us belongs to the body of the All
should be yielded to its action, we ought to make sure that we submit
only within limits, realizing that the entire man is not thus bound to
it: intelligent servitors yield a part of themselves to their masters
but in part retain their personality, and are thus less absolutely at
beck and call, as not being slaves, not utterly chattels.

The changing configurations within the All could not fail to be produced
as they are, since the moving bodies are not of equal speed.

Now the movement is guided by a Reason-Principle; the relations of the
living whole are altered in consequence; here in our own realm all that
happens reacts in sympathy to the events of that higher sphere: it
becomes, therefore, advisable to ask whether we are to think of this
realm as following upon the higher by agreement, or to attribute to the
configurations the powers underlying the events, and whether such powers
would be vested in the configurations simply or in the relations of the
particular items.

It will be said that one position of one given thing has by no means an
identical effect- whether of indication or of causation- in its relation
to another and still less to any group of others, since each several
being seems to have a natural tendency \[or receptivity\] of its own.

The truth is that the configuration of any given group means merely the
relationship of the several parts, and, changing the members, the
relationship remains the same.

But, this being so, the power will belong, not to the positions but to
the beings holding those positions?

To both taken together. For as things change their relations, and as any
one thing changes place, there is a change of power.

But what power? That of causation or of indication?

To this double thing- the particular configuration of particular beings-
there accrues often the twofold power, that of causation and that of
indication, but sometimes only that of indication. Thus we are obliged
to attribute powers both to the configuration and to the beings entering
into them. In mime dancers each of the hands has its own power, and so
with all the limbs; the relative positions have much power; and, for a
third power, there is that of the accessories and concomitants;
underlying the action of the performers' limbs, there are such items as
the clutched fingers and the muscles and veins following suit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 35](enn354)
