[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn389)  [Next](enn391) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. D. (12) Soul belongs, then, to another Nature: What is this? Is it
something which, while distinct from body, still belongs to it, for
example a harmony or accord?

The Pythagorean school holds this view thinking that the soul is, with
some difference, comparable to the accord in the strings of a lyre. When
the lyre is strung a certain condition is produced upon the strings, and
this is known as accord: in the same way our body is formed of distinct
constituents brought together, and the blend produces at once life and
that soul which is the condition existing upon the bodily total.

That this opinion is untenable has already been shown at length. The
soul is a prior \[to body\], the accord is a secondary to the lyre. Soul
rules, guides and often combats the body; as an accord of body it could
not do these things. Soul is a real being, accord is not. That due
blending \[or accord\] of the corporeal materials which constitute our
frame would be simply health. Each separate part of the body, entering
as a distinct entity into the total, would require a distinct soul \[its
own accord or note\], so that there would be many souls to each person.
Weightiest of all; before this soul there would have to be another soul
to bring about the accord as, in the case of the musical instrument,
there is the musician who produces the accord upon the strings by his
own possession of the principle on which he tunes them: neither musical
strings nor human bodies could put themselves in tune.

Briefly, the soulless is treated as ensouled, the unordered becomes
orderly by accident, and instead of order being due to soul, soul itself
owes its substantial existence to order- which is self-caused. Neither
in the sphere of the partial, nor in that of Wholes could this be true.
The soul, therefore, is not a harmony or accord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn391)
