[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn309)  [Next](enn311.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 24

24\. Now comes the question of the soul leaving the body; where does it
go?

It cannot remain in this world where there is no natural recipient for
it; and it cannot remain attached to anything not of a character to hold
it: it can be held here when only it is less than wise, containing
within itself something of that which lures it.

If it does contain any such alien element it gives itself, with
increasing attachment, to the sphere to which that element naturally
belongs and tends.

The space open to the soul's resort is vast and diverse; the difference
will come by the double force of the individual condition and of the
justice reigning in things. No one can ever escape the suffering
entailed by ill deeds done: the divine law is ineluctable, carrying
bound up, as one with it, the fore-ordained execution of its doom. The
sufferer, all unaware, is swept onward towards his due, hurried always
by the restless driving of his errors, until at last wearied out by that
against which he struggled, he falls into his fit place and, by
self-chosen movement, is brought to the lot he never chose. And the law
decrees, also, the intensity and the duration of the suffering while it
carries with it, too, the lifting of chastisement and the faculty of
rising from those places of pain- all by power of the harmony that
maintains the universal scheme.

Souls, body-bound, are apt to body-punishment; clean souls no longer
drawing to themselves at any point any vestige of body are, by their
very being, outside the bodily sphere; body-free, containing nothing of
body- there where Essence is, and Being, and the Divine within the
Divinity, among Those, within That, such a soul must be.

If you still ask Where, you must ask where those Beings are- and in your
seeking, seek otherwise than with the sight, and not as one seeking for
body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 25](enn311.md)
