[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn328)  [Next](enn330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. The ordering principle is twofold; there is the principle known to
us as the Demiurge and there is the Soul of the All; we apply the
appellation "Zeus" sometimes to the Demiurge and sometimes to the
principle conducting the universe.

When under the name of Zeus we are considering the Demiurge we must
leave out all notions of stage and progress, and recognize one
unchanging and timeless life.

But the life in the kosmos, the life which carries the leading principle
of the universe, still needs elucidation; does it operate without
calculation, without searching into what ought to be done?

Yes: for what must be stands shaped before the kosmos, and is ordered
without any setting in order: the ordered things are merely the things
that come to be; and the principle that brings them into being is Order
itself; this production is an act of a soul linked with an unchangeably
established wisdom whose reflection in that soul is Order. It is an
unchanging wisdom, and there can therefore be no changing in the soul
which mirrors it, not sometimes turned towards it, and sometimes away
from it- and in doubt because it has turned away- but an unremitting
soul performing an unvarying task.

The leading principle of the universe is a unity- and one that is
sovereign without break, not sometimes dominant and sometimes dominated.
What source is there for any such multiplicity of leading principles as
might result in contest and hesitation? And this governing unity must
always desire the one thing: what could bring it to wish now for this
and now for that, to its own greater perplexing? But observe: no
perplexity need follow upon any development of this soul essentially a
unity. The All stands a multiple thing no doubt, having parts, and parts
dashing with parts, but that does not imply that it need be in doubt as
to its conduct: that soul does not take its essence from its ultimates
or from its parts, but from the Primals; it has its source in the First
and thence, along an unhindered path, it flows into a total of things,
conferring grace, and, because it remains one same thing occupied in one
task, dominating. To suppose it pursuing one new object after another is
to raise the question whence that novelty comes into being; the soul,
besides, would be in doubt as to its action; its very work, the kosmos,
would be the less well done by reason of the hesitancy which such
calculations would entail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn330)
