[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn388)  [Next](enn390) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. C. (11) We come to the theory that this pneuma is an earlier form,
one which on entering the cold and being tempered by it develops into
soul by growing finer under that new condition. This is absurd at the
start, since many living beings rise in warmth and have a soul that has
been tempered by cold: still that is the theory- the soul has an earlier
form, and develops its true nature by force of external accidents. Thus
these teachers make the inferior precede the higher, and before that
inferior they put something still lower, their "Habitude." It is obvious
that the Intellectual-Principle is last and has sprung from the soul,
for, if it were first of all, the order of the series must be, second
the soul, then the nature-principle, and always the later inferior, as
the system actually stands.

If they treat God as they do the Intellectual-Principle- as later,
engendered and deriving intellection from without- soul and intellect
and God may prove to have no existence: this would follow if a
potentiality could not come to existence, or does not become actual,
unless the corresponding actuality exists. And what could lead it onward
if there were no separate being in previous actuality? Even on the
absurd supposition that the potentially existent brings itself to
actuality, it must be looking to some Term, and that must be no
potentiality but actual.

No doubt the eternally self-identical may have potentiality and be
self-led to self-realization, but even in this case the being considered
as actualized is of higher order than the being considered as merely
capable of actualization and moving towards a desired Term.

Thus the higher is the earlier, and it has a nature other than body, and
it exists always in actuality: Intellectual-Principle and Soul precede
Nature: thus, Soul does not stand at the level of pneuma or of body.

These arguments are sufficient in themselves, though many others have
been framed, to show that the soul is not to be thought of as a body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn390)
