[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn331)  [Next](enn333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 13

13\. But what is the difference between the Wisdom thus conducting the
universe and the principle known as Nature?

This Wisdom is a first \[within the All-Soul\] while Nature is a last:
for Nature is an image of that Wisdom, and, as a last in the soul,
possesses only the last of the Reason-Principle: we may imagine a thick
waxen seal, in which the imprint has penetrated to the very uttermost
film so as to show on both sides, sharp cut on the upper surface, faint
on the under. Nature, thus, does not know, it merely produces: what it
holds it passes, automatically, to its next; and this transmission to
the corporeal and material constitutes its making power: it acts as a
thing warmed, communicating to what lies in next contact to it the
principle of which it is the vehicle so as to make that also warm in
some less degree.

Nature, being thus a mere communicator, does not possess even the
imaging act. There is \[within the Soul\] intellection, superior to
imagination; and there is imagination standing midway between that
intellection and the impression of which alone Nature is capable. For
Nature has no perception or consciousness of anything; imagination \[the
imaging faculty\] has consciousness of the external, for it enables that
which entertains the image to have knowledge of the experience
encountered, while Nature's function is to engender- of itself though in
an act derived from the active principle \[of the soul\].

Thus the Intellectual-Principle possesses: the Soul of the All eternally
receives from it; this is the soul's life; its consciousness is its
intellection of what is thus eternally present to it; what proceeds from
it into Matter and is manifested there is Nature, with which- or even a
little before it- the series of real being comes to an end, for all in
this order are the ultimates of the intellectual order and the
beginnings of the imitative.

There is also the decided difference that Nature operates toward soul,
and receives from it: soul, near to Nature but superior, operates
towards Nature but without receiving in turn; and there is the still
higher phase \[the purely Intellectual\] with no action whatever upon
body or upon Matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](enn333.md)
