[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn366)  [Next](enn368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. If sight depends upon the linking of the light of vision with the
light leading progressively to the illumined object, then, by the very
hypothesis, one intervening substance, the light, is indispensable: but
if the illuminated body, which is the object of vision, serves as an
agent operating certain changes, some such change might very well
impinge immediately upon the eye, requiring no medium; this all the
more, since as things are the intervening substance, which actually does
exist, is in some degree changed at the point of contact with the eye
\[and so cannot be in itself a requisite to vision\].

Those who have made vision a forth-going act \[and not an in-coming from
the object\] need not postulate an intervening substance- unless,
indeed, to provide against the ray from the eye failing on its path- but
this is a ray of light and light flies straight. Those who make vision
depend upon resistance are obliged to postulate an intervening
substance.

The champions of the image, with its transit through a void, are seeking
the way of least resistance; but since the entire absence of
intervenient gives a still easier path they will not oppose that
hypothesis.

So, too, those that explain vision by sympathy must recognize that an
intervening substance will be a hindrance as tending to check or block
or enfeeble that sympathy; this theory, especially, requires the
admission that any intervenient, and particularly one of kindred nature,
must blunt the perception by itself absorbing part of the activity.
Apply fire to a body continuous through and through, and no doubt the
core will be less affected than the surface: but where we are dealing
with the sympathetic parts of one living being, there will scarcely be
less sensation because of the intervening substance, or, if there should
be, the degree of sensation will still be proportionate to the nature of
the separate part, with the intervenient acting merely as a certain
limitation; this, though, will not be the case where the element
introduced is of a kind to overleap the bridge.

But this is saying that the sympathetic quality of the universe depends
upon its being one living thing, and that our amenability to experience
depends upon our belonging integrally to that unity; would it not follow
that continuity is a condition of any perception of a remote object?

The explanation is that continuity and its concomitant, the bridging
substance, come into play because a living being must be a continuous
thing, but that, none the less, the receiving of impression is not an
essentially necessary result of continuity; if it were, everything would
receive such impression from everything else, and if thing is affected
by thing in various separate orders, there can be no further question of
any universal need of intervening substance.

Why it should be especially requisite in the act of seeing would have to
be explained: in general, an object passing through the air does not
affect it beyond dividing it; when a stone falls, the air simply yields;
nor is it reasonable to explain the natural direction of movement by
resistance; to do so would bring us to the absurdity that resistance
accounts for the upward movement of fire, which on the contrary,
overcomes the resistance of the air by its own essentially quick energy.
If we are told that the resistance is brought more swiftly into play by
the very swiftness of the ascending body, that would be a mere
accidental circumstance, not a cause of the upward motion: in trees the
upthrust from the root depends on no such external propulsion; we, too,
in our movements cleave the air and are in no wise forwarded by its
resistance; it simply flows in from behind to fill the void we make.

If the severance of the air by such bodies leaves it unaffected, why
must there be any severance before the images of sight can reach us?

And, further, once we reject the theory that these images reach us by
way of some outstreaming from the objects seen, there is no reason to
think of the air being affected and passing on to us, in a progression
of impression, what has been impressed upon itself.

If our perception is to depend upon previous impressions made upon the
air, then we have no direct knowledge of the object of vision, but know
it only as through an intermediary, in the same way as we are aware of
warmth where it is not the distant fire itself that warms us, but the
warmed intervening air. That is a matter of contact; but sight is not
produced by contact: the application of an object to the eye would not
produce sight; what is required is the illumination of the intervening
medium; for the air in itself is a dark substance: If it were not for
this dark substance there would probably be no reason for the existence
of light: the dark intervening matter is a barrier, and vision requires
that it be overcome by light. Perhaps also the reason why an object
brought close to the eye cannot be seen is that it confronts us with a
double obscuration, its own and that of the air.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn368)
