[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn477)  [Next](enn479.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. It is a principle with us that one who has attained to the vision of
the Intellectual Beauty and grasped the beauty of the Authentic
Intellect will be able also to come to understand the Father and
Transcendent of that Divine Being. It concerns us, then, to try to see
and say, for ourselves and as far as such matters may be told, how the
Beauty of the divine Intellect and of the Intellectual Kosmos may be
revealed to contemplation.

Let us go to the realm of magnitudes: Suppose two blocks of stone lying
side by side: one is unpatterned, quite untouched by art; the other has
been minutely wrought by the craftsman's hands into some statue of god
or man, a Grace or a Muse, or if a human being, not a portrait but a
creation in which the sculptor's art has concentrated all loveliness.

Now it must be seen that the stone thus brought under the artist's hand
to the beauty of form is beautiful not as stone- for so the crude block
would be as pleasant- but in virtue of the form or idea introduced by
the art. This form is not in the material; it is in the designer before
ever it enters the stone; and the artificer holds it not by his
equipment of eyes and hands but by his participation in his art. The
beauty, therefore, exists in a far higher state in the art; for it does
not come over integrally into the work; that original beauty is not
transferred; what comes over is a derivative and a minor: and even that
shows itself upon the statue not integrally and with entire realization
of intention but only in so far as it has subdued the resistance of the
material.

Art, then, creating in the image of its own nature and content, and
working by the Idea or Reason-Principle of the beautiful object it is to
produce, must itself be beautiful in a far higher and purer degree since
it is the seat and source of that beauty, indwelling in the art, which
must naturally be more complete than any comeliness of the external. In
the degree in which the beauty is diffused by entering into matter, it
is so much the weaker than that concentrated in unity; everything that
reaches outwards is the less for it, strength less strong, heat less
hot, every power less potent, and so beauty less beautiful.

Then again every prime cause must be, within itself, more powerful than
its effect can be: the musical does not derive from an unmusical source
but from music; and so the art exhibited in the material work derives
from an art yet higher.

Still the arts are not to be slighted on the ground that they create by
imitation of natural objects; for, to begin with, these natural objects
are themselves imitations; then, we must recognise that they give no
bare reproduction of the thing seen but go back to the Ideas from which
Nature itself derives, and, furthermore, that much of their work is all
their own; they are holders of beauty and add where nature is lacking.
Thus Pheidias wrought the Zeus upon no model among things of sense but
by apprehending what form Zeus must take if he chose to become manifest
to sight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn479.md)
