[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn487)  [Next](enn489) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. Similarly any one, unable to see himself, but possessed by that
God, has but to bring that divine- within before his consciousness and
at once he sees an image of himself, himself lifted to a better beauty:
now let him ignore that image, lovely though it is, and sink into a
perfect self-identity, no such separation remaining; at once he forms a
multiple unity with the God silently present; in the degree of his power
and will, the two become one; should he turn back to the former duality,
still he is pure and remains very near to the God; he has but to look
again and the same presence is there.

This conversion brings gain: at the first stage, that of separation, a
man is aware of self; but, retreating inwards, he becomes possessor of
all; he puts sense away behind him in dread of the separated life and
becomes one in the Divine; if he plans to see in separation, he sets
himself outside.

The novice must hold himself constantly under some image of the Divine
Being and seek in the light of a clear conception; knowing thus, in a
deep conviction, whither he is going- into what a sublimity he
penetrates- he must give himself forthwith to the inner and, radiant
with the Divine Intellections \[with which he is now one\], be no longer
the seer but, as that place has made him, the seen.

Still, we will be told, one cannot be in beauty and yet fail to see it.
The very contrary: to see the divine as something external is to be
outside of it; to become it is to be most truly in beauty: since sight
deals with the external, there can here be no vision unless in the sense
of identification with the object.

And this identification amounts to a self-knowing, a self-consciousness,
guarded by the fear of losing the self in the desire of a too wide
awareness.

It must be remembered that sensations of the ugly and evil impress us
more violently than those of what is agreeable and yet leave less
knowledge as the residue of the shock: sickness makes the rougher mark,
but health, tranquilly present, explains itself better; it takes the
first place, it is the natural thing, it belongs to our being; illness
is alien, unnatural and thus makes itself felt by its very incongruity,
while the other conditions are native and we take no notice. Such being
our nature, we are most completely aware of ourselves when we are most
completely identified with the object of our knowledge.

This is why in that other sphere, when we are deepest in that knowledge
by intellection, we are aware of none; we are expecting some impression
on sense, which has nothing to report since it has seen nothing and
never could in that order see anything. The unbelieving element is
sense; it is the other, the Intellectual-Principle, that sees; and if
this too doubted, it could not even credit its own existence, for it can
never stand away and with bodily eyes apprehend itself as a visible
object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn489)
