[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn452)  [Next](enn454) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. The Intellectual-Principle, the veritably and essentially
intellective, can this be conceived as ever falling into error, ever
failing to think reality?

Assuredly no: it would no longer be intelligent and therefore no longer
Intellectual-Principle: it must know unceasingly- and never forget; and
its knowledge can be no guesswork, no hesitating assent, no acceptance
of an alien report. Nor can it call on demonstration or, we are told it
may at times act by this or, I method, at least there must be something
patent to it in virtue of its own nature. In actual fact reason tells us
that all its knowledge is thus inherent to it, for there is no means by
which to distinguish between the spontaneous knowledge and the other.
But, in any case, some knowledge, it is conceded, is inherent to it.
Whence are we to understand the certainty of this knowledge to come to
it or how do its objects carry the conviction of their reality?

Consider sense-knowledge: its objects seem most patently certified, yet
the doubt returns whether the apparent reality may not lie in the states
of the percipient rather than in the material before him; the decision
demands intelligence or reasoning. Besides, even granting that what the
senses grasp is really contained in the objects, none the less what is
thus known by the senses is an image: sense can never grasp the thing
itself; this remains for ever outside.

Now, if the Intellectual-Principle in its act- that is in knowing the
intellectual- is to know these its objects as alien, we have to explain
how it makes contact with them: obviously it might never come upon them,
and so might never know them; or it might know them only upon the
meeting: its knowing, at that, would not be an enduring condition. If we
are told that the Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual Objects
are linked in a standing unity, we demand the description of this unity.

Next, the intellections would be impressions, that is to say not native
act but violence from without: now how is such impressing possible and
what shape could the impressions bear?

Intellection, again, becomes at this a mere handling of the external,
exactly like sense-perception. What then distinguishes it unless that it
deals with objects of less extension? And what certitude can it have
that its knowledge is true? Or what enables it to pronounce that the
object is good, beautiful, or just, when each of these ideas is to stand
apart from itself? The very principles of judgement, by which it must be
guided, would be \[as Ideas\] excluded: with objects and canons alike
outside it, so is truth.

Again; either the objects of the Intellectual-Principle are senseless
and devoid of life and intellect or they are in possession of Intellect.

Now, if they are in possession of Intellect, that realm is a union of
both and is Truth. This combined Intellectual realm will be the Primal
Intellect: we have only then to examine how this reality, conjoint of
Intellectual-Principle and its object, is to be understood, whether as
combining self-united identity with yet duality and difference, or what
other relation holds between them.

If on the contrary the objects of Intellectual-Principle are without
intelligence and life, what are they? They cannot be premises, axioms or
predicates: as predicates they would not have real existence; they would
be affirmations linking separate entities, as when we affirm that
justice is good though justice and good are distinct realities.

If we are told that they are self-standing entities- the distinct beings
Justice and Good- then \[supposing them to be outside\] the Intellectual
Realm will not be a unity nor be included in any unity: all is sundered
individuality. Where, then, are they and what spatial distinction keeps
them apart? How does the Intellectual-Principle come to meet with them
as it travels round; what keeps each true to its character; what gives
them enduring identity; what conceivable shape or character can they
have? They are being presented to us as some collection of figures, in
gold or some other material substance, the work of some unknown sculptor
or graver: but at once the Intellectual-Principle which contemplates
them becomes sense-perception; and there still remains the question how
one of them comes to be Justice and another something else.

But the great argument is that if we are to allow that these objects of
Intellection are in the strict sense outside the Intellectual-Principle,
which, therefore, must see them as external, then inevitably it cannot
possess the truth of them.

In all it looks upon, it sees falsely; for those objects must be the
authentic things; yet it looks upon them without containing them and in
such knowledge holds only their images; that is to say, not containing
the authentic, adopting phantasms of the true, it holds the false; it
never possesses reality. If it knows that it possesses the false, it
must confess itself excluded from the truth; if it fails of this
knowledge also, imagining itself to possess the truth which has eluded
it, then the doubled falsity puts it the deeper into error.

It is thus, I suppose, that in sense-perception we have belief instead
of truth; belief is our lief; we satisfy ourselves with something very
different from the original which is the occasion of perception.

In fine, there would be on the hypothesis no truth in the
Intellectual-Principle. But such an Intellectual-Principle would not be
truth, nor truly an Intellectual-Principle. There would be no
Intellectual-Principle at all \[no Divine Mind\]: yet elsewhere truth
cannot be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn454)
