[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn484)  [Next](enn486.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. This then is Beauty primally: it is entire and omnipresent as an
entirety; and therefore in none of its parts or members lacking in
beauty; beautiful thus beyond denial. Certainly it cannot be anything
\[be, for example, Beauty\] without being wholly that thing; it can be
nothing which it is to possess partially or in which it utterly fails
\[and therefore it must entirely be Beauty entire\].

If this principle were not beautiful, what other could be? Its prior
does not deign to be beautiful; that which is the first to manifest
itself- Form and object of vision to the intellect- cannot but be lovely
to see. It is to indicate this that Plato, drawing on something well
within our observation, represents the Creator as approving the work he
has achieved: the intention is to make us feel the lovable beauty of the
autotype and of the Divine Idea; for to admire a representation is to
admire the original upon which it was made.

It is not surprising if we fail to recognise what is passing within us:
lovers, and those in general that admire beauty here, do not stay to
reflect that it is to be traced, as of course it must be, to the Beauty
There. That the admiration of the Demiurge is to be referred to the
Ideal Exemplar is deliberately made evident by the rest of the passage:
"He admired; and determined to bring the work into still closer likeness
with the Exemplar": he makes us feel the magnificent beauty of the
Exemplar by telling us that the Beauty sprung from this world is,
itself, a copy from That.

And indeed if the divine did not exist, the transcendently beautiful, in
a beauty beyond all thought, what could be lovelier than the things we
see? Certainly no reproach can rightly be brought against this world
save only that it is not That.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn486.md)
