[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn468)  [Next](enn470.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. We may be told that nothing prevents an identity being thus
multiple. But there must be a unity underlying the aggregate: a manifold
is impossible without a unity for its source or ground, or at least,
failing some unity, related or unrelated. This unity must be numbered as
first before all and can be apprehended only as solitary and
self-existent.

When we recognize it, resident among the mass of things, our business is
to see it for what it is- present to the items but essentially
distinguished from them- and, while not denying it there, to seek this
underly of all no longer as it appears in those other things but as it
stands in its pure identity by itself. The identity resident in the rest
of things is no doubt close to authentic identity but cannot be it; and,
if the identity of unity is to be displayed beyond itself, it must also
exist within itself alone.

It may be suggested that its existence takes substantial form only by
its being resident among outside things: but, at this, it is itself no
longer simplex nor could any coherence of manifolds occur. On the one
hand things could take substantial existence only if they were in their
own virtue simplex. On the other hand, failing a simplex, the aggregate
of multiples is itself impossible: for the simplex individual thing
could not exist if there were no simplex unity independent of the
individual, \[a principle of identity\] and, not existing, much less
could it enter into composition with any other such: it becomes
impossible then for the compound universe, the aggregate of all, to
exist; it would be the coming together of things that are not, things
not merely lacking an identity of their own but utterly non-existent.

Once there is any manifold, there must be a precedent unity: since any
intellection implies multiplicity in the intellective subject, the
non-multiple must be without intellection; that non-multiple will be the
First: intellection and the Intellectual-Principle must be
characteristic of beings coming later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn470.md)
