[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn406)  [Next](enn408.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. And- if it is desirable to venture the more definite statement of a
personal conviction clashing with the general view- even our human soul
has not sunk entire; something of it is continuously in the Intellectual
Realm, though if that part, which is in this sphere of sense, hold the
mastery, or rather be mastered here and troubled, it keeps us blind to
what the upper phase holds in contemplation.

The object of the Intellectual Act comes within our ken only when it
reaches downward to the level of sensation: for not all that occurs at
any part of the soul is immediately known to us; a thing must, for that
knowledge, be present to the total soul; thus desire locked up within
the desiring faculty remains unknown except when we make it fully ours
by the central faculty of perception, or by the individual choice or by
both at once. Once more, every soul has something of the lower on the
body side and something of the higher on the side of the
Intellectual-Principle.

The Soul of the All, as an entirety, governs the universe through that
part of it which leans to the body side, but since it does not exercise
a will based on calculation as we do- but proceeds by purely
intellectual act as in the execution of an artistic conception- its
ministrance is that of a labourless overpoising, only its lowest phase
being active upon the universe it embellishes.

The souls that have gone into division and become appropriated to some
thing partial have also their transcendent phase, but are preoccupied by
sensation, and in the mere fact of exercising perception they take in
much that clashes with their nature and brings distress and trouble
since the object of their concern is partial, deficient, exposed to many
alien influences, filled with desires of its own and taking its
pleasure, that pleasure which is its lure.

But there is always the other, that which finds no savour in passing
pleasure, but holds its own even way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NINTH TRACTATE](enn408.md)
