[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn435)  [Next](enn437.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. Does it all come down, then, to one phase of the self knowing
another phase?

That would be a case of knower distinguished from known, and would not
be self-knowing.

What, then, if the total combination were supposed to be of one piece,
knower quite undistinguished from known, so that, seeing any given part
of itself as identical with itself, it sees itself by means of itself,
knower and known thus being entirely without differentiation?

To begin with, the distinction in one self thus suggested is a strange
phenomenon. How is the self to make the partition? The thing cannot
happen of itself. And, again, which phase makes it? The phase that
decides to be the knower or that which is to be the known? Then how can
the knowing phase know itself in the known when it has chosen to be the
knower and put itself apart from the known? In such self-knowledge by
sundering it can be aware only of the object, not of the agent; it will
not know its entire content, or itself as an integral whole; it knows
the phase seen but not the seeing phase and thus has knowledge of
something else, not self-knowledge.

In order to perfect self-knowing it must bring over from itself the
knowing phase as well: seeing subject and seen objects must be present
as one thing. Now if in this coalescence of seeing subject with seen
objects, the objects were merely representations of the reality, the
subject would not possess the realities: if it is to possess them it
must do so not by seeing them as the result of any self-division but by
knowing them, containing them, before any self-division occurs.

At that, the object known must be identical with the knowing act \[or
agent\], the Intellectual-Principle, therefore, identical with the
Intellectual Realm. And in fact, if this identity does not exist,
neither does truth; the Principle that should contain realities is found
to contain a transcript, something different from the realities; that
constitutes non-Truth; Truth cannot apply to something conflicting with
itself; what it affirms it must also be.

Thus we find that the Intellectual-Principle, the Intellectual Realm and
Real Being constitute one thing, which is the Primal Being; the primal
Intellectual-Principle is that which contains the realities or, rather,
which is identical with them.

But taking Primal Intellection and its intellectual object to be a
unity, how does that give an Intellective Being knowing itself? An
intellection enveloping its object or identical with it is far from
exhibiting the Intellectual-Principle as self-knowing.

All turns on the identity. The intellectual object is itself an
activity, not a mere potentiality; it is not lifeless; nor are the life
and intellection brought into it as into something naturally devoid of
them, some stone or other dead matter; no, the intellectual object is
essentially existent, the primal reality. As an active force, the first
activity, it must be, also itself, the noblest intellection,
intellection possessing real being since it is entirely true; and such
an intellection, primal and primally existent, can be no other than the
primal principle of Intellection: for that primal principle is no
potentiality and cannot be an agent distinct from its act and thus, once
more, possessing its essential being as a mere potentiality. As an act-
and one whose very being is an act- it must be undistinguishably
identical with its act: but Being and the Intellectual object are also
identical with that act; therefore the Intellectual-Principle, its
exercise of intellection and the object of intellection all are
identical. Given its intellection identical with intellectual object and
the object identical with the Principle itself, it cannot but have
self-knowledge: its intellection operates by the intellectual act which
is itself upon the intellectual object which similarly is itself. It
possesses self-knowing, thus, on every count; the act is itself; and the
object seen in that act- self, is itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn437.md)
