[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn471)  [Next](enn473) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. If this reasoning is valid, The Good has no scope whatever for
intellection which demands something attractive from outside. The Good,
then, is without Act. What Act indeed, could be vested in Activity's
self? No activity has yet again an activity; and whatever we may add to
such Activities as depend from something else, at least we must leave
the first Activity of them all, that from which all depend, as an
uncontaminated identity, one to which no such addition can be made.

That primal Activity, then, is not an intellection, for there is nothing
upon which it could Exercise intellection since it is The First;
besides, intellection itself does not exercise the intellective act;
this belongs to some principle in which intellection is vested. There
is, we repeat, duality in any thinking being; and the First is wholly
above the dual.

But all this may be made more evident by a clearer recognition of the
twofold principle at work wherever there is intellection:

When we affirm the reality of the Real Beings and their individual
identity of being and declare that these Real Beings exist in the
Intellectual Realm, we do not mean merely that they remain unchangeably
self-identical by their very essence, as contrasted with the fluidity
and instability of the sense-realm; the sense-realm itself may contain
the enduring. No; we mean rather that these principles possess, as by
their own virtue, the consummate fulness of being. The Essence described
as the primally existent cannot be a shadow cast by Being, but must
possess Being entire; and Being is entire when it holds the form and
idea of intellection and of life. In a Being, then, the existence, the
intellection, the life are present as an aggregate. When a thing is a
Being, it is also an Intellectual-Principle, when it is an
Intellectual-Principle it is a Being; intellection and Being are
co-existents. Therefore intellection is a multiple not a unitary and
that which does not belong to this order can have no Intellection. And
if we turn to the partial and particular, there is the Intellectual form
of man, and there is man, there is the Intellectual form of horse and
there is horse, the Intellectual form of Justice, and Justice.

Thus all is dual: the unit is a duality and yet again the dual reverts
to unity.

That, however, which stands outside all this category can be neither an
individual unity nor an aggregate of all the duals or in any way a
duality. How the duals rose from The One is treated elsewhere.

What stands above Being stands above intellection: it is no weakness in
it not to know itself, since as pure unity it contains nothing which it
needs to explore. But it need not even spend any knowing upon things
outside itself: this which was always the Good of all gives them
something greater and better than its knowledge of them in giving them
in their own identity to cling, in whatever measure be possible, to a
principle thus lofty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE](enn473)
