[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn436)  [Next](enn438.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Thus we have shown that there exists that which in the strictest
sense possesses self-knowing.

This self-knowing agent, perfect in the Intellectual-Principle, is
modified in the Soul.

The difference is that, while the soul knows itself as within something
else, the Intellectual-Principle knows itself as self-depending, knows
all its nature and character, and knows by right of its own being and by
simple introversion. When it looks upon the authentic existences it is
looking upon itself; its vision as its effective existence, and this
efficacy is itself since the Intellectual-Principle and the Intellectual
Act are one: this is an integral seeing itself by its entire being, not
a part seeing by a part.

But has our discussion issued in an Intellectual-Principle having a
persuasive activity \[furnishing us with probability\]?

No: it brings compulsion not persuasion; compulsion belongs to the
Intellectual-Principle, persuasion to the soul or mind, and we seem to
desire to be persuaded rather than to see the truth in the pure
intellect.

As long as we were Above, collected within the Intellectual nature, we
were satisfied; we were held in the intellectual act; we had vision
because we drew all into unity- for the thinker in us was the
Intellectual-Principle telling us of itself- and the soul or mind was
motionless, assenting to that act of its prior. But now that we are once
more here- living in the secondary, the soul- we seek for persuasive
probabilities: it is through the image we desire to know the archetype.

Our way is to teach our soul how the Intellectual-Principle exercises
self-vision; the phase thus to be taught is that which already touches
the intellective order, that which we call the understanding or
intelligent soul, indicating by the very name that it is already of
itself in some degree an Intellectual-Principle or that it holds its
peculiar power through and from that Principle. This phase must be
brought to understand by what means it has knowledge of the thing it
sees and warrant for what it affirms: if it became what it affirms, it
would by that fact possess self-knowing. All its vision and affirmation
being in the Supreme or deriving from it- There where itself also is- it
will possess self-knowledge by its right as a Reason-Principle, claiming
its kin and bringing all into accord with the divine imprint upon it.

The soul therefore \[to attain self-knowledge\] has only to set this
image \[that is to say, its highest phase\] alongside the veritable
Intellectual-Principle which we have found to be identical with the
truths constituting the objects of intellection, the world of Primals
and Reality: for this Intellectual-Principle, by very definition, cannot
be outside of itself, the Intellectual Reality: self-gathered and
unalloyed, it is Intellectual-Principle through all the range of its
being- for unintelligent intelligence is not possible- and thus it
possesses of necessity self-knowing, as a being immanent to itself and
one having for function and essence to be purely and solely
Intellectual-Principle. This is no doer; the doer, not self-intent but
looking outward, will have knowledge, in some kind, of the external,
but, if wholly of this practical order, need have no self-knowledge;
where, on the contrary, there is no action- and of course the pure
Intellectual-Principle cannot be straining after any absent good- the
intention can be only towards the self; at once self-knowing becomes not
merely plausible but inevitable; what else could living signify in a
being immune from action and existing in Intellect?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn438.md)
