[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn408)  [Next](enn410.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. That the Soul of every individual is one thing we deduce from the
fact that it is present entire at every point of the body- the sign of
veritable unity- not some part of it here and another part there. In all
sensitive beings the sensitive soul is an omnipresent unity, and so in
the forms of vegetal life the vegetal soul is entire at each several
point throughout the organism.

Now are we to hold similarly that your soul and mine and all are one,
and that the same thing is true of the universe, the soul in all the
several forms of life being one soul, not parcelled out in separate
items, but an omnipresent identity?

If the soul in me is a unity, why need that in the universe be otherwise
seeing that there is no longer any question of bulk or body? And if
that, too, is one soul and yours, and mine, belongs to it, then yours
and mine must also be one: and if, again, the soul of the universe and
mine depend from one soul, once more all must be one.

What then in itself is this one soul?

First we must assure ourselves of the possibility of all souls being one
as that of any given individual is.

It must, no doubt, seem strange that my soul and that of any and
everybody else should be one thing only: it might mean my feelings being
felt by someone else, my goodness another's too, my desire, his desire,
all our experience shared with each other and with the (one-souled)
universe, so that the very universe itself would feel whatever I felt.

Besides how are we to reconcile this unity with the distinction of
reasoning soul and unreasoning, animal soul and vegetal?

Yet if we reject that unity, the universe itself ceases to be one thing
and souls can no longer be included under any one principle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn410.md)
