[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn432)  [Next](enn434.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. We begin with the soul, asking whether it is to be allowed
self-knowledge and what the knowing principle in it would be and how
operating.

The sense-principle in it we may at once decide, takes cognisance only
of the external; even in any awareness of events within the body it
occupies, this is still the perception of something external to a
principle dealing with those bodily conditions not as within but as
beneath itself.

The reasoning-principle in the Soul acts upon the representations
standing before it as the result of sense-perception; these it judges,
combining, distinguishing: or it may also observe the impressions, so to
speak, rising from the Intellectual-Principle, and has the same power of
handling these; and reasoning will develop to wisdom where it recognizes
the new and late-coming impressions \[those of sense\] and adapts them,
so to speak, to those it holds from long before- the act which may be
described as the soul's Reminiscence.

So far as this, the efficacy of the Intellectual-Principle in the Soul
certainly reaches; but is there also introversion and self-cognition or
is that power to be reserved strictly for the Divine Mind?

If we accord self-knowing to this phase of the soul we make it an
Intellectual-Principle and will have to show what distinguishes it from
its prior; if we refuse it self-knowing, all our thought brings us step
by step to some principle which has this power, and we must discover
what such self-knowing consists in. If, again, we do allow
self-knowledge in the lower we must examine the question of degree; for
if there is no difference of degree, then the reasoning principle in
soul is the Intellectual-Principle unalloyed.

We ask, then, whether the understanding principle in the soul has
equally the power of turning inwards upon itself or whether it has no
more than that of comprehending the impressions, superior and inferior,
which it receives.

The first stage is to discover what this comprehension is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn434.md)
