[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn470)  [Next](enn472.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. And again: the multiple must be always seeking its identity,
desiring self-accord and self-awareness: but what scope is there within
what is an absolute unity in which to move towards its identity or at
what term may it hope for self-knowing? It holds its identity in its
very essence and is above consciousness and all intellective act.
Intellection is not a primal either in the fact of being or in the value
of being; it is secondary and derived: for there exists The Good; and
this moves towards itself while its sequent is moved and by that
movement has its characteristic vision. The intellective act may be
defined as a movement towards The Good in some being that aspires
towards it; the effort produces the fact; the two are coincident; to see
is to have desired to see: hence again the Authentic Good has no need of
intellection since itself and nothing else is its good.

The intellective act is a movement towards the unmoved Good: thus the
self-intellection in all save the Absolute Good is the working of the
imaged Good within them: the intellectual principle recognises the
likeness, sees itself as a good to itself, an object of attraction: it
grasps at that manifestation of The Good and, in holding that, holds
self-vision: if the state of goodness is constant, it remains constantly
self-attractive and self-intellective. The self-intellection is not
deliberate: it sees itself as an incident in its contemplation of The
Good; for it sees itself in virtue of its Act; and, in all that exists,
the Act is towards The Good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn472.md)
