[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn440)  [Next](enn442.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. This matter need not be elaborated at present: it suffices to say
that if the created were all, these ultimates \[the higher\] need not
exist: but the Supreme does include primals, the primals because the
producers. In other words, there must be, with the made, the making
source; and, unless these are to be identical, there will be need of
some link between them. Similarly, this link which is the
Intellectual-Principle demands yet a Transcendent. If we are asked why
this Transcendent also should not have self-vision, our answer is that
it has no need of vision; but this we will discuss later: for the moment
we go back, since the question at issue is gravely important.

We repeat that the Intellectual-Principle must have, actually has,
self-vision, firstly because it has multiplicity, next because it exists
for the external and therefore must be a seeing power, one seeing that
external; in fact its very essence is vision. Given some external, there
must be vision; and if there be nothing external the
Intellectual-Principle \[Divine Mind\] exists in vain. Unless there is
something beyond bare unity, there can be no vision: vision must
converge with a visible object. And this which the seer is to see can be
only a multiple, no undistinguishable unity; nor could a universal unity
find anything upon which to exercise any act; all, one and desolate,
would be utter stagnation; in so far as there is action, there is
diversity. If there be no distinctions, what is there to do, what
direction in which to move? An agent must either act upon the extern or
be a multiple and so able to act upon itself: making no advance towards
anything other than itself, it is motionless and where it could know
only blank fixity it can know nothing.

The intellective power, therefore, when occupied with the intellectual
act, must be in a state of duality, whether one of the two elements
stand actually outside or both lie within: the intellectual act will
always comport diversity as well as the necessary identity, and in the
same way its characteristic objects \[the Ideas\] must stand to the
Intellectual-Principle as at once distinct and identical. This applies
equally to the single object; there can be no intellection except of
something containing separable detail and, since the object is a
Reason-principle \[a discriminated Idea\] it has the necessary element
of multiplicity. The Intellectual-Principle, thus, is informed of itself
by the fact of being a multiple organ of vision, an eye receptive of
many illuminated objects. If it had to direct itself to a memberless
unity, it would be dereasoned: what could it say or know of such an
object? The self-affirmation of \[even\] a memberless unity implies the
repudiation of all that does not enter into the character: in other
words, it must be multiple as a preliminary to being itself.

Then, again, in the assertion "I am this particular thing," either the
"particular thing" is distinct from the assertor- and there is a false
statement- or it is included within it, and, at once, multiplicity is
asserted: otherwise the assertion is "I am what I am," or "I am I."

If it be no more than a simple duality able to say "I and that other
phase," there is already multiplicity, for there is distinction and
ground of distinction, there is number with all its train of separate
things.

In sum, then, a knowing principle must handle distinct items: its object
must, at the moment of cognition, contain diversity; otherwise the thing
remains unknown; there is mere conjunction, such a contact, without
affirmation or comprehension, as would precede knowledge, the intellect
not yet in being, the impinging agent not percipient.

Similarly the knowing principle itself cannot remain simplex, especially
in the act of self-knowing: all silent though its self-perception be, it
is dual to itself. Of course it has no need of minute self-handling
since it has nothing to learn by its intellective act; before it is
\[effectively\] Intellect, it holds knowledge of its own content.
Knowledge implies desire, for it is, so to speak, discovery crowning a
search; the utterly undifferentiated remains self-centred and makes no
enquiry about that self: anything capable of analysing its content, must
be a manifold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn442.md)
