[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn402)  [Next](enn404) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. So it is with the individual souls; the appetite for the divine
Intellect urges them to return to their source, but they have, too, a
power apt to administration in this lower sphere; they may be compared
to the light attached upwards to the sun, but not grudging its
presidency to what lies beneath it. In the Intellectual, then, they
remain with soul-entire, and are immune from care and trouble; in the
heavenly sphere, absorbed in the soul-entire, they are administrators
with it just as kings, associated with the supreme ruler and governing
with him, do not descend from their kingly stations: the souls indeed
\[as distinguished from the kosmos\] are thus far in the one place with
their overlord; but there comes a stage at which they descend from the
universal to become partial and self-centred; in a weary desire of
standing apart they find their way, each to a place of its very own.
This state long maintained, the soul is a deserter from the All; its
differentiation has severed it; its vision is no longer set in the
Intellectual; it is a partial thing, isolated, weakened, full of care,
intent upon the fragment; severed from the whole, it nestles in one form
of being; for this, it abandons all else, entering into and caring for
only the one, for a thing buffeted about by a worldful of things: thus
it has drifted away from the universal and, by an actual presence, it
administers the particular; it is caught into contact now, and tends to
the outer to which it has become present and into whose inner depths it
henceforth sinks far.

With this comes what is known as the casting of the wings, the
enchaining in body: the soul has lost that innocency of conducting the
higher which it knew when it stood with the All-Soul, that earlier state
to which all its interest would bid it hasten back.

It has fallen: it is at the chain: debarred from expressing itself now
through its intellectual phase, it operates through sense, it is a
captive; this is the burial, the encavernment, of the Soul.

But in spite of all it has, for ever, something transcendent: by a
conversion towards the intellective act, it is loosed from the shackles
and soars- when only it makes its memories the starting point of a new
vision of essential being. Souls that take this way have place in both
spheres, living of necessity the life there and the life here by turns,
the upper life reigning in those able to consort more continuously with
the divine Intellect, the lower dominant where character or
circumstances are less favourable.

All this is indicated by Plato, without emphasis, where he distinguishes
those of the second mixing-bowl, describes them as "parts," and goes on
to say that, having in this way become partial, they must of necessity
experience birth.

Of course, where he speaks of God sowing them, he is to be understood as
when he tells of God speaking and delivering orations; what is rooted in
the nature of the All is figuratively treated as coming into being by
generation and creation: stage and sequence are transferred, for clarity
of exposition, to things whose being and definite form are eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn404)
