[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn428)  [Next](enn430.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. The One is all things and no one of them; the source of all things
is not all things; all things are its possession- running back, so to
speak, to it- or, more correctly, not yet so, they will be.

But a universe from an unbroken unity, in which there appears no
diversity, not even duality?

It is precisely because that is nothing within the One that all things
are from it: in order that Being may be brought about, the source must
be no Being but Being's generator, in what is to be thought of as the
primal act of generation. Seeking nothing, possessing nothing, lacking
nothing, the One is perfect and, in our metaphor, has overflowed, and
its exuberance has produced the new: this product has turned again to
its begetter and been filled and has become its contemplator and so an
Intellectual-Principle.

That station towards the one \[the fact that something exists in
presence of the One\] establishes Being; that vision directed upon the
One establishes the Intellectual-Principle; standing towards the One to
the end of vision, it is simultaneously Intellectual-Principle and
Being; and, attaining resemblance in virtue of this vision, it repeats
the act of the One in pouring forth a vast power.

This second outflow is a Form or Idea representing the Divine Intellect
as the Divine Intellect represented its own prior, The One.

This active power sprung from essence \[from the Intellectual-Principle
considered as Being\] is Soul.

Soul arises as the idea and act of the motionless
Intellectual-Principle- which itself sprang from its own motionless
prior- but the soul's operation is not similarly motionless; its image
is generated from its movement. It takes fulness by looking to its
source; but it generates its image by adopting another, a downward,
movement.

This image of Soul is Sense and Nature, the vegetal principle.

Nothing, however, is completely severed from its prior. Thus the human
Soul appears to reach away as far down as to the vegetal order: in some
sense it does, since the life of growing things is within its province;
but it is not present entire; when it has reached the vegetal order it
is there in the sense that having moved thus far downwards it produces-
by its outgoing and its tendency towards the less good- another
hypostasis or form of being just as its prior (the loftier phase of the
Soul) is produced from the Intellectual-Principle which yet remains in
untroubled self-possession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn430.md)
