[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn439)  [Next](enn441) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. In order, then, to know what the Divine Mind is, we must observe
soul and especially its most God-like phase.

One certain way to this knowledge is to separate first, the man from the
body- yourself, that is, from your body- next to put aside that soul
which moulded the body, and, very earnestly, the system of sense with
desires and impulses and every such futility, all setting definitely
towards the mortal: what is left is the phase of the soul which we have
declared to be an image of the Divine Intellect, retaining some light
from that sun, while it pours downward upon the sphere of magnitudes
\[that is, of Matter\] the light playing about itself which is generated
from its own nature.

Of course we do not pretend that the sun's light \[as the analogy might
imply\] remains a self-gathered and sun-centred thing: it is at once
outrushing and indwelling; it strikes outward continuously, lap after
lap, until it reaches us upon our earth: we must take it that all the
light, including that which plays about the sun's orb, has travelled;
otherwise we would have a void expanse, that of the space- which is
material- next to the sun's orb. The Soul, on the contrary- a light
springing from the Divine Mind and shining about it- is in closest touch
with that source; it is not in transit but remains centred there, and,
in likeness to that principle, it has no place: the light of the sun is
actually in the air, but the soul is clean of all such contact so that
its immunity is patent to itself and to any other of the same order.

And by its own characteristic act, though not without reasoning process,
it knows the nature of the Intellectual-Principle which, on its side,
knows itself without need of reasoning, for it is ever self-present
whereas we become so by directing our soul towards it; our life is
broken and there are many lives, but that principle needs no changings
of life or of things; the lives it brings to being are for others not
for itself: it cannot need the inferior; nor does it for itself produce
the less when it possesses or is the all, nor the images when it
possesses or is the prototype.

Anyone not of the strength to lay hold of the first soul, that
possessing pure intellection, must grasp that which has to do with our
ordinary thinking and thence ascend: if even this prove too hard, let
him turn to account the sensitive phase which carries the ideal forms of
the less fine degree, that phase which, too, with its powers, is
immaterial and lies just within the realm of Ideal-principles.

One may even, if it seem necessary, begin as low as the reproductive
soul and its very production and thence make the ascent, mounting from
those ultimate ideal principles to the ultimates in the higher sense,
that is to the primals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn441)
