[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn423)  [Next](enn425) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. Anaxagoras, again, in his assertion of a Mind pure and unmixed,
affirms a simplex First and a sundered One, though writing long ago he
failed in precision.

Heraclitus, with his sense of bodily forms as things of ceaseless
process and passage, knows the One as eternal and intellectual.

In Empedocles, similarly, we have a dividing principle, "Strife," set
against "Friendship"- which is The One and is to him bodiless, while the
elements represent Matter.

Later there is Aristotle; he begins by making the First transcendent and
intellective but cancels that primacy by supposing it to have
self-intellection. Further he affirms a multitude of other intellective
beings- as many indeed as there are orbs in the heavens; one such
principle as in- over to every orb- and thus his account of the
Intellectual Realm differs from Plato's and, failing reason, he brings
in necessity; though whatever reasons he had alleged there would always
have been the objection that it would be more reasonable that all the
spheres, as contributory to one system, should look to a unity, to the
First.

We are obliged also to ask whether to Aristotle's mind all Intellectual
Beings spring from one, and that one their First; or whether the
Principles in the Intellectual are many.

If from one, then clearly the Intellectual system will be analogous to
that of the universe of sense-sphere encircling sphere, with one, the
outermost, dominating all- the First \[in the Intellectual\] will
envelop the entire scheme and will be an Intellectual \[or Archetypal\]
Kosmos; and as in our universe the spheres are not empty but the first
sphere is thick with stars and none without them, so, in the
Intellectual Kosmos, those principles of Movement will envelop a
multitude of Beings, and that world will be the realm of the greater
reality.

If on the contrary each is a principle, then the effective powers become
a matter of chance; under what compulsion are they to hold together and
act with one mind towards that work of unity, the harmony of the entire
heavenly system? Again what can make it necessary that the material
bodies of the heavenly system be equal in number to the Intellectual
moving principles, and how can these incorporeal Beings be numerically
many when there is no Matter to serve as the basis of difference?

For these reasons the ancient philosophers that ranged themselves most
closely to the school of Pythagoras and of his later followers and to
that of Pherekudes, have insisted upon this Nature, some developing the
subject in their writings while others treated of it merely in unwritten
discourses, some no doubt ignoring it entirely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn425)
