[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn459)  [Next](enn461.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. So that we are left wondering whence it came, from within or
without; and when it has gone, we say, "It was here. Yet no; it was
beyond!" But we ought not to question whence; there is no whence, no
coming or going in place; now it is seen and now not seen. We must not
run after it, but fit ourselves for the vision and then wait tranquilly
for its appearance, as the eye waits on the rising of the sun, which in
its own time appears above the horizon- out of the ocean, as the poets
say- and gives itself to our sight.

This Principle, of which the sun is an image, where has it its dawning,
what horizon does it surmount to appear?

It stands immediately above the contemplating Intellect which has held
itself at rest towards the vision, looking to nothing else than the good
and beautiful, setting its entire being to that in a perfect surrender,
and now tranquilly filled with power and taking a new beauty to itself,
gleaming in the light of that presence.

This advent, still, is not by expectation: it is a coming without
approach; the vision is not of something that must enter but of
something present before all else, before the Intellect itself made any
movement. Yet it is the Intellect that must move, to come and to go-
going because it has not known where it should stay and where that
presence stays, the nowhere contained.

And if the Intellect, too, could hold itself in that nowhere- not that
it is ever in place; it too is uncontained, utterly unplaced- it would
remain for ever in the vision of its prior, or, indeed, not in vision
but in identity, all duality annulled. But it is Intellect \[having a
sphere of its own\] and, when it is to see, it must see by that in it
which is not Intellect \[by its divinest power\].

No doubt it is wonderful that The First should thus be present without
any coming, and that, while it is nowhere, nowhere is it not; but
wonderful though this be in itself, the contrary would be more wonderful
to those who know. Of course neither this contrary nor the wonder at it
can be entertained. But we must explain:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn461.md)
