[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn479)  [Next](enn481) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. Thus there is in the Nature-Principle itself an Ideal archetype of
the beauty that is found in material forms and, of that archetype again,
the still more beautiful archetype in Soul, source of that in Nature. In
the proficient soul this is brighter and of more advanced loveliness:
adorning the soul and bringing to it a light from that greater light
which is beauty primally, its immediate presence sets the soul
reflecting upon the quality of this prior, the archetype which has no
such entries, and is present nowhere but remains in itself alone, and
thus is not even to be called a Reason-Principle but is the creative
source of the very first Reason-Principle which is the Beauty to which
Soul serves as Matter.

This prior, then, is the Intellectual-Principle, the veritable, abiding
and not fluctuant since not taking intellectual quality from outside
itself. By what image thus, can we represent it? We have nowhere to go
but to what is less. Only from itself can we take an image of it; that
is, there can be no representation of it, except in the sense that we
represent gold by some portion of gold- purified, either actually or
mentally, if it be impure- insisting at the same time that this is not
the total thing-gold, but merely the particular gold of a particular
parcel. In the same way we learn in this matter from the purified
Intellect in ourselves or, if you like, from the Gods and the glory of
the Intellect in them.

For assuredly all the Gods are august and beautiful in a beauty beyond
our speech. And what makes them so? Intellect; and especially Intellect
operating within them \[the divine sun and stars\] to visibility. It is
not through the loveliness of their corporeal forms: even those that
have body are not gods by that beauty; it is in virtue of Intellect that
they, too, are gods, and as gods beautiful. They do not veer between
wisdom and folly: in the immunity of Intellect unmoving and pure, they
are wise always, all-knowing, taking cognisance not of the human but of
their own being and of all that lies within the contemplation of
Intellect. Those of them whose dwelling is in the heavens, are ever in
this meditation- what task prevents them?- and from afar they look, too,
into that further heaven by a lifting of the head. The Gods belonging to
that higher Heaven itself, they whose station is upon it and in it, see
and know in virtue of their omnipresence to it. For all There is heaven;
earth is heaven, and sea heaven; and animal and plant and man; all is
the heavenly content of that heaven: and the Gods in it, despising
neither men nor anything else that is there where all is of the heavenly
order, traverse all that country and all space in peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn481)
