[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn458)  [Next](enn460.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Consider the act of ocular vision:

There are two elements here; there is the form perceptible to the sense
and there is the medium by which the eye sees that form. This medium is
itself perceptible to the eye, distinct from the form to be seen, but
the cause of the seeing; it is perceived at the one stroke in that form
and on it and, hence, is not distinguished from it, the eye being held
entirely by the illuminated object. When on the contrary this medium
presents itself alone it is seen directly- though even then actual sight
demands some solid base; there must be something besides the medium
which, unless embracing some object, eludes perception; thus the light
inherent to the sun would not be perceived but for the solidity of the
mass. If it is objected that the sun is light entire, this would only be
a proof of our assertion: no other visible form will contain light which
must, then, have no other property than that of visibility, and in fact
all other visible objects are something more than light alone.

So it is with the act of vision in the Intellectual Principle.

This vision sees, by another light, the objects illuminated by the First
Principle: setting itself among them, it sees veritably; declining
towards the lower Nature, that upon which the light from above rests, it
has less of that vision. Passing over the visible and looking to the
medium by which it sees, then it holds the Light and the source of
Light.

But since the Intellectual-Principle is not to see this light as
something external we return to our analogy; the eye is not wholly
dependent upon an outside and alien light; there is an earlier light
within itself, a more brilliant, which it sees sometimes in a momentary
flash. At night in the darkness a gleam leaps from within the eye: or
again we make no effort to see anything; the eyelids close; yet a light
flashes before us; or we rub the eye and it sees the light it contains.
This is sight without the act, but it is the truest seeing, for it sees
light whereas its other objects were the lit not the light.

It is certainly thus that the Intellectual-Principle, hiding itself from
all the outer, withdrawing to the inmost, seeing nothing, must have its
vision- not of some other light in some other thing but of the light
within itself, unmingled, pure, suddenly gleaming before it;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn460.md)
