[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn437)  [Next](enn439.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. The contemplating of God, we might answer.

But to admit its knowing God is to be compelled to admit its
self-knowing. It will know what it holds from God, what God has given
forth or may; with this knowledge, it knows itself at the stroke, for it
is itself one of those given things- in fact is all of them. Knowing God
and His power, then, it knows itself, since it comes from Him and
carries His power upon it; if, because here the act of vision is
identical with the object, it is unable to see God clearly, then all the
more, by the equation of seeing and seen, we are driven back upon that
self-seeing and self-knowing in which seeing and thing seen are
undistinguishably one thing.

And what else is there to attribute to it?

Repose, no doubt; but, to an Intellectual-Principle, Repose is not an
abdication from intellect; its Repose is an Act, the act of abstention
from the alien: in all forms of existence repose from the alien leaves
the characteristic activity intact, especially where the Being is not
merely potential but fully realized.

In the Intellectual-Principle, the Being is an Act and in the absence of
any other object it must be self-directed; by this self-intellection it
holds its Act within itself and upon itself; all that can emanate from
it is produced by this self-centering and self-intention; first-
self-gathered, it then gives itself or gives something in its likeness;
fire must first be self-centred and be fire, true to fire's natural Act;
then it may reproduce itself elsewhere.

Once more, then; the Intellectual-Principle is a self-intent activity,
but soul has the double phase, one inner, intent upon the
Intellectual-Principle, the other outside it and facing to the external;
by the one it holds the likeness to its source; by the other, even in
its unlikeness, it still comes to likeness in this sphere, too, by
virtue of action and production; in its action it still contemplates,
and its production produces Ideal-forms- divine intellections perfectly
wrought out- so that all its creations are representations of the divine
Intellection and of the divine Intellect, moulded upon the archetype, of
which all are emanations and images, the nearer more true, the very
latest preserving some faint likeness of the source.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn439.md)
