[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn417)  [Next](enn419.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. The Soul once seen to be thus precious, thus divine, you may hold
the faith that by its possession you are already nearing God: in the
strength of this power make upwards towards Him: at no great distance
you must attain: there is not much between.

But over this divine, there is still a diviner: grasp the upward
neighbour of the soul, its prior and source.

Soul, for all the worth we have shown to belong to it, is yet a
secondary, an image of the Intellectual-Principle: reason uttered is an
image of the reason stored within the soul, and in the same way soul is
an utterance of the Intellectual-Principle: it is even the total of its
activity, the entire stream of life sent forth by that Principle to the
production of further being; it is the forthgoing heat of a fire which
has also heat essentially inherent. But within the Supreme we must see
energy not as an overflow but in the double aspect of integral inherence
with the establishment of a new being. Sprung, in other words, from the
Intellectual-Principle, Soul is intellective, but with an intellection
operation by the method of reasonings: for its perfecting it must look
to that Divine Mind, which may be thought of as a father watching over
the development of his child born imperfect in comparison with himself.

Thus its substantial existence comes from the Intellectual-Principle;
and the Reason within it becomes Act in virtue of its contemplation of
that prior; for its thought and act are its own intimate possession when
it looks to the Supreme Intelligence; those only are soul-acts which are
of this intellective nature and are determined by its own character; all
that is less noble is foreign \[traceable to Matter\] and is accidental
to the soul in the course of its peculiar task.

In two ways, then, the Intellectual-Principle enhances the divine
quality of the soul, as father and as immanent presence; nothing
separates them but the fact that they are not one and the same, that
there is succession, that over against a recipient there stands the
ideal-form received; but this recipient, Matter to the Supreme
Intelligence, is also noble as being at once informed by divine
intellect and uncompounded.

What the Intellectual-Principle must be is carried in the single word
that Soul, itself so great, is still inferior.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn419.md)
