[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn400)  [Next](enn402.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. Enquiring, then, of Plato as to our own soul, we find ourselves
forced to enquire into the nature of soul in general- to discover what
there can be in its character to bring it into partnership with body,
and, again, what this kosmos must be in which, willing unwilling or in
any way at all, soul has its activity.

We have to face also the question as to whether the Creator has planned
well or ill...... like our souls, which it may be, are such that
governing their inferior, the body, they must sink deeper and deeper
into it if they are to control it.

No doubt the individual body- though in all cases appropriately placed
within the universe- is of itself in a state of dissolution, always on
the way to its natural terminus, demanding much irksome forethought to
save it from every kind of outside assailant, always gripped by need,
requiring every help against constant difficulty: but the body inhabited
by the World-Soul- complete, competent, self-sufficing, exposed to
nothing contrary to its nature- this needs no more than a brief word of
command, while the governing soul is undeviatingly what its nature makes
it wish to be, and, amenable neither to loss nor to addition, knows
neither desire nor distress.

This is how we come to read that our soul, entering into association
with that complete soul and itself thus made perfect, walks the lofty
ranges, administering the entire kosmos, and that as long as it does not
secede and is neither inbound to body nor held in any sort of servitude,
so long it tranquilly bears its part in the governance of the All,
exactly like the world-soul itself; for in fact it suffers no hurt
whatever by furnishing body with the power to existence, since not every
form of care for the inferior need wrest the providing soul from its own
sure standing in the highest.

The soul's care for the universe takes two forms: there is the
supervising of the entire system, brought to order by deedless command
in a kindly presidence, and there is that over the individual, implying
direct action, the hand to the task, one might say, in immediate
contact: in the second kind of care the agent absorbs much of the nature
of its object.

Now in its comprehensive government of the heavenly system, the soul's
method is that of an unbroken transcendence in its highest phases, with
penetration by its lower power: at this, God can no longer be charged
with lowering the All-Soul, which has not been deprived of its natural
standing and from eternity possesses and will unchangeably possess that
rank and habit which could never have been intruded upon it against the
course of nature but must be its characteristic quality, neither failing
ever nor ever beginning.

Where we read that the souls or stars stand to their bodily forms as the
All to the material forms within it- for these starry bodies are
declared to be members of the soul's circuit- we are given to understand
that the star-souls also enjoy the blissful condition of transcendence
and immunity that becomes them.

And so we might expect: commerce with the body is repudiated for two
only reasons, as hindering the soul's intellective act and as filling
with pleasure, desire, pain; but neither of these misfortunes can befall
a soul which has never deeply penetrated into the body, is not a slave
but a sovereign ruling a body of such an order as to have no need and no
shortcoming and therefore to give ground for neither desire nor fear.

There is no reason why it should be expectant of evil with regard to
such a body nor is there any such preoccupied concern, bringing about a
veritable descent, as to withdraw it from its noblest and most blessed
vision; it remains always intent upon the Supreme, and its governance of
this universe is effected by a power not calling upon act.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn402.md)
