[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn480)  [Next](enn482.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. To "live at ease" is There; and, to these divine beings, verity is
mother and nurse, existence and sustenance; all that is not of process
but of authentic being they see, and themselves in all: for all is
transparent, nothing dark, nothing resistant; every being is lucid to
every other, in breadth and depth; light runs through light. And each of
them contains all within itself, and at the same time sees all in every
other, so that everywhere there is all, and all is all and each all, and
infinite the glory. Each of them is great; the small is great; the sun,
There, is all the stars; and every star, again, is all the stars and
sun. While some one manner of being is dominant in each, all are
mirrored in every other.

Movement There is pure \[as self-caused\] for the moving principle is
not a separate thing to complicate it as it speeds.

So, too, Repose is not troubled, for there is no admixture of the
unstable; and the Beauty is all beauty since it is not merely resident
\[as an attribute or addition\] in some beautiful object. Each There
walks upon no alien soil; its place is its essential self; and, as each
moves, so to speak, towards what is Above, it is attended by the very
ground from which it starts: there is no distinguishing between the
Being and the Place; all is Intellect, the Principle and the ground on
which it stands, alike. Thus we might think that our visible sky \[the
ground or place of the stars\], lit, as it is, produces the light which
reaches us from it, though of course this is really produced by the
stars \[as it were, by the Principles of light alone, not also by the
ground as the analogy would require\].

In our realm all is part rising from part and nothing can be more than
partial; but There each being is an eternal product of a whole and is at
once a whole and an individual manifesting as part but, to the keen
vision There, known for the whole it is.

The myth of Lynceus seeing into the very deeps of the earth tells us of
those eyes in the divine. No weariness overtakes this vision, which yet
brings no such satiety as would call for its ending; for there never was
a void to be filled so that, with the fulness and the attainment of
purpose, the sense of sufficiency be induced: nor is there any such
incongruity within the divine that one Being there could be repulsive to
another: and of course all There are unchangeable. This absence of
satisfaction means only a satisfaction leading to no distaste for that
which produces it; to see is to look the more, since for them to
continue in the contemplation of an infinite self and of infinite
objects is but to acquiesce in the bidding of their nature.

Life, pure, is never a burden; how then could there be weariness There
where the living is most noble? That very life is wisdom, not a wisdom
built up by reasonings but complete from the beginning, suffering no
lack which could set it enquiring, a wisdom primal, unborrowed, not
something added to the Being, but its very essence. No wisdom, thus, is
greater; this is the authentic knowing, assessor to the divine Intellect
as projected into manifestation simultaneously with it; thus, in the
symbolic saying, Justice is assessor to Zeus.

\[Perfect wisdom\] for all the Principles of this order, dwelling There,
are as it were visible images protected from themselves, so that all
becomes an object of contemplation to contemplators immeasurably
blessed. The greatness and power of the wisdom There we may know from
this, that is embraces all the real Beings, and has made all, and all
follow it, and yet that it is itself those beings, which sprang into
being with it, so that all is one, and the essence There is wisdom. If
we have failed to understand, it is that we have thought of knowledge as
a mass of theorems and an accumulation of propositions, though that is
false even for our sciences of the sense-realm. But in case this should
be questioned, we may leave our own sciences for the present, and deal
with the knowing in the Supreme at which Plato glances where he speaks
of "that knowledge which is not a stranger in something strange to it"-
though in what sense, he leaves us to examine and declare, if we boast
ourselves worthy of the discussion. This is probably our best
starting-point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn482.md)
