[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn404)  [Next](enn406.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Something besides a unity there must be or all would be
indiscernibly buried, shapeless within that unbroken whole: none of the
real beings \[of the Intellectual Kosmos\] would exist if that unity
remained at halt within itself: the plurality of these beings, offspring
of the unity, could not exist without their own nexts taking the outward
path; these are the beings holding the rank of souls.

In the same way the outgoing process could not end with the souls, their
issue stifled: every Kind must produce its next; it must unfold from
some concentrated central principle as from a seed, and so advance to
its term in the varied forms of sense. The prior in its being will
remain unalterably in the native seat; but there is the lower phase,
begotten to it by an ineffable faculty of its being, native to soul as
it exists in the Supreme.

To this power we cannot impute any halt, any limit of jealous grudging;
it must move for ever outward until the universe stands accomplished to
the ultimate possibility. All, thus, is produced by an inexhaustible
power giving its gift to the universe, no part of which it can endure to
see without some share in its being.

There is, besides, no principle that can prevent anything from
partaking, to the extent of its own individual receptivity in the Nature
of Good. If therefore Matter has always existed, that existence is
enough to ensure its participation in the being which, according to each
receptivity, communicates the supreme good universally: if on the
contrary, Matter has come into being as a necessary sequence of the
causes preceding it, that origin would similarly prevent it standing
apart from the scheme as though it were out of reach of the principle to
whose grace it owes its existence.

In sum: The loveliness that is in the sense-realm is an index of the
nobleness of the Intellectual sphere, displaying its power and its
goodness alike: and all things are for ever linked; the one order
Intellectual in its being, the other of sense; one self-existent, the
other eternally taking its being by participation in that first, and to
the full of its power reproducing the Intellectual nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn406.md)
