[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn475)  [Next](enn477.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. In the case of twin birth among human beings how can we make out the
Reason-Principles to be different; and still more when we turn to the
animals and especially those with litters?

Where the young are precisely alike, there is one Reason-Principle.

But this would mean that after all there are not as many Reason
Principles as separate beings?

As many as there are of differing beings, differing by something more
than a mere failure in complete reproduction of their Idea.

And why may not this \[sharing of archetype\] occur also in beings
untouched by differentiation, if indeed there be any such?

A craftsman even in constructing an object identical with a model must
envisage that identity in a mental differentiation enabling him to make
a second thing by bringing in some difference side by side with the
identity: similarly in nature, where the thing comes about not by
reasoning but in sole virtue of Reason-Principles, that differentiation
must be included in the archetypal idea, though it is not in our power
to perceive the difference.

The consideration of Quantity brings the same result:

If production is undetermined in regard to Quantity, each thing has its
distinct Reason-Principle: if there is a measured system the Quantity
has been determined by the unrolling and unfolding of the
Reason-Principles of all the existences.

Thus when the universe has reached its term, there will be a fresh
beginning, since the entire Quantity which the Kosmos is to exhibit,
every item that is to emerge in its course, all is laid up from the
first in the Being that contains the Reason-Principles.

Are we, then, looking to the brute realm, to hold that there are as many
Reason-Principles as distinct creatures born in a litter?

Why not? There is nothing alarming about such limitlessness in
generative forces and in Reason-Principles, when Soul is there to
sustain all.

As in Soul \[principle of Life\] so in Divine Mind \[principle of Idea\]
there is this infinitude of recurring generative powers; the Beings
there are unfailing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: EIGHTH TRACTATE](enn477.md)
