[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn474)  [Next](enn476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. But individuals are brought into being by the union of the
Reason-Principles of the parents, male and female: this seems to do away
with a definite Reason-Principle for each of the offspring: one of the
parents- the male let us say- is the source; and the offspring is
determined not by Reason-Principles differing from child to child but by
one only, the father's or that of the father's father.

No: a distinct Reason-Principle may be the determinant for the child
since the parent contains all: they would become effective at different
times.

And so of the differences among children of the same parents: it is a
matter of varying dominance: either the offspring- whether it so appears
or not- has been mainly determined by, now, the male, now, the female
or, while each principle has given itself entire and lies there within,
yet it effectively moulds one portion of the bodily substance rather
than another.

And how \[by the theory of a divine archetype of each individual\] are
the differences caused by place to be explained?

Is the differentiating element to be found in the varying resistance of
the material of the body?

No: if this were so, all men with the exception of one only would be
untrue to nature.

Difference everywhere is a good, and so there must be differing
archetypes, though only to evil could be attribute any power in Matter
to thwart nature by overmastering the perfect Reason-Principles, hidden
but given, all.

Still, admitting the diversity of the Reason-principles, why need there
by as many as there are men born in each Period, once it is granted that
different beings may take external manifestation under the presence of
the same principles?

Under the presence of all; agreed: but with the dominance of the very
same? That is still open to question.

May we not take it that there may be identical reproduction from one
Period to another but not in the same Period?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn476)
