[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn462)  [Next](enn464) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. It is infinite also by right of being a pure unity with nothing
towards which to direct any partial content. Absolutely One, it has
never known measure and stands outside of number, and so is under no
limit either in regard to any extern or within itself; for any such
determination would bring something of the dual into it. And having no
constituent parts it accepts no pattern, forms no shape.

Reason recognising it as such a nature, you may not hope to see it with
mortal eyes, nor in any way that would be imagined by those who make
sense the test of reality and so annul the supremely real. For what
passes for the most truly existent is most truly non-existent- the thing
of extension least real of all- while this unseen First is the source
and principle of Being and sovereign over Reality.

You must turn appearances about or you will be left void of God. You
will be like those at the festivals who in their gluttony cram
themselves with things which none going to the gods may touch; they hold
these goods to be more real than the vision of the God who is to be
honoured and they go away having had no share in the sanctities of the
shrine.

In these celebrations of which we speak, the unseen god leaves those in
doubt of his existence who think nothing patent but what may be known to
the flesh: it happens as if a man slept a life through and took the
dream world in perfect trust; wake him, and he would refuse belief to
the report of his open eyes and settle down to sleep again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn464)
