[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn410)  [Next](enn412.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. Yet, looking at another set of facts, reflection tells us that we
are in sympathetic relation to each other, suffering, overcome, at the
sight of pain, naturally drawn to forming attachments; and all this can
be due only to some unity among us.

Again, if spells and other forms of magic are efficient even at a
distance to attract us into sympathetic relations, the agency can be no
other than the one soul.

A quiet word induces changes in a remote object, and makes itself heard
at vast distances- proof of the oneness of all things within the one
soul.

But how reconcile this unity with the existence of a reasoning soul, an
unreasoning, even a vegetal soul?

\[It is a question of powers\]: the indivisible phase is classed as
reasoning because it is not in division among bodies, but there is the
later phase, divided among bodies, but still one thing and distinct only
so as to secure sense-perception throughout; this is to be classed as
yet another power; and there is the forming and making phase which again
is a power. But a variety of powers does not conflict with unity; seed
contains many powers and yet it is one thing, and from that unity rises,
again, a variety which is also a unity.

But why are not all the powers of this unity present everywhere?

The answer is that even in the case of the individual soul described,
similarly, as permeating its body, sensation is not equally present in
all the parts, reason does not operate at every point, the principle of
growth is at work where there is no sensation- and yet all these powers
join in the one soul when the body is laid aside.

The nourishing faculty as dependent from the All belongs also to the
All-Soul: why then does it not come equally from ours?

Because what is nourished by the action of this power is a member of the
All, which itself has sensation passively; but the perception, which is
an intellectual judgement, is individual and has no need to create what
already exists, though it would have done so had the power not been
previously included, of necessity, in the nature of the All.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn412.md)
