[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn454)  [Next](enn456.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. Thus we have here one identical Principle, the Intellect, which is
the universe of authentic beings, the Truth: as such it is a great god
or, better, not a god among gods but the Godhead entire. It is a god, a
secondary god manifesting before there is any vision of that other, the
Supreme which rests over all, enthroned in transcendence upon that
splendid pediment, the Nature following close upon it.

The Supreme in its progress could never be borne forward upon some
soulless vehicle nor even directly upon the soul: it will be heralded by
some ineffable beauty: before the great King in his progress there comes
first the minor train, then rank by rank the greater and more exalted,
closer to the King the kinglier; next his own honoured company until,
last among all these grandeurs, suddenly appears the Supreme Monarch
himself, and all- unless indeed for those who have contented themselves
with the spectacle before his coming and gone away- prostrate themselves
and hail him.

In that royal progress the King is of another order from those that go
before him, but the King in the Supreme is no ruler over externs; he
holds that most just of governances, rooted in nature, the veritable
kingship, for he is King of Truth, holding sway by all reason over a
dense offspring his own, a host that shares his divinity, King over a
king and over kings and even more justly called father of Gods.

\[Interpolation: Zeus (Universal Soul) is in this a symbol of him, Zeus
who is not content with the contemplation of his father (Kronos, divine
Intellect) but looks to that father's father (to Ouranos, the
Transcendent) as what may be called the divine energy working to the
establishment of a real being.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn456.md)
