[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn441)  [Next](enn443.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. Thus the Intellectual-Principle, in the act of knowing the
Transcendent, is a manifold. It knows the Transcendent in very essence
but, with all its effort to grasp that prior as a pure unity, it goes
forth amassing successive impressions, so that, to it, the object
becomes multiple: thus in its outgoing to its object it is not \[fully
realised\] Intellectual-Principle; it is an eye that has not yet seen;
in its return it is an eye possessed of the multiplicity which it has
itself conferred: it sought something of which it found the vague
presentment within itself; it returned with something else, the manifold
quality with which it has of its own act invested the simplex.

If it had not possessed a previous impression of the Transcendent, it
could never have grasped it, but this impression, originally of unity,
becomes an impression of multiplicity; and the Intellectual-Principle,
in taking cognisance of that multiplicity, knows the Transcendent and so
is realized as an eye possessed of its vision.

It is now Intellectual-Principle since it actually holds its object, and
holds it by the act of intellection: before, it was no more than a
tendance, an eye blank of impression: it was in motion towards the
transcendental; now that it has attained, it has become
Intellectual-Principle henceforth absorbed; in virtue of this
intellection it holds the character of Intellectual-Principle, of
Essential Existence and of Intellectual Act where, previously, not
possessing the Intellectual Object, it was not Intellectual Perception,
and, not yet having exercised the Intellectual Act, it was not
Intellectual-Principle.

The Principle before all these principles is no doubt the first
principle of the universe, but not as immanent: immanence is not for
primal sources but for engendering secondaries; that which stands as
primal source of everything is not a thing but is distinct from all
things: it is not, then, a member of the total but earlier than all,
earlier, thus, than the Intellectual-Principle- which in fact envelops
the entire train of things.

Thus we come, once more, to a Being above the Intellectual-Principle
and, since the sequent amounts to no less than the All, we recognise,
again, a Being above the All. This assuredly cannot be one of the things
to which it is prior. We may not call it "Intellect"; therefore, too, we
may not call it "the Good," if "the Good" is to be taken in the sense of
some one member of the universe; if we mean that which precedes the
universe of things, the name may be allowed.

The Intellectual-Principle is established in multiplicity; its
intellection, self-sprung though it be, is in the nature of something
added to it \[some accidental dualism\] and makes it multiple: the
utterly simplex, and therefore first of all beings, must, then,
transcend the Intellectual-Principle; and, obviously, if this had
intellection it would no longer transcend the Intellectual-Principle but
be it, and at once be a multiple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn443.md)
