[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn399)  [Next](enn401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. Many times it has happened: Lifted out of the body into myself;
becoming external to all other things and self-encentered; beholding a
marvellous beauty; then, more than ever, assured of community with the
loftiest order; enacting the noblest life, acquiring identity with the
divine; stationing within It by having attained that activity; poised
above whatsoever within the Intellectual is less than the Supreme: yet,
there comes the moment of descent from intellection to reasoning, and
after that sojourn in the divine, I ask myself how it happens that I can
now be descending, and how did the soul ever enter into my body, the
soul which, even within the body, is the high thing it has shown itself
to be.

Heraclitus, who urges the examination of this matter, tells of
compulsory alternation from contrary to contrary, speaks of ascent and
descent, says that "change reposes," and that "it is weariness to keep
toiling at the same things and always beginning again"; but he seems to
teach by metaphor, not concerning himself about making his doctrine
clear to us, probably with the idea that it is for us to seek within
ourselves as he sought for himself and found.

Empedocles- where he says that it is law for faulty souls to descend to
this sphere, and that he himself was here because he turned a deserter,
wandered from God, in slavery to a raving discord- reveals neither more
nor less than Pythagoras and his school seem to me to convey on this as
on many other matters; but in his case, versification has some part in
the obscurity.

We have to fall back on the illustrious Plato, who uttered many noble
sayings about the soul, and has in many places dwelt upon its entry into
body so that we may well hope to get some light from him.

What do we learn from this philosopher?

We will not find him so consistent throughout that it is easy to
discover his mind.

Everywhere, no doubt, he expresses contempt for all that is of sense,
blames the commerce of the soul with body as an enchainment, an
entombment, and upholds as a great truth the saying of the Mysteries
that the soul is here a prisoner. In the Cavern of Plato and in the Cave
of Empedocles, I discern this universe, where the breaking of the
fetters and the ascent from the depths are figures of the wayfaring
toward the Intellectual Realm.

In the Phaedrus he makes a failing of the wings the cause of the entry
to this realm: and there are Periods which send back the soul after it
has risen; there are judgements and lots and fates and necessities
driving other souls down to this order.

In all these explanations, he finds guilt in the arrival of the soul at
body, But treating, in the Timaeus, of our universe he exalts the kosmos
and entitles it a blessed god, and holds that the soul was given by the
goodness of the creator to the end that the total of things might be
possessed of intellect, for thus intellectual it was planned to be, and
thus it cannot be except through soul. There is a reason, then, why the
soul of this All should be sent into it from God: in the same way the
soul of each single one of us is sent, that the universe may be
complete; it was necessary that all beings of the Intellectual should be
tallied by just so many forms of living creatures here in the realm of
sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn401)
