[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn457)  [Next](enn459.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. All this, however, we may leave to individual judgement: to proceed:

This produced reality is an Ideal form- for certainly nothing springing
from the Supreme can be less- and it is not a particular form but the
form of all, beside which there is no other; it follows that The First
must be without form, and, if without form, then it is no Being; Being
must have some definition and therefore be limited; but the First cannot
be thought of as having definition and limit, for thus it would be not
the Source but the particular item indicated by the definition assigned
to it. If all things belong to the produced, which of them can be
thought of as the Supreme? Not included among them, this can be
described only as transcending them: but they are Being and the Beings;
it therefore transcends Being.

Note that the phrase transcending Being assigns no character, makes no
assertion, allots no name, carries only the denial of particular being;
and in this there is no attempt to circumscribe it: to seek to throw a
line about that illimitable Nature would be folly, and anyone thinking
to do so cuts himself off from any slightest and most momentary approach
to its least vestige.

As one wishing to contemplate the Intellectual Nature will lay aside all
the representations of sense and so may see what transcends the
sense-realm, in the same way one wishing to contemplate what transcends
the Intellectual attains by putting away all that is of the intellect,
taught by the intellect, no doubt, that the Transcendent exists but
never seeking to define it.

Its definition, in fact, could be only "the indefinable": what is not a
thing is not some definite thing. We are in agony for a true expression;
we are talking of the untellable; we name, only to indicate for our own
use as best we may. And this name, The One, contains really no more than
the negation of plurality: under the same pressure the Pythagoreans
found their indication in the symbol "Apollo" \[a= not; pollon= of
many\] with its repudiation of the multiple. If we are led to think
positively of The One, name and thing, there would be more truth in
silence: the designation, a mere aid to enquiry, was never intended for
more than a preliminary affirmation of absolute simplicity to be
followed by the rejection of even that statement: it was the best that
offered, but remains inadequate to express the Nature indicated. For
this is a principle not to be conveyed by any sound; it cannot be known
on any hearing but, if at all, by vision; and to hope in that vision to
see a form is to fail of even that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn459.md)
