[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn510)  [Next](enn512) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. We are told that number is Quantity in the primary sense, number
together with all continuous magnitude, space and time: these are the
standards to which all else that is considered as Quantity is referred,
including motion which is Quantity because its time is quantitative-
though perhaps, conversely, the time takes its continuity from the
motion.

If it is maintained that the continuous is a Quantity by the fact of its
continuity, then the discrete will not be a Quantity. If, on the
contrary, the continuous possesses Quantity as an accident, what is
there common to both continuous and discrete to make them quantities?

Suppose we concede that numbers are quantities: we are merely allowing
them the name of quantity; the principle which gives them this name
remains obscure.

On the other hand, line and surface and body are not called quantities;
they are called magnitudes: they become known as quantities only when
they are rated by number-two yards, three yards. Even the natural body
becomes a quantity when measured, as does the space which it occupies;
but this is quantity accidental, not quantity essential; what we seek to
grasp is not accidental quantity but Quantity independent and essential,
Quantity-Absolute. Three oxen is not a quantity; it is their number, the
three, that is Quantity; for in three oxen we are dealing with two
categories. So too with a line of a stated length, a surface of a given
area; the area will be a quantity but not the surface, which only comes
under that category when it constitutes a definite geometric figure.

Are we then to consider numbers, and numbers only, as constituting the
category of Quantity? If we mean numbers in themselves, they are
substances, for the very good reason that they exist independently. If
we mean numbers displayed in the objects participant in number, the
numbers which give the count of the objects- ten horses or ten oxen, and
not ten units- then we have a paradoxical result: first, the numbers in
themselves, it would appear, are substances but the numbers in objects
are not; and secondly, the numbers inhere in the objects as measures
\[of extension or weight\], yet as standing outside the objects they
have no measuring power, as do rulers and scales. If however their
existence is independent, and they do not inhere in the objects, but are
simply called in for the purpose of measurement, the objects will be
quantities only to the extent of participating in Quantity.

So with the numbers themselves: how can they constitute the category of
Quantity? They are measures; but how do measures come to be quantities
or Quantity? Doubtless in that, existing as they do among the Existents
and not being adapted to any of the other categories, they find their
place under the influence of verbal suggestion and so are referred to
the so-called category of Quantity. We see the unit mark off one
measurement and then proceed to another; and number thus reveals the
amount of a thing, and the mind measures by availing itself of the total
figure.

It follows that in measuring it is not measuring essence; it pronounces
its "one" or "two," whatever the character of the objects, even summing
contraries. It does not take count of condition- hot, handsome; it
simply notes how many.

Number then, whether regarded in itself or in the participant objects,
belongs to the category of Quantity, but the participant objects do not.
"Three yards long" does not fall under the category of Quantity, but
only the three.

Why then are magnitudes classed as quantities? Not because they are so
in the strict sense, but because they approximate to Quantity, and
because objects in which magnitudes inhere are themselves designated as
quantities. We call a thing great or small from its participation in a
high number or a low. True, greatness and smallness are not claimed to
be quantities, but relations: but it is by their apparent possession of
quantity that they are thought of as relations. All this, however, needs
more careful examination.

In sum, we hold that there is no single genus of Quantity. Only number
is Quantity, the rest \[magnitudes, space, time, motion\] quantities
only in a secondary degree. We have therefore not strictly one genus,
but one category grouping the approximate with the primary and the
secondary.

We have however to enquire in what sense the abstract numbers are
substances. Can it be that they are also in a manner quantitative? Into
whatever category they fall, the other numbers \[those inherent in
objects\] can have nothing in common with them but the name. 5. Speech,
time, motion- in what sense are these quantities?

Let us begin with speech. It is subject to measurement, but only in so
far as it is sound; it is not a quantity in its essential nature, which
nature is that it be significant, as noun and verb are significant. The
air is its Matter, as it is Matter to verb and noun, the components of
speech.

To be more precise, we may define speech as an impact \[made upon the
outer air by the breath\], though it is not so much the impact as the
impression which the impact produces and which, as it were, imposes Form
\[upon the air\]. Speech, thus, is rather an action than a quantity- an
action with a significance. Though perhaps it would be truer to say that
while this motion, this impact, is an action, the counter-motion is an
experience \[or Passion\]; or each may be from different points of view
either an action or an experience: or we may think of speech as action
upon a substrate \[air\] and experience within that substrate.

If however voice is not characteristically impact, but is simply air,
two categories will be involved: voice is significant, and the one
category will not be sufficient to account for this significance without
associating with a second.

With regard to time, if it is to be thought of as a measure, we must
determine what it is that applies this measure. It must clearly be
either Soul or the Present Moment. If on the contrary we take time to be
something measured and regard it as being of such and such extension- a
year, for example- then we may consider it as a quantity: essentially
however time is of a different nature; the very fact that we can
attribute this or that length to it shows us that it is not length: in
other words, time is not Quantity. Quantity in the strict sense is the
Quantity not inbound with things; if things became quantities by mere
participation in Quantity, then Substance itself would be identical with
Quantity.

Equality and inequality must be regarded as properties of
Quantity-Absolute, not of the participants, or of them not essentially
but only accidentally: such participants as "three yards' length," which
becomes a quantity, not as belonging to a single genus of Quantity, but
by being subsumed under the one head, the one category.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn512)
