[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn530)  [Next](enn532) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 25

25\. There are those who lay down four categories and make a fourfold
division into Substrates, Qualities, States, and Relative States, and
find in these a common Something, and so include everything in one
genus.

Against this theory there is much to be urged, but particularly against
this posing of a common Something and a single all-embracing genus. This
Something, it may be submitted, is unintelligible to themselves, is
indefinable, and does not account either for bodies or for the bodiless.
Moreover, no room is left for a differentia by which this Something may
be distinguished. Besides, this common Something is either existent or
non-existent: if existent, it must be one or other of its \[four\]
species;- if non-existent, the existent is classed under the
non-existent. But the objections are countless; we must leave them for
the present and consider the several heads of the division.

To the first genus are assigned Substrates, including Matter, to which
is given a priority over the others; so that what is ranked as the first
principle comes under the same head with things which must be posterior
to it since it is their principle.

First, then: the prior is made homogeneous with the subsequent. Now this
is impossible: in this relation the subsequent owes its existence to the
prior, whereas among things belonging to one same genus each must have,
essentially, the equality implied by the genus; for the very meaning of
genus is to be predicated of the species in respect of their essential
character. And that Matter is the basic source of all the rest of
things, this school, we may suppose, would hardly deny.

Secondly: since they treat the Substrate as one thing, they do not
enumerate the Existents; they look instead for principles of the
Existents. There is however a difference between speaking of the actual
Existents and of their principles.

If Matter is taken to be the only Existent, and all other things as
modifications of Matter, it is not legitimate to set up a single genus
to embrace both the Existent and the other things; consistency requires
that Being \[Substance\] be distinguished from its modifications and
that these modifications be duly classified.

Even the distinction which this theory makes between Substrates and the
rest of things is questionable. The Substrate is \[necessarily\] one
thing and admits of no differentia- except perhaps in so far as it is
split up like one mass into its various parts; and yet not even so,
since the notion of Being implies continuity: it would be better,
therefore, to speak of the Substrate, in the singular.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 26](enn532)
