[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn567)  [Next](enn569) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. The division into elements must, in short, be abandoned, especially
in regard to Sensible Substance, known necessarily by sense rather than
by reason. We must no longer look for help in constituent parts, since
such parts will not be substances, or at any rate not sensible
substances.

Our plan must be to apprehend what is constant in stone, earth, water
and the entities which they compose- the vegetal and animal forms,
considered purely as sensibles- and to confine this constant within a
single genus. Neither Matter nor Form will thus be overlooked, for
Sensible Substance comports them; fire and earth and the two
intermediaries consist of Matter and Form, while composite things are
actually many substances in one. They all, moreover, have that common
property which distinguishes them from other things: serving as subjects
to these others, they are never themselves present in a subject nor
predicated of any other thing. Similarly, all the characteristics which
we have ascribed to Substance find a place in this classification.

But Sensible Substance is never found apart from magnitude and quality:
how then do we proceed to separate these accidents? If we subtract them-
magnitude, figure, colour, dryness, moistness- what is there left to be
regarded as Substance itself? All the substances under consideration
are, of course, qualified.

There is, however, something in relation to which whatever turns
Substance into qualified Substance is accidental: thus, the whole of
fire is not Substance, but only a part of it- if the term "part" be
allowed.

What then can this "part" be? Matter may be suggested. But are we
actually to maintain that the particular sensible substance consists of
a conglomeration of qualities and Matter, while Sensible Substance as a
whole is merely the sum of these coagulations in the uniform Matter,
each one separately forming a quale or a quantum or else a thing of many
qualities? Is it true to say that everything whose absence leaves
subsistence incomplete is a part of the particular substance, while all
that is accidental to the substance already existent takes independent
rank and is not submerged in the mixture which constitutes this
so-called substance?

I decline to allow that whatever combines in this way with anything else
is Substance if it helps to produce a single mass having quantity and
quality, whereas taken by itself and divorced from this complementary
function it is a quality: not everything which composes the amalgam is
Substance, but only the amalgam as a whole.

And let no one take exception on the ground that we produce Sensible
Substance from non-substances. The whole amalgam itself is not True
Substance; it is merely an imitation of that True Substance which has
Being apart from its concomitants, these indeed being derived from it as
the possessor of True Being. In the lower realm the case is different:
the underlying ground is sterile, and from its inability to produce
fails to attain to the status of Being; it remains a shadow, and on this
shadow is traced a sketch- the world of Appearance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn569)
