[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn533)  [Next](enn535) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 28

28\. Many as are the objections to this theory, we pass on for fear of
the ridicule we might incur by arguing against a position itself so
manifestly ridiculous. We may be content with pointing out that it
assigns the primacy to the Non-existent and treats it as the very summit
of Existence: in short, it places the last thing first. The reason for
this procedure lies in the acceptance of sense-perception as a
trustworthy guide to first-principles and to all other entities.

This philosophy began by identifying the Real with body; then, viewing
with apprehension the transmutations of bodies, decided that Reality was
that which is permanent beneath the superficial changes- which is much
as if one regarded space as having more title to Reality than the bodies
within it, on the principle that space does not perish with them. They
found a permanent in space, but it was a fault to take mere permanence
as in itself a sufficient definition of the Real; the right method would
have been to consider what properties must characterize Reality, by the
presence of which properties it has also that of unfailing permanence.
Thus if a shadow had permanence, accompanying an object through every
change, that would not make it more real than the object itself. The
sensible universe, as including the Substrate and a multitude of
attributes, will thus have more claim to be Reality entire than has any
one of its component entities (such as Matter): and if the sensible were
in very truth the whole of Reality, Matter, the mere base and not the
total, could not be that whole.

Most surprising of all is that, while they make sense-perception their
guarantee of everything, they hold that the Real cannot be grasped by
sensation;- for they have no right to assign to Matter even so much as
resistance, since resistance is a quality. If however they profess to
grasp Reality by Intellect, is it not a strange Intellect which ranks
Matter above itself, giving Reality to Matter and not to itself? And as
their "Intellect" has, thus, no Real-Existence, how can it be
trustworthy when it speaks of things higher than itself, things to which
it has no affinity whatever?

But an adequate treatment of this entity \[Matter\] and of substrates
will be found elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 29](enn535)
