[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn519)  [Next](enn521.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 14

14\. The Academy and the Lyceum are places, and parts of Place, just as
"above," "below," "here" are species or parts of Place; the difference
is of minuter delimitation.

If then "above," "below," "the middle" are places- Delphi, for example,
is the middle \[of the earth\]- and "near-the-middle" is also a place-
Athens, and of course the Lyceum and the other places usually cited, are
near the middle- what need have we to go further and seek beyond Place,
admitting as we do that we refer in every instance to a place?

If, however, we have in mind the presence of one thing in another, we
are not speaking of a single entity, we are not expressing a single
notion.

Another consideration: when we say that a man is here, we present a
relation of the man to that in which he is, a relation of the container
to the contained. Why then do we not class as a relative whatever may be
produced from this relation?

Besides, how does "here" differ from "at Athens"? The demonstrative
"here" admittedly signifies place; so, then, does "at Athens": "at
Athens" therefore belongs to the category of Place.

Again, if "at Athens" means "is at Athens," then the "is" as well as the
place belongs to the predicate; but this cannot be right: we do not
regard "is a quality" as predicate, but "a quality."

Furthermore, if "in time," "in place" are to be ranged under a category
other than that applying to time and place, why not a separate category
for "in a vessel"? Why not distinct categories for "in Matter," "in a
subject," "a part in a whole," "a whole in its parts," "a genus in its
species," "a species in a genus"? We are certainly on the way to a
goodly number of categories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](enn521.md)
