[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn500)  [Next](enn502) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. All, then, that is present in the sense realm as Idea comes from
the Supreme. But what is not present as Idea, does not. Thus of things
conflicting with nature, none is There: the inartistic is not contained
in the arts; lameness is not in the seed; for a lame leg is either
inborn through some thwarting of the Reason-principle or is a marring of
the achieved form by accident. To that Intellectual Kosmos belong
qualities, accordant with Nature, and quantities; number and mass;
origins and conditions; all actions and experiences not against nature;
movement and repose, both the universals and the particulars: but There
time is replaced by eternity and space by its intellectual equivalent,
mutual inclusiveness.

In that Intellectual Kosmos, where all is one total, every entity that
can be singled out is an intellective essence and a participant in life:
thus, identity and difference, movement and rest with the object resting
or moving, essence and quality, all have essential existence. For every
real being must be in actuality not merely in potentiality and therefore
the nature of each essence is inherent in it.

This suggests the question whether the Intellectual Kosmos contains the
forms only of the things of sense or of other existents as well. But
first we will consider how it stands with artistic creations: there is
no question of an ideal archetype of evil: the evil of this world is
begotten of need, privation, deficiency, and is a condition peculiar to
Matter distressed and to what has come into likeness with Matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn502)
