[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn525)  [Next](enn527.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 20

20\. But though not opposed, it is still different from Action and
cannot belong to the same genus as activity; though if they are both
Motion, it will so belong, on the principle that alteration must be
regarded as qualitative motion.

Does it follow that whenever alteration proceeds from Quality, it will
be activity and Action, the quale remaining impassive? It may be that if
the quale remains impassive, the alteration will be in the category of
Action; whereas if, while its energy is directed outwards, it also
suffers- as in beating- it will cease to belong to that category: or
perhaps there is nothing to prevent its being in both categories at one
and the same moment.

If then an alteration be conditioned by Passivity alone, as is the case
with rubbing, on what ground is it assigned to Action rather than to
Passivity? Perhaps the Passivity arises from the fact that a
counter-rubbing is involved. But are we, in view of this counter-motion,
to recognize the presence of two distinct motions? No: one only.

How then can this one motion be both Action and Passion? We must suppose
it to be Action in proceeding from an object, and Passion in being
directly upon another- though it remains the same motion throughout.

Suppose however Passion to be a different motion from Action: how then
does its modification of the patient object change that patient's
character without the agent being affected by the patient? For obviously
an agent cannot be passive to the operation it performs upon another.
Can it be that the fact of motion existing elsewhere creates the
Passion, which was not Passion in the agent?

If the whiteness of the swan, produced by its Reason-Principle, is given
at its birth, are we to affirm Passion of the swan on its passing into
being? If, on the contrary, the swan grows white after birth, and if
there is a cause of that growth and the corresponding result, are we to
say that the growth is a Passion? Or must we confine Passion to purely
qualitative change?

One thing confers beauty and another takes it: is that which takes
beauty to be regarded as patient? If then the source of beauty- tin,
suppose- should deteriorate or actually disappear, while the recipient-
copper- improves, are we to think of the copper as passive and the tin
active?

Take the learner: how can he be regarded as passive, seeing that the Act
of the agent passes into him \[and becomes his Act\]? How can the Act,
necessarily a simple entity, be both Act and Passion? No doubt the Act
is not in itself a Passion; nonetheless, the learner coming to possess
it will be a patient by the fact of his appropriation of an experience
from outside: he will not, of course, be a patient in the sense of
having himself performed no Act; learning- like seeing- is not analogous
to being struck, since it involves the acts of apprehension and
recognition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 21](enn527.md)
