[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn514)  [Next](enn516.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 9

9\. It follows that in the cases specified above- agent, knowledge and
the rest- the relation must be considered as in actual operation, and
the Act and the Reason-Principle in the Act must be assumed to be real:
in all other cases there will be simply participation in an Ideal-Form,
in a Reason-Principle.

If Reality implied embodiment, we should indeed be forced to deny
Reality to these conditions called relative; if however we accord the
pre-eminent place to the unembodied and to the Reason-Principles, and at
the same time maintain that relations are Reason-Principles and
participate in Ideal-Forms, we are bound to seek their causes in that
higher sphere. Doubleness, it is clear, is the cause of a thing being
double, and from it is derived halfness.

Some correlatives owe their designations to the same Form, others to
opposite Forms; it is thus that two objects are simultaneously double
and half of each other, and one great and the other small. It may happen
that both correlatives exist in one object-likeness and unlikeness, and,
in general, identity and difference, so that the same thing will be at
once like and unlike, identical and different.

The question arises here whether sharing in the same Form could make one
man depraved and another more depraved. In the case of total depravity,
clearly the two are made equal by the absence of a Form. Where there is
a difference of degree, the one has participated in a Form which has
failed to predominate, the other in a Form which has failed still more:
or, if we choose the negative aspect, we may think of them both as
failing to participate in a Form which naturally belonged to them.

Sensation may be regarded as a Form of double origin \[determined both
by the sense-organ and by the sensible object\]; and similarly with
knowledge.

Habit is an Act directed upon something had \[some experience produced
by habit\] and binding it as it were with the subject having
\[experiencing\], as the Act of production binds producer and product.

Measurement is an Act of the measurer upon the measured object: it too
is therefore a kind of Reason-Principle.

Now if the condition of being related is regarded as a Form having a
generic unity, Relation must be allowed to be a single genus owing its
reality to a Reason-Principle involved in all instances. If however the
Reason-Principles \[governing the correlatives\] stand opposed and have
the differences to which we have referred, there may perhaps not be a
single genus, but this will not prevent all relatives being expressed in
terms of a certain likeness and falling under a single category.

But even if the cases of which we have spoken can be subsumed under a
single head, it is nevertheless impossible to include in a single genus
all that goes with them in the one common category: for the category
includes negations and derivatives- not only, for example, double but
also its negative, the resultant doubleness and the act of doubling. But
we cannot include in one genus both the thing and its negative- double
and not-double, relative and not-relative- any more than in dealing with
the genus animal we can insert in it the nonanimal. Moreover, doubleness
and doubling have only the relation to double that whiteness has to
white; they cannot be classed as identical with it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](enn516.md)
