[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn569)  [Next](enn571.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. Another method of division is possible: substances may be classed
as hot-dry, dry-cold, cold-moist, or however we choose to make the
coupling. We may then proceed to the combination and blending of these
couples, either halting at that point and going no further than the
compound, or else subdividing by habitation- on the earth, in the earth-
or by form and by the differences exhibited by living beings, not qua
living, but in their bodies viewed as instruments of life.

Differentiation by form or shape is no more out of place than a division
based on qualities- heat, cold and the like. If it be objected that
qualities go to make bodies what they are, then, we reply, so do
blendings, colours, shapes. Since our discussion is concerned with
Sensible Substance, it is not strange that it should turn upon
distinctions related to sense-perception: this Substance is not Being
pure and simple, but the Sensible Being which we call the Universe.

We have remarked that its apparent subsistence is in fact an assemblage
of Sensibles, their existence guaranteed to us by sense-perception. But
since their combination is unlimited, our division must be guided by the
Form-Ideas of living beings, as for example the Form-Idea of Man
implanted in Body; the particular Form acts as a qualification of Body,
but there is nothing unreasonable in using qualities as a basis of
division.

We may be told that we have distinguished between simple and composite
bodies, even ranking them as opposites. But our distinction, we reply,
was between material and organic bodies and raised no question of the
composite. In fact, there exists no means of opposing the composite to
the simple; it is necessary to determine the simples in the first stage
of division, and then, combining them on the basis of a distinct
underlying principle, to differentiate the composites in virtue of their
places and shapes, distinguishing for example the heavenly from the
earthly.

These observations will suffice for the Being \[Substance\], or rather
the Becoming, which obtains in the Sensible realm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn571.md)
