[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn558)  [Next](enn560) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 22

22\. We may here adduce the pregnant words of Plato: "Inasmuch as
Intellect perceives the variety and plurality of the Forms present in
the complete Living Being...." The words apply equally to Soul; Soul is
subsequent to Intellect, yet by its very nature it involves Intellect in
itself and perceives more clearly in that prior. There is Intellect in
our intellect also, which again perceives more clearly in its prior, for
while of itself it merely perceives, in the prior it also perceives its
own perception.

This intellect, then, to which we ascribe perception, though not
divorced from the prior in which it originates, evolves plurality out of
unity and has bound up with it the principle of Difference: it therefore
takes the form of a plurality-in-unity. A plurality-in-unity, it
produces the many intellects by the dictate of its very nature.

It is certainly no numerical unity, no individual thing; for whatever
you find in that sphere is a species, since it is divorced from Matter.
This may be the import of the difficult words of Plato, that Substance
is broken up into an infinity of parts. So long as the division proceeds
from genus to species, infinity is not reached; a limit is set by the
species generated: the lowest species, however- that which is not
divided into further species- may be more accurately regarded as
infinite. And this is the meaning of the words: "to relegate them once
and for all to infinity and there abandon them." As for particulars,
they are, considered in themselves, infinite, but come under number by
being embraced by the \[total\] unity.

Now Soul has Intellect for its prior, is therefore circumscribed by
number down to its ultimate extremity; at that point infinity is
reached. The particular intellect, though all-embracing, is a partial
thing, and the collective Intellect and its various manifestations \[all
the particular intellects\] are in actuality parts of that part. Soul
too is a part of a part, though in the sense of being an Act
\[actuality\] derived from it. When the Act of Intellect is directed
upon itself, the result is the manifold \[particular\] intellects; when
it looks outwards, Soul is produced.

If Soul acts as a genus or a species, the various \[particular\] souls
must act as species. Their activities \[Acts\] will be twofold: the
activity upward is Intellect; that which looks downward constitutes the
other powers imposed by the particular Reason-Principle \[the
Reason-Principle of the being ensouled\]; the lowest activity of Soul is
in its contact with Matter to which it brings Form.

This lower part of Soul does not prevent the rest from being entirely in
the higher sphere: indeed what we call the lower part is but an image of
Soul: not that it is cut off from Soul; it is like the reflection in the
mirror, depending upon the original which stands outside of it.

But we must keep in mind what this "outside" means. Up to the production
of the image, the Intellectual realm is wholly and exclusively composed
of Intellectual Beings: in the same way the Sensible world, representing
that in so far as it is able to retain the likeness of a living being,
is itself a living being: the relation is like that of a portrait or
reflection to the original which is regarded as prior to the water or
the painting reproducing it.

The representation, notice, in the portrait or on the water is not of
the dual being, but of the one element \[Matter\] as formed by the other
\[Soul\]. Similarly, this likeness of the Intellectual realm carries
images, not of the creative element, but of the entities contained in
that creator, including Man with every other living being: creator and
created are alike living beings, though of a different life, and both
coexist in the Intellectual realm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THIRD TRACTATE](enn560)
