[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn512)  [Next](enn514.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Now if we do not mean anything by Relation but are victims of words,
none of the relations mentioned can exist: Relation will be a notion
void of content.

Suppose however that we do possess ourselves of objective truth when in
comparing two points of time we pronounce one prior, or posterior, to
the other, that priority does entail something distinct from the objects
to which it refers; admit an objective truth behind the relation of left
and right: does this apply also to magnitudes, and is the relation
exhibiting excess and deficiency also something distinct from the
quantities involved?

Now one thing is double of another quite apart from our speech or
thought; one thing possesses and another is possessed before we notice
the fact; equals do not await our comparison but- and this applies to
Quality as well as Quantity- rest upon an identity existing between the
objects compared: in all the conditions in which we assert Relation the
mutual relation exists over and above the objects; we perceive it as
already existent; our knowledge is directed upon a thing, there to be
known- a clear testimony to the reality of Relation.

In these circumstances we can no longer put the question of its
existence. We have simply to distinguish: sometimes the relation
subsists while the objects remain unaltered and even apart; sometimes it
depends upon their combination; sometimes, while they remain unchanged,
the relation utterly ceases, or, as happens with right and near, becomes
different. These are the facts which chiefly account for the notion that
Relation has no reality in such circumstances.

Our task, thus, is to give full value to this elusive character of
Relation, and, then to enquire what there is that is constant in all
these particular cases and whether this constant is generic or
accidental; and having found this constant, we must discover what sort
of actuality it possesses.

It need hardly be said that we are not to affirm Relation where one
thing is simply an attribute of another, as a habit is an attribute of a
soul or of a body; it is not Relation when a soul belongs to this
individual or dwells in that body. Relation enters only when the
actuality of the relationships is derived from no other source than
Relation itself; the actuality must be, not that which is characteristic
of the substances in question, but that which is specifically called
relative. Thus double with its correlative, half gives actuality neither
to two yards' length or the number two, nor to one yard's length or the
number one; what happens is that, when these quantities are viewed in
their relation, they are found to be not merely two and one
respectively, but to produce the assertion and to exhibit the fact of
standing one to the other in the condition of double and half. Out of
the objects in a certain conjunction this condition of being double and
half has issued as something distinct from either; double and half have
emerged as correlatives, and their being is precisely this of mutual
dependence; the double exists by its superiority over the half, and the
half by its inferiority; there is no priority to distinguish double from
half; they arise simultaneously.

It is another question whether they endure simultaneously. Take the case
of father and son, and such relationships; the father dies, but the
other is still his son, and so with brothers. Moreover, we see likeness
where one of the like people is dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn514.md)
