[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn594)  [Next](enn596) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. But why does not one same soul enter more than one body?

Because any second body must approach, if it might; but the first has
approached and received and keeps.

Are we to think that this second body, in keeping its soul with a like
care, is keeping the same soul as the first?

Why not: what difference is there? Merely some additions \[from the
experiences of life, none in the soul itself\].

We ask further why one soul in foot and hand and not one soul in the
distinct members of the universe.

Sensations no doubt differ from soul to soul but only as do the
conditions and experiences; this is difference not in the judging
principle but in the matters coming to judgement; the judge is one and
the same soul pronouncing upon various events, and these not its own but
belonging to a particular body; it is only as a man pronounces
simultaneously upon a pleasant sensation in his finger and a pain in his
head.

But why is not the soul in one man aware, then, of the judgement passed
by another?

Because it is a judgement made, not a state set up; besides, the soul
that has passed the judgement does not pronounce but simply judges:
similarly a man's sight does not report to his hearing, though both have
passed judgement; it is the reason above both that reports, and this is
a principle distinct from either. Often, as it happens, reason does
become aware of a verdict formed in another reason and takes to itself
an alien experience: but this has been dealt with elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn596)
