[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn598)  [Next](enn600) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. We may be told that an image need not be thus closely attached to
its archetype, that we know images holding in the absence of their
archetype and that a warmed object may retain its heat when the fire is
withdrawn.

To begin with the image and archetype: If we are reminded of an artist's
picture we observe that here the image was produced by the artist, not
by his subject; even in the case of a self-portrait, the picture is no
"image of archetype," since it is not produced by the painter's body,
the original represented: the reproduction is due to the effective
laying on of the colours.

Nor is there strictly any such making of image as we see in water or in
mirrors or in a shadow; in these cases the original is the cause of the
image which, at once, springs from it and cannot exist apart from it.
Now, it is in this sense that we are to understand the weaker powers to
be images of the Priors. As for the illustration from the fire and the
warmed object, the warmth cannot be called an image of the fire unless
we think of warmth as containing fire so that the two are separate
things. Besides, the fire removed, the warmth does sooner or later
disappear, leaving the object cold.

If we are told that these powers fade out similarly, we are left with
only one imperishable: the souls, the Intellectual-Principle, become
perishable; then since Being \[identical with the
Intellectual-Principle\] becomes transitory, so also must the Beings,
its productions. Yet the sun, so long as it holds its station in the
universe, will pour the same light upon the same places; to think its
light may be lessened is to hold its mass perishable. But it has been
abundantly stated that the emanants of the First are not perishable,
that the souls, and the Intellectual-Principle with all its content,
cannot perish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn600)
