[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn527)  [Next](enn529) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 22

22\. Passivity, thus, implies the existence within of a motion
functioning somehow or other in the direction of alteration. Action too
implies motion within, whether the motion be aimless or whether it be
driven by the impulse comported by the term "Action" to find its goal in
an external object. There is Motion in both Action and Passion, but the
differentia distinguishing Action from Passion keeps Action impassive,
while Passion is recognised by the fact that a new state replaces the
old, though nothing is added to the essential character of the patient;
whenever Being \[essential Being\] is produced, the patient remains
distinct.

Thus, what is Action in one relation may be Passion in another. One same
motion will be Action from the point of view of A, Passion from that of
B; for the two are so disposed that they might well be consigned to the
category of Relation- at any rate in the cases where the Action entails
a corresponding Passion: neither correlative is found in isolation; each
involves both Action and Passion, though A acts as mover and B is moved:
each then involves two categories.

Again, A gives motion to B, B receives it, so that we have a giving and
a receiving- in a word, a relation.

But a recipient must possess what it has received. A thing is admitted
to possess its natural colour: why not its motion also? Besides,
independent motions such as walking and thought do, in fact, involve the
possession of the powers respectively to walk and to think.

We are reminded to enquire whether thought in the form of providence
constitutes Action; to be subject to providence is apparently Passion,
for such thought is directed to an external, the object of the
providential arrangement. But it may well be that neither is the
exercise of providence an action, even though the thought is concerned
with an external, nor subjection to it a Passion. Thought itself need
not be an action, for it does not go outward towards its object but
remains self-gathered. It is not always an activity; all Acts need not
be definable as activities, for they need not produce an effect;
activity belongs to Act only accidentally.

Does it follow that if a man as he walks produces footprints, he cannot
be considered to have performed an action? Certainly as a result of his
existing something distinct from himself has come into being. Yet
perhaps we should regard both action and Act as merely accidental,
because he did not aim at this result: it would be as we speak of Action
even in things inanimate- "fire heats," "the drug worked."

So much for Action and Passion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 23](enn529)
