[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn576)  [Next](enn578) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 17

17\. This procedure, if approved, will entail a distinction between
psychic and bodily qualities, the latter belonging specifically to body.

If we decide to refer all souls to the higher, we are still at liberty
to perform for Sensible qualities a division founded upon the senses
themselves- the eyes, the ears, touch, taste, smell; and if we are to
look for further differences, colours may be subdivided according to
varieties of vision, sounds according to varieties of hearing, and so
with the other senses: sounds may also be classified qualitatively as
sweet, harsh, soft.

Here a difficulty may be raised: we divide the varieties of Substance
and their functions and activities, fair or foul or indeed of any kind
whatsoever, on the basis of Quality, Quantity rarely, if ever, entering
into the differences which produce species; Quantity, again, we divide
in accordance with qualities of its own: how then are we to divide
Quality itself into species? what differences are we to employ, and from
what genus shall we take them? To take them from Quality itself would be
no less absurd than setting up substances as differences of substances.

How, then, are we to distinguish black from white? how differentiate
colours in general from tastes and tangible qualities? By the variety of
sense-organs? Then there will be no difference in the objects
themselves.

But, waiving this objection, how deal with qualities perceived by the
same sense-organ? We may be told that some colours integrate, others
disintegrate the vision, that some tastes integrate, others disintegrate
the tongue: we reply that, first, it is the actual experiences \[of
colour and taste, and not the sense-organs\] that we are discussing and
it is to these that the notions of integration and disintegration must
be applied; secondly, a means of differentiating these experiences has
not been offered.

It may be suggested that we divide them by their powers, and this
suggestion is so far reasonable that we may well agree to divide the
non-sensuous qualities, the sciences for example, on this basis; but we
see no reason for resorting to their effects for the division of
qualities sensuous. Even if we divide the sciences by their powers,
founding our division of their processes upon the faculties of the mind,
we can only grasp their differences in a rational manner if we look not
only to their subject-matter but also to their Reason-Principles.

But, granted that we may divide the arts by their Reason-Principles and
theorems, this method will hardly apply to embodied qualities. Even in
the arts themselves an explanation would be required for the differences
between the Reason-Principles themselves. Besides, we have no difficulty
in seeing that white differs from black; to account for this difference
is the purpose of our enquiry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](enn578)
