[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn575)  [Next](enn577.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 16

16\. When each of the entities bound up with the pseudo-substance is
taken apart from the rest, the name of Quality is given to that one
among them, by which without pointing to essence or quantity or motion
we signify the distinctive mark, the type or aspect of a thing- for
example, the beauty or ugliness of a body. This beauty- need we say?- is
identical in name only with Intellectual Beauty: it follows that the
term "Quality" as applied to the Sensible and the Intellectual is
necessarily equivocal; even blackness and whiteness are different in the
two spheres.

But the beauty in the germ, in the particular Reason-Principle- is this
the same as the manifested beauty, or do they coincide only in name? Are
we to assign this beauty- and the same question applies to deformity in
the soul- to the Intellectual order, or to the Sensible? That beauty is
different in the two spheres is by now clear. If it be embraced in
Sensible Quality, then virtue must also be classed among the qualities
of the lower. But merely some virtues will take rank as Sensible, others
as Intellectual qualities.

It may even be doubted whether the arts, as Reason-Principles, can
fairly be among Sensible qualities; Reason-Principles, it is true, may
reside in Matter, but "matter" for them means Soul. On the other hand,
their being found in company with Matter commits them in some degree to
the lower sphere. Take the case of lyrical music: it is performed upon
strings; melody, which may be termed a part of the art, is sensuous
sound- though, perhaps, we should speak here not of parts but of
manifestations \[Acts\]: yet, called manifestations, they are
nonetheless sensuous. The beauty inherent in body is similarly bodiless;
but we have assigned it to the order of things bound up with body and
subordinate to it.

Geometry and arithmetic are, we shall maintain, of a twofold character;
in their earthly types they rank with Sensible Quality, but in so far as
they are functions of pure Soul, they necessarily belong to that other
world in close proximity to the Intellectual. This, too, is in Plato's
view the case with music and astronomy.

The arts concerned with material objects and making use of perceptible
instruments and sense-perception must be classed with Sensible Quality,
even though they are dispositions of the Soul, attendant upon its
apostasy.

There is also every reason for consigning to this category the practical
virtues whose function is directed to a social end: these do not isolate
Soul by inclining it towards the higher; their manifestation makes for
beauty in this world, a beauty regarded not as necessary but as
desirable.

On this principle, the beauty in the germ, and still more the blackness
and whiteness in it, will be included among Sensible Qualities.

Are we, then, to rank the individual soul, as containing these
Reason-Principles, with Sensible Substance? But we do not even identify
the Principles with body; we merely include them in Sensible Quality on
the ground that they are connected with body and are activities of body.
The constituents of Sensible Substance have already been specified; we
have no intention whatever of adding to them Substance bodiless.

As for Qualities, we hold that they are invariably bodiless, being
affections arising within Soul; but, like the Reason-Principles of the
individual soul, they are associated with Soul in its apostasy, and are
accordingly counted among the things of the lower realm: such
affections, torn between two worlds by their objects and their abode, we
have assigned to Quality, which is indeed not bodily but manifested in
body.

But we refrain from assigning Soul to Sensible Substance, on the ground
that we have already referred to Quality \[which is Sensible\] those
affections of Soul which are related to body. On the contrary, Soul,
conceived apart from affection and Reason-Principle, we have restored to
its origin, leaving in the lower realm no substance which is in any
sense Intellectual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 17](enn577.md)
