[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn562)  [Next](enn564) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. How then do we go to work?

Let us begin by distinguishing Matter, Form, the Mixture of both, and
the Attributes of the Mixture. The Attributes may be subdivided into
those which are mere predicates, and those serving also as accidents.
The accidents may be either inclusive or included; they may, further, be
classified as activities, experiences, consequents.

Matter will be found common to all substances, not however as a genus,
since it has no differentiae- unless indeed differentiae be ascribed to
it on the ground of its taking such various forms as fire and air.

It may be held that Matter is sufficiently constituted a genus by the
fact that the things in which it appears hold it in common, or in that
it presents itself as a whole of parts. In this sense Matter will indeed
be a genus, though not in the accepted sense of the term. Matter, we may
remark, is also a single element, if the element as such is able to
constitute a genus.

Further, if to a Form be added the qualification "bound up with,
involved in Matter," Matter separates that Form from other Forms: it
does not however embrace the whole of Substantial Form \[as, to be the
genus of Form, it must\].

We may, again, regard Form as the creator of Substance and make the
Reason-Principle of Substance dependent upon Form: yet we do not come
thereby to an understanding of the nature of Substance.

We may, also, restrict Substance to the Composite. Matter and Form then
cease to be substances. If they are Substance equally with the
Composite, it remains to enquire what there is common to all three.

The "mere predicates" fall under the category of Relation: such are
cause and element. The accidents included in the composite substances
ire found to be either Quality or Quantity; those which are inclusive
are of the nature of Space and Time. Activities and experiences comprise
Motions; consequents Space and Time, which are consequents respectively
of the Composites and of Motion.

The first three entities \[Matter, Form, Composite\] go, as we have
discovered, to make a single common genus, the Sensible counterpart of
Substance. Then follow in order Relation, Quantity, Quality,
Time-during-which, Place-in-which, Motion; though, with Time and Space
already included \[under Relation\], Time-during-which and
Place-in-which become superfluous.

Thus we have five genera, counting the first three entities as one. If
the first three are not massed into a unity, the series will be Matter,
Form, Composite, Relation, Quantity, Quality, Motion. The last three
may, again, be included in Relation, which is capable of bearing this
wider extension.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn564)
