[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn593)  [Next](enn595.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. Herein lies its greatness, not in mass; mass is limited and may be
whittled down to nothingness; in that order no such paring off is
possible- nor, if it were, could there be any falling short. Where
limitation is unthinkable, what fear can there be of absence at any
point? Nowhere can that principle fail which is the unfailing, the
everlasting, the undwindling; suppose it in flux and it must at some
time flow to its end; since it is not in flux- and, besides \[as the
All\], it has nowhere to flow to- it lies spread over the universe; in
fact it is the universe, too great to be held by body, giving,
therefore, to the material universe but little of itself, the little
which that participant can take.

We may not make this principle the lesser, or if in the sense of mass we
do, we must not begin to mistrust the power of that less to stretch to
the greater. Of course, we have in fact no right to affirm it less or to
measure the thing of magnitude against that which has none; as well talk
of a doctor's skill being smaller than his body. This greatness is not
to be thought of in terms of quantity; the greater and less of body have
nothing to do with soul.

The nature of the greatness of soul is indicated by the fact that as the
body grows, the larger mass is held by the same soul that sufficed to
the smaller; it would be in many ways absurd to suppose a corresponding
enlargement in the soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn595.md)
