[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn577)  [Next](enn579.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. These problems at any rate all serve to show that, while in general
it is necessary to look for differences by which to separate things from
each other, to hunt for differences of the differences themselves is
both futile and irrational. We cannot have substances of substances,
quantities of quantities, qualities of qualities, differences of
differences; differences must, where possible, be found outside the
genus, in creative powers and the like: but where no such criteria are
present, as in distinguishing dark-green from pale-green, both being
regarded as derived from white and black, what expedient may be
suggested?

Sense-perception and intelligence may be trusted to indicate diversity
but not to explain it: explanation is outside the province of
sense-perception, whose function is merely to produce a variety of
information; while, as for intelligence, it works exclusively with
intuitions and never resorts to explanations to justify them; there is
in the movements of intelligence a diversity which separates one object
from another, making further differentiation unnecessary.

Do all qualities constitute differentiae, or not? Granted that whiteness
and colours in general and the qualities dependent upon touch and taste
can, even while they remain species \[of Quality\], become differentiae
of other things, how can grammar and music serve as differentiae?
Perhaps in the sense that minds may be distinguished as grammatical and
musical, especially if the qualities are innate, in which case they do
become specific differentiae.

It remains to decide whether there can be any differentia derived from
the genus to which the differentiated thing belongs, or whether it must
of necessity belong to another genus? The former alternative would
produce differentiae of things derived from the same genus as the
differentiae themselves- for example, qualities of qualities. Virtue and
vice are two states differing in quality: the states are qualities, and
their differentiae qualities- unless indeed it be maintained that the
state undifferentiated is not a quality, that the differentia creates
the quality.

But consider the sweet as beneficial, the bitter as injurious: then
bitter and sweet are distinguished, not by Quality, but by Relation. We
might also be disposed to identify the sweet with the thick, and the
Pungent with the thin: "thick" however hardly reveals the essence but
merely the cause of sweetness- an argument which applies equally to
pungency.

We must therefore reflect whether it may be taken as an invariable rule
that Quality is never a differentia of Quality, any more than Substance
is a differentia of Substance, or Quantity of Quantity.

Surely, it may be interposed, five differs from three by two. No: it
exceeds it by two; we do not say that it differs: how could it differ by
a "two" in the "three"? We may add that neither can Motion differ from
Motion by Motion. There is, in short, no parallel in any of the other
genera.

In the case of virtue and vice, whole must be compared with whole, and
the differentiation conducted on this basis. As for the differentia
being derived from the same genus as themselves, namely, Quality, and
from no other genus, if we proceed on the principle that virtue is bound
up with pleasure, vice with lust, virtue again with the acquisition of
food, vice with idle extravagance, and accept these definitions as
satisfactory, then clearly we have, here too, differentiae which are not
qualities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](enn579.md)
