[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn523)  [Next](enn525) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. There are other questions calling for consideration:

First: Are both Acts and motions to be included in the category of
Action, with the distinction that Acts are momentary while Motions, such
as cutting, are in time? Or will both be regarded as motions or as
involving Motion?

Secondly: Will all activities be related to passivity, or will some- for
example, walking and speaking- be considered as independent of it?

Thirdly: Will all those related to passivity be classed as motions and
the independent as Acts, or will the two classes overlap? Walking, for
instance, which is an independent, would, one supposes, be a motion;
thinking, which also does not essentially involve "passivity," an Act:
otherwise we must hold that thinking and walking are not even actions.
But if they are not in the category of Action, where then in our
classification must they fall?

It may perhaps be urged that the act of thinking, together with the
faculty of thought, should be regarded as relative to the thought
object; for is not the faculty of sensation treated as relative to the
sensible object? If then, we may ask, in the analogue the faculty of
sensation is treated as relative to the sensible object, why not the
sensory act as well? The fact is that even sensation, though related to
an external object, has something besides that relation: it has, namely,
its own status of being either an Act or a Passion. Now the Passion is
separable from the condition of being attached to some object and caused
by some object: so, then, is the Act a distinct entity. Walking is
similarly attached and caused, and yet has besides the status of being a
motion. It follows that thought, in addition to its relationship, will
have the status of being either a motion or an Act.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 19](enn525)
