[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn565)  [Next](enn567.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. Granted, it may be urged, that these observations upon the nature of
Substance are sound, we have not yet arrived at a statement of its
essence. Our critic doubtless expects to see this "Sensible": but its
essence, its characteristic being, cannot be seen.

Do we infer that fire and water are not Substance? They certainly are
not Substance because they are visible. Why, then? Because they possess
Matter? No. Or Form? No. Nor because they involve a Couplement of Matter
and Form. Then why are they Substance? By existing. But does not
Quantity exist, and Quality? This anomaly is to be explained by an
equivocation in the term "existence."

What, then, is the meaning of "existence" as applied to fire, earth and
the other elements? What is the difference between this existence and
existence in the other categories? It is the difference between being
simply- that which merely is- and being white. But surely the being
qualified by "white" is the same as that having no qualification? It is
not the same: the latter is Being in the primary sense, the former is
Being only by participation and in a secondary degree. Whiteness added
to Being produces a being white; Being added to whiteness produces a
white being: thus, whiteness becomes an accident of Being, and Being an
accident of whiteness.

The case is not equivalent to predicating white of Socrates and Socrates
of white: for Socrates remains the same, though white would appear to
have a different meaning in the two propositions, since in predicating
Socrates of white we include Socrates in the \[whole\] sphere of
whiteness, whereas in the proposition "Socrates is white" whiteness is
plainly an attribute of Socrates.

"Being is white" implies, similarly, that Being possesses whiteness as
an attribute, while in the proposition "whiteness is Being \[or, is a
being\]" Being is regarded as comprising whiteness in its own extension.

In sum, whiteness has existence because it is bound up with Being and
present in it: Being is, thus, the source of its existence. Being is
Being on its own account, but the white is due to whiteness- not because
it is "present in" whiteness, but because whiteness is present in it.

The Being of the Sensible resembles the white in not originating in
itself. It must therefore be regarded as dependent for its being upon
the Authentic Being, as white is dependent upon the Authentic Whiteness,
and the Authentic Whiteness dependent for its whiteness upon
participation in that Supreme Being whose existence is underived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn567.md)
