[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn534)  [Next](enn536) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 29

29\. Qualities must be for this school distinct from Substrates. This in
fact they acknowledge by counting them as the second category. If then
they form a distinct category, they must be simplex; that is to say they
are not composite; that is to say that as qualities, pure and simple,
they are devoid of Matter: hence they are bodiless and active, since
Matter is their substrate- a relation of passivity.

If however they hold Qualities to be composite, that is a strange
classification which first contrasts simple and composite qualities,
then proceeds to include them in one genus, and finally includes one of
the two species \[simple\] in the other \[composite\]; it is like
dividing knowledge into two species, the first comprising grammatical
knowledge, the second made up of grammatical and other knowledge.

Again, if they identify Qualities with qualifications of Matter, then in
the first place even their Seminal Principles \[Logoi\] will be material
and will not have to reside in Matter to produce a composite, but prior
to the composite thus produced they will themselves be composed of
Matter and Form: in other words, they will not be Forms or Principles.
Further, if they maintain that the Seminal Principles are nothing but
Matter in a certain state, they evidently identify Qualities with
States, and should accordingly classify them in their fourth genus. If
this is a state of some peculiar kind, what precisely is its
differentia? Clearly the state by its association with Matter receives
an accession of Reality: yet if that means that when divorced from
Matter it is not a Reality, how can State be treated as a single genus
or species? Certainly one genus cannot embrace the Existent and the
Non-existent.

And what is this state implanted in Matter? It is either real, or
unreal: if real, absolutely bodiless: if unreal, it is introduced to no
purpose; Matter is all there is; Quality therefore is nothing. The same
is true of State, for that is even more unreal; the alleged Fourth
Category more so.

Matter then is the sole Reality. But how do we come to know this?
Certainly not from Matter itself. How, then? From Intellect? But
Intellect is merely a state of Matter, and even the "state" is an empty
qualification. We are left after all with Matter alone competent to make
these assertions, to fathom these problems. And if its assertions were
intelligent, we must wonder how it thinks and performs the functions of
Soul without possessing either Intellect or Soul. If, then, it were to
make foolish assertions, affirming itself to be what it is not and
cannot be, to what should we ascribe this folly? Doubtless to Matter, if
it was in truth Matter that spoke. But Matter does not speak; anyone who
says that it does proclaims the predominance of Matter in himself; he
may have a soul, but he is utterly devoid of Intellect, and lives in
ignorance of himself and of the faculty alone capable of uttering the
truth in these things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 30](enn536)
