[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn636)  [Next](enn638) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 18

18\. It appears then that Number in that realm is definite; it is we
that can conceive the "More than is present"; the infinity lies in our
counting: in the Real is no conceiving more than has been conceived; all
stands entire; no number has been or could be omitted to make addition
possible. It might be described as infinite in the sense that it has not
been measured- who is there to measure it?- but it is solely its own, a
concentrated unit, entire, not ringed round by any boundary; its manner
of being is settled for it by itself alone. None of the Real-Beings is
under limit; what is limited, measured, is what needs measure to prevent
it running away into the unbounded. There every being is Measure; and
therefore it is that all is beautiful. Because that is a living thing it
is beautiful, holding the highest life, the complete, a life not tainted
towards death, nothing mortal there, nothing dying. Nor is the life of
that Absolute Living-Form some feeble flickering; it is primal, the
brightest, holding all that life has of radiance; it is that first light
which the souls There draw upon for their life and bring with them when
they come here. It knows for what purpose it lives, towards What it
lives, from Whence it lives; for the Whence of its life is the
Whither... and close above it stands the wisdom of all, the collective
Intellectual-Principle, knit into it, one with it, colouring it to a
higher goodness, by kneading wisdom into it, making its beauty still
more august. Even here the august and veritably beautiful life is the
life in wisdom, here dimly seen, There purely. For There wisdom gives
sight to the seer and power for the fuller living and in that tenser
life both to see and to become what is seen.

Here attention is set for the most part upon the unliving and, in the
living, upon what is lifeless in them; the inner life is taken only with
alloy: There, all are Living Beings, living wholly, unalloyed; however
you may choose to study one of them apart from its life, in a moment
that life is flashed out upon you: once you have known the Essence that
pervades them, conferring that unchangeable life upon them, once you
perceive the judgement and wisdom and knowledge that are theirs, you can
but smile at all the lower nature with its pretention to Reality.

In virtue of this Essence it is that life endures, that the
Intellectual-Principle endures, that the Beings stand in their eternity;
nothing alters it, turns it, moves it; nothing, indeed, is in being
besides it to touch it; anything that is must be its product; anything
opposed to it could not affect it. Being itself could not make such an
opposite into Being; that would require a prior to both and that prior
would then be Being; so that Parmenides was right when he taught the
identity of Being and Unity. Being is thus beyond contact not because it
stands alone but because it is Being. For Being alone has Being in its
own right.

How then can we deny to it either Being or anything at all that may
exist effectively, anything that may derive from it?

As long as it exists it produces: but it exists for ever; so, therefore,
do its products. And so great is it in power and beauty that it remains
the allurer, all things of the universe depending from it and rejoicing
to hold their trace of it and through that to seek their good. To us,
existence is before the good; all this world desires life and wisdom in
order to Being; every soul and every intellect seeks to be its Being,
but Being is sufficient to itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: SEVENTH TRACTATE](enn638)
