[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn645)  [Next](enn647) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. So much for the thing of sense; but it would appear that the
prototype There of the living form, the universal horse, must look
deliberately towards this sphere; and, that being so, the idea of horse
must have been worked out in order there be a horse here?

Yet what was that there to present the idea of the horse it was desired
to produce? Obviously the idea of horse must exist before there was any
planning to make a horse; it could not be thought of in order to be
made; there must have been horse unproduced before that which was later
to come into being. If, then, the thing existed before it was produced-
if it cannot have been thought of in order to its production- the Being
that held the horse as There held it in presence without any looking to
this sphere; it was not with intent to set horse and the rest in being
here that they were contained There; it is that, the universal existing,
the reproduction followed of necessity since the total of things was not
to halt at the Intellectual. Who was there to call a halt to a power
capable at once of self-concentration and of outflow?

But how come these animals of earth to be There? What have they to do
within God? Reasoning beings, all very well; but this host of the
unreasoning, what is there august in them? Surely the very contrary?

The answer is that obviously the unity of our universe must be that of a
manifold since it is subsequent to that unity-absolute; otherwise it
would be not next to that but the very same thing. As a next it could
not hold the higher rank of being more perfectly a unity; it must fall
short: since the best is a unity, inevitably there must be something
more than unity, for deficiency involves plurality.

But why should it not be simply a dyad?

Because neither of the constituents could ever be a pure unity, but at
the very least a duality and so progressively \[in an endless
dualization\]. Besides, in that first duality of the hypothesis there
would be also movement and rest, Intellect and the life included in
Intellect, all-embracing Intellect and life complete. That means that it
could not be one Intellect; it must be Intellect agglomerate including
all the particular intellects, a thing therefore as multiple as all the
Intellects and more so; and the life in it would nat be that of one soul
but of all the souls with the further power of producing the single
souls: it would be the entire living universe containing much besides
man; for if it contained only man, man would be alone here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn647)
