[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn602)  [Next](enn604) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 14

14\. But, admitting this one soul at every point, how is there a
particular soul of the individual and how the good soul and the bad?

The one soul reaches to the individual but nonetheless contains all
souls and all intelligences; this, because it is at once a unity and an
infinity; it holds all its content as one yet with each item distinct,
though not to the point of separation. Except by thus holding all its
content as one-life entire, soul entire, all intelligence- it could not
be infinite; since the individualities are not fenced off from each
other, it remains still one thing. It was to hold life not single but
infinite and yet one life, one in the sense not of an aggregate built up
but of the retention of the unity in which all rose. Strictly, of
course, it is a matter not of the rising of the individuals but of their
being eternally what they are; in that order, as there is no beginning,
so there is no apportioning except as an interpretation by the
recipient. What is of that realm is the ancient and primal; the relation
to it of the thing of process must be that of approach and apparent
merging with always dependence.

But we ourselves, what are We?

Are we that higher or the participant newcomer, the thing of beginnings
in time?

Before we had our becoming Here we existed There, men other than now,
some of us gods: we were pure souls, Intelligence inbound with the
entire of reality, members of the Intellectual, not fenced off, not cut
away, integral to that All. Even now, it is true, we are not put apart;
but upon that primal Man there has intruded another, a man seeking to
come into being and finding us there, for we were not outside of the
universe. This other has wound himself about us, foisting himself upon
the Man that each of us was at first. Then it was as if one voice
sounded, one word was uttered, and from every side an ear attended and
received and there was an effective hearing, possessed through and
through of what was present and active upon it: now we have lost that
first simplicity; we are become the dual thing, sometimes indeed no more
than that later foisting, with the primal nature dormant and in a sense
no longer present.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](enn604)
