[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn626)  [Next](enn628.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 8

8\. As then there is a Life-Form primal- which therefore is the
Life-Form Absolute- and there is Intellectual-Principle or Being,
Authentic Being, these, we affirm, contain all living things and all
Number, and Absolute Justice and Beauty and all of that order; for we
ascribe an existence of their own to Absolute Man, Absolute Number,
Absolute Justice. It remains to discover, in so far as such knowledge is
possible, how these distinct entities come to be and what is the manner
of their being.

At the outset we must lay aside all sense-perception; by
Intellectual-Principle we know Intellectual-Principle. We reflect within
ourselves there is life, there is intellect, not in extension but as
power without magnitude, issue of Authentic Being which is power
self-existing, no vacuity but a thing most living and intellective-
nothing more living, more intelligent, more real- and producing its
effect by contact and in the ratio of the contact, closely to the close,
more remotely to the remote. If Being is to be sought, then most be
sought is Being at its intensest; so too the intensest of Intellect if
the Intellectual act has worth; and so, too, of Life.

First, then, we take Being as first in order; then
Intellectual-Principle; then the Living-Form considered as containing
all things: Intellectual-Principle, as the Act of Real Being, is a
second.

Thus it is clear that Number cannot be dependent upon the Living-Form
since unity and duality existed before that; nor does it rise in the
Intellectual-Principle since before that there existed Real Being which
is both one and numerous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](enn628.md)
