[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn599)  [Next](enn601.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 11

11\. Still, this integral omnipresence admitted, why do not all things
participate in the Intellectual Order in its entirety? Why has it a
first participant, a second, and so on?

We can but see that presence is determined by the fitness of the
participant so that, while Being is omnipresent to the realm of Being,
never falling short of itself, yet only the competent possess themselves
of that presence which depends not upon situation but upon adequacy; the
transparent object and the opaque answer very differently to the light.
These firsts, seconds, thirds, of participance are determined by rank,
by power, not by place but by differentiation; and difference is no bar
to coexistence, witness soul and Intellectual-Principle: similarly our
own knowledge, the trivial next the gravest; one and the same object
yields colour to our sight, fragrance to smell, to every sense a
particular experience, all presented simultaneously.

But would not this indicate that the Authentic is diverse, multiple?

That diversity is simplex still; that multiple is one; for it is a
Reason-Principle, which is to say a unity in variety: all Being is one;
the differing being is still included in Being; the differentiation is
within Being, obviously not within non-Being. Being is bound up with the
unity which is never apart from it; wheresoever Being appears, there
appears its unity; and the unity of Being is self-standing, for presence
in the sensible does not abrogate independence: things of sense are
present to the Intellectual- where this occurs- otherwise than as the
Intellectual is present within itself; so, too, body's presence to soul
differs from that of knowledge to soul; one item of knowledge is present
in a different way than another; a body's presence to body is, again,
another form of relation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 12](enn601.md)
