[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn609)  [Next](enn611.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. Then consider this god \[in man\] whom we cannot think to be absent
at some point and present at another. All that have insight into the
nature of the divine beings hold the omnipresence of this god and of all
the gods, and reason assures us that so it must be.

Now all-pervasion is inconsistent with partition; that would mean no
longer the god throughout but part of the god at one point and part at
another; the god ceases to be one god, just as a mass cut up ceases to
be a mass, the parts no longer giving the first total. Further, the god
becomes corporeal.

If all this is impossible, the disputed doctrine presents itself again;
holding the god to pervade the Being of man, we hold the omnipresence of
an integral identity.

Again, if we think of the divine nature as infinite- and certainly it is
confined by no bounds- this must mean that it nowhere fails; its
presence must reach to everything; at the point to which it does not
reach, there it has failed; something exists in which it is not.

Now, admitting any sequent to the absolute unity, that sequent must be
bound up with the absolute; any third will be about that second and move
towards it, linked to it as its offspring. In this way all participants
in the Later will have share in the First. The Beings of the
Intellectual are thus a plurality of firsts and seconds and thirds
attached like one sphere to one centre, not separated by interval but
mutually present; where, therefore, the Intellectual tertiaries are
present, the secondaries and firsts are present too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn611.md)
