[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn664)  [Next](enn666) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 27

27\. But what is that whose entry supplies every such need?

Some Idea, we maintain. There is a Form to which Matter aspires: to
soul, moral excellence is this Form.

But is this Form a good to the thing as being apt to it, does the
striving aim at the apt?

No: the aptest would be the most resemblant to the thing itself, but
that, however sought and welcomed, does not suffice for the good: the
good must be something more: to be a good to another a thing must have
something beyond aptness; that only can be adopted as the good which
represents the apt in its better form and is best to what is best in the
quester's self, to that which the quester tends potentially to be.

A thing is potentially that to which its nature looks; this, obviously,
it lacks; what it lacks, of its better, is its good. Matter is of all
that most in need; its next is the lowest Form; Form at lowest is just
one grade higher than Matter. If a thing is a good to itself, much more
must its perfection, its Form, its better, be a good to it; this better,
good in its own nature, must be good also to the quester whose good it
procures.

But why should the Form which makes a thing good be a good to that
thing? As being most appropriate?

No: but because it is, itself, a portion of the Good. This is why the
least alloyed and nearest to the good are most at peace within
themselves.

It is surely out of place to ask why a thing good in its own nature
should be a good; we can hardly suppose it dissatisfied with its own
goodness so that it must strain outside its essential quality to the
good which it effectually is.

There remains the question with regard to the Simplex: where there is
utter absence of distinction does this self-aptness constitute the good
to that Simplex?

If thus far we have been right, the striving of the lower possesses
itself of the good as of a thing resident in a certain Kind, and it is
not the striving that constitutes the good but the good that calls out
the striving: where the good is attained something is acquired and on
this acquisition there follows pleasure. But the thing must be chosen
even though no pleasure ensued; it must be desirable for its own sake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 28](enn666)
