[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn653)  [Next](enn655) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 16

16\. But even there we are not to remain always, in that beauty of the
multiple; we must make haste yet higher, above this heaven of ours and
even that; leaving all else aside we ask in awe "Who produced that realm
and how?" Everything There is a single Idea in an individual impression
and, informed by The Good, possesses the universal good transcendent
over all. Each possessing that Being above, possesses also the total
Living-Form in virtue of that transcendent life, possesses, no doubt,
much else as well.

But what is the Nature of this Transcendent in view of which and by way
of which the Ideas are good?

The best way of putting the question is to ask whether, when
Intellectual-Principle looked towards The Good, it had Intellection of
that unity as a multiplicity and, itself a unity, plied its Act by
breaking into parts what it was too feeble to know as a whole.

No: that would not be Intellection looking upon the Good; it would be a
looking void of Intellection. We must think of it not as looking but as
living; dependent upon That, it kept itself turned Thither; all the
tendance taking place There and upon That must be a movement teeming
with life and must so fill the looking Principle; there is no longer
bare Act, there is a filling to saturation. Forthwith
Intellectual-Principle becomes all things, knows that fact in virtue of
its self-knowing and at once becomes Intellectual-Principle, filled so
as to hold within itself that object of its vision, seeing all by the
light from the Giver and bearing that Giver with it.

In this way the Supreme may be understood to be the cause at once of
essential reality and of the knowing of reality. The sun, cause of the
existence of sense-things and of their being seen, is indirectly the
cause of sight, without being either the faculty or the object:
similarly this Principle, The Good, cause of Being and
Intellectual-Principle, is a light appropriate to what is to be seen
There and to their seer; neither the Beings nor the
Intellectual-Principle, it is their source and by the light it sheds
upon both makes them objects of Intellection. This filling procures the
existence; after the filling, the being; the existence achieved, the
seeing followed: the beginning is that state of not yet having been
filled, though there is, also, the beginning which means that the
Filling Principle was outside and by that act of filling gave shape to
the filled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 17](enn655)
