[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn687)  [Next](enn689) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 7

7\. Soul becomes free when it moves, through Intellectual-Principle,
towards The Good; what it does in that spirit is its free act;
Intellectual-Principle is free in its own right. That principle of Good
is the sole object of desire and the source of self-disposal to the
rest, to soul when it fully attains, to Intellectual-Principle by
connate possession.

How then can the sovereign of all that august sequence- the first in
place, that to which all else strives to mount, all dependent upon it
and taking from it their powers even to this power of self-disposal- how
can This be brought under the freedom belonging to you and me, a
conception applicable only by violence to Intellectual-Principle itself?

It is rash thinking drawn from another order that would imagine a First
Principle to be chance- made what it is, controlled by a manner of being
imposed from without, void therefore of freedom or self-disposal, acting
or refraining under compulsion. Such a statement is untrue to its
subject and introduces much difficulty; it utterly annuls the principle
of freewill with the very conception of our own voluntary action, so
that there is no longer any sense in discussion upon these terms, empty
names for the non-existent. Anyone upholding this opinion would be
obliged to say not merely that free act exists nowhere but that the very
word conveys nothing to him. To admit understanding the word is to be
easily brought to confess that the conception of freedom does apply
where it is denied. No doubt a concept leaves the reality untouched and
unappropriated, for nothing can produce itself, bring itself into being;
but thought insists upon distinguishing between what is subject to
others and what is independent, bound under no allegiance, lord of its
own act.

This state of freedom belongs in the absolute degree to the Eternals in
right of that eternity and to other beings in so far as without
hindrance they possess or pursue The Good which, standing above them
all, must manifestly be the only good they can reasonably seek.

To say that The Good exists by chance must be false; chance belongs to
the later, to the multiple; since the First has never come to be, we
cannot speak of it either as coming by chance into being or as not
master of its being. Absurd also the objection that it acts in
accordance with its being if this is to suggest that freedom demands act
or other expression against the nature. Neither does its nature as the
unique annul its freedom when this is the result of no compulsion but
means only that The Good is no other than itself, is self-complete and
has no higher.

The objection would imply that where there is most good there is least
freedom. If this is absurd, still more absurd to deny freedom to The
Good on the ground that it is good and self-concentred, not needing to
lean upon anything else but actually being the Term to which all tends,
itself moving to none.

Where- since we must use such words- the essential act is identical with
the being- and this identity must obtain in The Good since it holds even
in Intellectual-Principle- there the act is no more determined by the
Being than the Being by the Act. Thus "acting according to its nature"
does not apply; the Act, the Life, so to speak, cannot be held to issue
from the Being; the Being accompanies the Act in an eternal association:
from the two \[Being and Act\] it forms itself into The Good,
self-springing and unspringing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 8](enn689)
