[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn601)  [Next](enn603) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 13

13\. But how account, at this, for its extension over all the heavens
and all living beings?

There is no such extension. Sense-perception, by insistence upon which
we doubt, tells of Here and There; but reason certifies that the Here
and There do not attach to that principle; the extended has participated
in that kosmos of life which itself has no extension.

Clearly no participant can participate in itself; self-participation
would be merely identity. Body, then, as participant does not
participate in body; body it has; its participation must be in what is
not body. So too magnitude does not participate in magnitude; it has it:
not even in addition of quantity does the initial magnitude participate
in magnitude: the two cubits do not themselves become three cubits; what
occurs is that an object totalling to a certain quantity now totals to
another: for magnitude to participate in magnitude the actual two cubits
must themselves become the new three \[which cannot occur\].

If, then, the divided and quantitatively extended is to participate in
another Kind, is to have any sort of participation, it can participate
only in something undivided, unextended, wholly outside of quantity.
Therefore, that which is to be introduced by the participation must
enter as itself an omnipresent indivisible.

This indivisibility must, of course, not be taken in any sense of
littleness: littleness would be still divisible, could not cover the
extension of the participant and could not maintain integral presence
against that expansion. Nor is it the indivisibility of a geometric
point: the participant mass is no single point but includes an infinity
of points; so that on the theory this principle must be an infinity of
points, not a simultaneous entire, and so, again, will fail to cover the
participant.

If, then, the participant mass in its entirety is to contain that
principle entire, the universe must hold that one soul present at its
every point.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](enn603)
