[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn692)  [Next](enn694) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 12

12\. Yet, is not God what He is? Can He, then, be master of being what
He is or master to stand above Being? The mind utterly reluctant returns
to its doubt: some further considerations, therefore, must be offered:

In us the individual, viewed as body, is far from reality; by soul which
especially constitutes the being we participate in reality, are in some
degree real. This is a compound state, a mingling of Reality and
Difference, not, therefore reality in the strictest sense, not reality
pure. Thus far we are not masters of our being; in some sense the
reality in us is one thing and we another. We are not masters of our
being; the real in us is the master, since that is the principle
establishing our characteristic difference; yet we are again in some
sense that which is sovereign in us and so even on this level might in
spite of all be described as self-disposing.

But in That which is wholly what it is- self-existing reality, without
distinction between the total thing and its essence- the being is a unit
and is sovereign over itself; neither the being nor the essence is to be
referred to any extern. Besides, the very question as to self. disposal
falls in the case of what is First in reality; if it can be raised at
all, we must declare that there can be no subjection whatever in That to
which reality owes its freedom, That in whose nature the conferring of
freedom must clearly be vested, preeminently to be known as the
liberator.

Still, is not this Principle subject to its essential Being? On the
contrary, it is the source of freedom to Being.

Even if there be Act in the Supreme- an Act with which it is to be
identified- this is not enough to set up a duality within it and prevent
it being entirely master of that self from which the Act springs; for
the Act is not distinct from that self. If we utterly deny Act in it-
holding that Act begins with others moving about it- we are all the less
able to allow either self-mastery or subjection in it: even self-mastery
is absent here, not that anything else is master over it but that
self-mastery begins with Being while the Supreme is to be set in a
higher order.

But what can there be higher than that which is its own master?

Where we speak of self-mastery there is a certain duality, Act against
essence; from the exercise of the Act arises the conception of the
mastering principle- though one identical with the essence- hence arises
the separate idea of mastery, and the being concerned is said to possess
self-mastery. Where there is no such duality joining to unity but solely
a unity pure- either because the Act is the whole being or because there
is no Act at all- then we cannot strictly say that the being has this
mastery of self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](enn694)
