[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn635)  [Next](enn637.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 17

17\. But what of the Infinite Number we hear of; does not all this
reasoning set it under limit?

And rightly so if the thing is to be a number; limitlessness and number
are in contradiction.

How, then, do we come to use the term? Is it that we think of Number as
we think of an infinite line, not with the idea that any such lire
exists but that even the very greatest- that of the \[path of the\]
universe, for example- may be thought of as still greater? So it might
be with number; let it be fixed, yet we still are free to think of its
double, though not of course to produce the doubled quantity since it is
impossible to join to the actual what is no more than a conception, a
phantasm, private to ourselves.

It is our view that there does exist an infinite line, among the
Intellectual Beings: for There a line would not be quantitative and
being without quantity could be numerically infinite. This however would
be in another mode than that of limitless extension. In what mode then?
In that the conception of the Absolute Line does not include the
conception of limit.

But what sort of thing is the Line in the Intellectual and what place
does it hold?

It is later than Number since unity is observed in it; it rises at one
point and traverses one course and simply lacks the quantity that would
be the measure of the distance.

But where does this thing lie? Is it existent only in the defining
thought, so to speak?

No; it is also a thing, though a thing of the Intellectual. All that
belongs to that order is at once an Intellectual and in some degree the
concrete thing. There is a position, as well as a manner of being, for
all configurations, for surface, for solid. And certainly the
configurations are not of our devising; for example, the configurations
of the universe are obviously antecedent to ourselves; so it must be
with all the configurations of the things of nature; before the bodily
reproductions all must exist There, without configuration, primal
configurations. For these primals are not shapes in something;
self-belonging, they are perfect without extension; only the extended
needs the external. In the sphere of Real-Being the configuration is
always a unity; it becomes discrete either in the Living-Form or
immediately before: I say "becomes discrete" not in the sense that it
takes magnitude There but that it is broken apart for the purpose of the
Living-Form and is allotted to the bodies within that Form- for
instance, to Fire There, the Intellectual Pyramid. And because the
Ideal-Form is There, the fire of this sphere seeks to produce that
configuration against the check of Matter: and so of all the rest as we
read in the account of the realm of sense.

But does the Life-Form contain the configurations by the mere fact of
its life?

They are in the Intellectual-Principle previously but they also exist in
the Living-Form; if this be considered as including the
Intellectual-Principle, then they are primally in the Life-Form, but if
that Principle comes first then they are previously in that. And if the
Life-Form entire contains also souls, it must certainly be subsequent to
the Intellectual-Principle.

No doubt there is the passage "Whatever Intellect sees in the entire
Life-Form"; thus seeing, must not the Intellectual-Principle be the
later?

No; the seeing may imply merely that the reality comes into being by the
fact of that seeing; the Intellectual-Principle is not external to the
Life-Form; all is one; the Act of the Intellectual-Principle possesses
itself of bare sphere, while the Life-Form holds the sphere as sphere of
a living total.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](enn637.md)
