[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn669)  [Next](enn671) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 32

32\. Where, then? where exists the author of this beauty and life, the
begetter of the veritable?

You see the splendour over the things of the universe with all the
variety begotten of the Ideas; well might we linger here: but amid all
these things of beauty we cannot but ask whence they come and whence the
beauty. This source can be none of the beautiful objects; were it so, it
too would be a thing of parts. It can be no shape, no power, nor the
total of powers and shapes that have had the becoming that has set them
here; it must stand above all the powers, all the patterns. The origin
of all this must be the formless- formless not as lacking shape but as
the very source of even shape Intellectual.

In the realm of process anything coming to be must come to be something;
to every thing its distinctive shape: but what shape can that have which
no one has shaped? It can be none of existing things; yet it is all:
none, in that beings are later; all, as the wellspring from which they
flow. That which can make all can have, itself, no extension; it must be
limitless and so without magnitude; magnitude itself is of the Later and
cannot be an element in that which is to bring it into being. The
greatness of the Authentic cannot be a greatness of quantity; all
extension must belong to the subsequent: the Supreme is great in the
sense only that there can be nothing mightier, nothing to equal it,
nothing with anything in common with it: how then could anything be
equal to any part of its content? Its eternity and universal reach
entail neither measure nor measurelessness; given either, how could it
be the measure of things? So with shape: granted beauty, the absence of
shape or form to be grasped is but enhancement of desire and love; the
love will be limitless as the object is, an infinite love.

Its beauty, too, will be unique, a beauty above beauty: it cannot be
beauty since it is not a thing among things. It is lovable and the
author of beauty; as the power to all beautiful shape, it will be the
ultimate of beauty, that which brings all loveliness to be; it begets
beauty and makes it yet more beautiful by the excess of beauty streaming
from itself, the source and height of beauty. As the source of beauty it
makes beautiful whatsoever springs from it. And this conferred beauty is
not itself in shape; the thing that comes to be is without shape, though
in another sense shaped; what is denoted by shape is, in itself, an
attribute of something else, shapeless at first. Not the beauty but its
participant takes the shape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 33](enn671)
