[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn604)  [Next](enn606.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 16

16\. But if that Principle can never fall to evil and we have given a
true account of the soul's entry or presence to body, what are we to say
of the periodic Descents and Returns, the punishments, the banishment
into animal forms? That teaching we have inherited from those ancient
philosophers who have best probed into soul and we must try to show that
our own doctrine is accordant with it, or at least not conflicting.

We have seen that the participation of things here in that higher means
not that the soul has gone outside of itself to enter the corporeal, but
that the corporeal has approached soul and is now participant in it; the
coming affirmed by the ancients can be only that approach of the body to
the higher by which it partakes of life and of soul; this has nothing to
do with local entry but is some form of communion; by the descent and
embodiment of current phrasing must be understood not that soul becomes
an appanage of body but that it gives out to it something of itself;
similarly, the soul's departure is the complete cessation of that
communion.

The various rankings of the universe will determine various degrees of
the communion; soul, ultimate of the Intellectual, will give forth
freely to body as being more nearly of the one power and standing
closer, as distance holds in that order.

The soul's evil will be this association, its good the release. Why?
Because, even unmerged, a soul in any way to be described as attached to
this universe is in some degree fallen from the All into a state of
partition; essentially belonging to the All, it no longer directs its
act Thither: thus, a man's knowledge is one whole, but he may guide
himself by no more than some single item of it, where his good would lie
in living not by some such fragment but by the total of his knowing.

That One Soul- member of the Intellectual kosmos and there merging what
it has of partial into the total- has broken away, so to speak, from the
All to the part and to that devotes itself becoming partial with it:
thus fire that might consume everything may be set to ply its all-power
upon some trifle. So long as the soul remains utterly unattached it is
soul not singled out; when it has accepted separation- not that of place
but that of act determining individualities- it is a part, no longer the
soul entire, or at least not entire in the first sense; when, on the
contrary, it exercises no such outward control it is perfectly the
All-Soul, the partial in it latent.

As for the entry into the World of the Shades, if this means into the
unseen, that is its release; if into some lower place, there is nothing
strange in that, since even here the soul is taken to be where the body
is, in place with the body.

But on the dissolution of the body?

So long as the image-soul has not been discarded, clearly the higher
will be where that is; if, on the contrary, the higher has been
completely emancipated by philosophic discipline, the image-soul may
very well go alone to that lower place, the authentic passing
uncontaminated into the Intellectual, separated from that image but
nonetheless the soul entire.

Let the image-offspring of the individuality- fare as it may, the true
soul when it turns its light upon itself, chooses the higher and by that
choice blends into the All, neither acting now nor extinct.

But it is time to return to our main theme:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: FIFTH TRACTATE](enn606.md)
