[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn672)  [Next](enn674.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 35

35\. Such in this union is the soul's temper that even the act of
Intellect, once so intimately loved, she now dismisses; Intellection is
movement and she has no wish to move; she has nothing to say of this
very Intellectual-Principle by means of which she has attained the
vision, herself made over into Intellectual-Principle and becoming that
principle so as to be able to take stand in that Intellectual space.
Entered there and making herself over to that, she at first contemplates
that realm, but once she sees that higher still she leaves all else
aside. Thus when a man enters a house rich in beauty he might gaze about
and admire the varied splendour before the master appears; but, face to
face with that great person- no thing of ornament but calling for the
truest attention- he would ignore everything else and look only to the
master. In this state of absorbed contemplation there is no longer
question of holding an object: the vision is continuous so that seeing
and seen are one thing; object and act of vision have become identical;
of all that until then filled the eye no memory remains. And our
comparison would be closer if instead of a man appearing to the visitor
who had been admiring the house it were a god, and not a god manifesting
to the eyes but one filling the soul.

Intellectual-Principle, thus, has two powers, first that of grasping
intellectively its own content, the second that of an advancing and
receiving whereby to know its transcendent; at first it sees, later by
that seeing it takes possession of Intellectual-Principle, becoming one
only thing with that: the first seeing is that of Intellect knowing, the
second that of Intellect loving; stripped of its wisdom in the
intoxication of the nectar, it comes to love; by this excess it is made
simplex and is happy; and to be drunken is better for it than to be too
staid for these revels.

But is its vision parcelwise, thing here and thing there?

No: reason unravelling gives process; Intellectual-Principle has
unbroken knowledge and has, moreover, an Act unattended by knowing, a
vision by another approach. In this seeing of the Supreme it becomes
pregnant and at once knows what has come to be within it; its knowledge
of its content is what is designated by its Intellection; its knowing of
the Supreme is the virtue of that power within it by which, in a later
\[lower\] stage it is to become "Intellective."

As for soul, it attains that vision by- so to speak- confounding and
annulling the Intellectual-Principle within it; or rather that Principle
immanent in soul sees first and thence the vision penetrates to soul and
the two visions become one.

The Good spreading out above them and adapting itself to that union
which it hastens to confirm is present to them as giver of a blessed
sense and sight; so high it lifts them that they are no longer in space
or in that realm of difference where everything is root,ed in some other
thing; for The Good is not in place but is the container of the
Intellectual place; The Good is in nothing but itself.

The soul now knows no movement since the Supreme knows none; it is now
not even soul since the Supreme is not in life but above life; it is no
longer Intellectual-Principle, for the Supreme has not Intellection and
the likeness must be perfect; this grasping is not even by Intellection,
for the Supreme is not known Intellectively.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 36](enn674.md)
