[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn610)  [Next](enn612.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. Often for the purpose of exposition- as a help towards stating the
nature of the produced multiplicity- we use the example of many lines
radiating from one centre; but, while we provide for individualization,
we must carefully preserve mutual presence. Even in the case of our
circle we need not think of separated radii; all may be taken as forming
one surface: where there is no distinction even upon the one surface but
all is power and reality undifferentiated, all the beings may be thought
of as centres uniting at one central centre: we ignore the radial lines
and think of their terminals at that centre, where they are at one.
Restore the radii; once more we have lines, each touching a generating
centre of its own, but that centre remains coincident with the one first
centre; the centres all unite in that first centre and yet remain what
they were, so that they are as many as are the lines to which they serve
as terminals; the centres themselves appear as numerous as the lines
starting from gem and yet all those centres constitute a unity.

Thus we may liken the Intellectual Beings in their diversity to many
centres coinciding with the one centre and themselves at one in it but
appearing multiple on account of the radial lines- lines which do not
generate the centres but merely lead to them. The radii, thus, afford a
serviceable illustration for the mode of contact by which the
Intellectual Unity manifests itself as multiple and multipresent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn612.md)
