[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn630)  [Next](enn632.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 12

12\. We may be told that unity and monad have no real existence, that
the only unity is some definite object that is one thing, so that all
comes to an attitude of the mind towards things considered singly.

But, to begin with, why at this should not the affirmation of Being pass
equally as an attitude of mind so that Being too must disappear? No
doubt Being strikes and stings and gives the impression of reality; but
we find ourselves just as vividly struck and impressed in the presence
of unity. Besides, is this attitude, this concept itself, a unity or a
manifold? When we deny the unity of an object, clearly the unity
mentioned is not supplied by the object, since we are saying it has
none; the unity therefore is within ourselves, something latent in our
minds independently of any concrete one thing.

\[An objector speaks-\] "But the unity we thus possess comes by our
acceptance of a certain idea or impression from things external; it is a
notion derived from an object. Those that take the notion of numbers and
of unity to be but one species of the notions held to be inherent in the
mind must allow to numbers and to unity the reality they ascribe to any
of the others, and upon occasion they must be met; but no such real
existence can be posited when the concept is taken to be an attitude or
notion rising in us as a by-product of the objects; this happens when we
say "This," "What," and still more obviously in the affirmations
"Crowd," "Festival," "Army," "Multiplicity." As multiplicity is nothing
apart from certain constituent items and the festival nothing apart from
the people gathered happily at the rites, so when we affirm unity we are
not thinking of some Oneness self-standing, unrelated. And there are
many other such cases; for instance "on the right," "Above" and their
opposites; what is there of reality about this "On-the-right-ness" but
the fact that two different positions are occupied? So with "Above":
"Above" and "Below" are a mere matter of position and have no
significance outside of this sphere.

Now in answer to this series of objections our first remark is that
there does exist an actuality implicit in each one of the relations
cited; though this is not the same for all or the same for correlatives
or the same for every reference to unity.

But these objections must be taken singly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](enn632.md)
