[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn623)  [Next](enn625.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 5

5\. What then is the veritable nature of Number?

Is it an accompaniment upon each substance, something seen in the things
as in a man we see one man, in a being one being and in the total of
presentations the total of number?

But how explain the dyad and triad? How comes the total to be unitary
and any particular number to be brought under unity? The theory offers a
multiplicity of units, and no number is reducible to unity but the
simple "one." It might be suggested that a dyad is that thing- or rather
what is observed upon that thing- which has two powers combined, a
compound thing related to a unity: or numbers might be what the
Pythagoreans seem to hold them in their symbolic system in which
Justice, for example, is a Tetrad: but this is rather to add the number,
a number of manifold unity like the decad, to the multiplicity of the
thing which yet is one thing. Now it is not so that we treat the ten
things; we bring them together and apply the figure ten to the several
items. Or rather in that case we say ten, but when the several items
form a unity we say decad. This would apply in the Intellectual as in
the sensible.

But how then can number, observed upon things, rank among Real Beings?

One answer might be that whiteness is similarly observed upon things and
yet is real, just as movement is observed upon things and there is still
a real existence of movement. But movement is not on a par with number:
it is because movement is an entity that unity can be observed upon it.
Besides, the kind of real existence thus implied annuls the reality of
number, making it no more than an attribute; but that cannot be since an
attribute must exist before it can be attributed; it may be inseparable
from the subject but still must in itself be something, some entity as
whiteness is; to be a predicate it must be that which is to be
predicated. Thus if unity is observed in every subject, and "one man"
says more than "man's oneness being different from the manness and
common to all things- then this oneness must be something prior to man
and to all the rest: only so can the unity come to apply to each and to
all: it must therefore be prior also to even movement, prior to Being,
since without unity these could not be each one thing: of course what is
here meant is not the unity postulated as transcending Being but the
unity predicable of the Ideas which constitute each several thing. So
too there is a decad prior to the subject in which we affirm it; this
prior would be the decad absolute, for certainly the thing in which the
decad is observed is not that absolute.

Is this unity, then, connate and coexistent to the Beings? Suppose it
coexistent merely as an accidental, like health in man, it still must
exist of itself; suppose it present as an element in a compound, there
must first exist unity and the unity absolute that can thus enter into
composition; moreover if it were compounded with an object brought into
being by its agency it would make that object only spuriously a unity;
its entry would produce a duality.

But what of the decad? Where lies the need of decad to a thing which, by
totalling to that power, is decad already?

The need may be like that of Form to Matter; ten and decad may exist by
its virtue; and, once more, the decad must previously exist of its own
existence, decad unattached.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](enn625.md)
