[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn677)  [Next](enn679.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 40

40\. That there can be no intellection in the First will be patent to
those that have had such contact; but some further confirmation is
desirable, if indeed words can carry the matter; we need overwhelming
persuasion.

It must be borne in mind that all intellection rises in some principle
and takes cognisance of an object. But a distinction is to be made:

There is the intellection that remains within its place of origin; it
has that source as substratum but becomes a sort of addition to it in
that it is an activity of that source perfecting the potentiality there,
not by producing anything but as being a completing power to the
principle in which it inheres. There is also the intellection inbound
with Being- Being's very author- and this could not remain confined to
the source since there it could produce nothing; it is a power to
production; it produces therefore of its own motion and its act is
Real-Being and there it has its dwelling. In this mode the intellection
is identical with Being; even in its self-intellection no distinction is
made save the logical distinction of thinker and thought with, as we
have often observed, the implication of plurality.

This is a first activity and the substance it produces is Essential
Being; it is an image, but of an original so great that the very copy
stands a reality. If instead of moving outward it remained with the
First, it would be no more than some appurtenance of that First, not a
self-standing existent.

At the earliest activity and earliest intellection, it can be preceded
by no act or intellection: if we pass beyond this being and this
intellection we come not to more being and more intellection but to what
overpasses both, to the wonderful which has neither, asking nothing of
these products and standing its unaccompanied self.

That all-transcending cannot have had an activity by which to produce
this activity- acting before act existed- or have had thought in order
to produce thinking- applying thought before thought exists- all
intellection, even of the Good, is beneath it.

In sum, this intellection of the Good is impossible: I do not mean that
it is impossible to have intellection of the Good- we may admit the
possibility but there can be no intellection by The Good itself, for
this would be to include the inferior with the Good.

If intellection is the lower, then it will be bound up with Being; if
intellection is the higher, its object is lower. Intellection, then,
does not exist in the Good; as a lesser, taking its worth through that
Good, it must stand apart from it, leaving the Good unsoiled by it as by
all else. Immune from intellection the Good remains incontaminably what
it is, not impeded by the presence of the intellectual act which would
annul its purity and unity.

Anyone making the Good at once Thinker and Thought identifies it with
Being and with the Intellection vested in Being so that it must perform
that act of intellection: at once it becomes necessary to find another
principle, one superior to that Good: for either this act, this
intellection, is a completing power of some such principle, serving as
its ground, or it points, by that duality, to a prior principle having
intellection as a characteristic. It is because there is something
before it that it has an object of intellection; even in its
self-intellection, it may be said to know its content by its vision of
that prior.

What has no prior and no external accompaniment could have no
intellection, either of itself or of anything else. What could it aim
at, what desire? To essay its power of knowing? But this would make the
power something outside itself; there would be, I mean, the power it
grasped and the power by which it grasped: if there is but the one
power, what is there to grasp at?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 41](enn679.md)
