[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn628)  [Next](enn630.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. When it takes lot with multiplicity, Being becomes Number by the
fact of awakening to manifoldness;- before, it was a preparation, so to
speak, of the Beings, their fore-promise, a total of henads offering a
stay for what was to be based upon them.

Here with us a man will say "I wish I had such and such a quantity of
gold"- or "such and such a number of houses." Gold is one thing: the
wish is not to bring the numerical quantity into gold but to bring the
gold to quantity; the quantity, already present in the mind, is to be
passed on to the gold so that it acquire that numerical value.

If the Beings preceded the number and this were discerned upon them at
the stirring, to such and such a total, of the numbering principle, then
the actual number of the Beings would be a chance not a choice; since
that total is not a matter of chance, Number is a causing principle
preceding that determined total.

Number then pre-exists and is the cause by which produced things
participate in quantity.

The single thing derives its unity by participation in Unity-Absolute;
its being it derives from Being-Absolute, which holds its Being from
itself alone; a unity is a unity in virtue of Being; the particular
unity- where the unity is a multiple unity- is one thing only as the
Triad is; the collective Being is a unity of this kind, the unity not of
the monad but of the myriad or any such collective number.

Take a man affirming the presence of ten thousand things; it is he that
produces the number; he does not tell us that the ten thousand have
uttered it; they merely exhibit their several forms; the enumerator's
mind supplies the total which would never be known if the mind kept
still.

How does the mind pronounce?

By being able to enumerate; that is by knowing Number: but in order to
this, Number must be in existence, and that that Principle should not
know its own total content is absurd, impossible.

It is with Number as with Good. When we pronounce things to be good
either we mean that they are in their own nature so or we affirm
goodness as an accidental in them. Dealing with the primals, the
goodness we have in mind is that First Hypostasis; where the goodness is
an accidental we imply the existence of a Principle of Good as a
necessary condition of the accidental presence; there must be some
source of that good which is observed elsewhere, whether this source be
an Absolute Good or something that of its own nature produces the good.
Similarly with number; in attributing the decad to things we affirm
either the truly existent decad or, where the decadhood is accidental,
we necessarily posit the self-subsistent decad, decad not associated; if
things are to be described as forming a decad, then either they must be
of themselves the decad or be preceded by that which has no other being
than that of decadhood.

It must be urged as a general truth that anything affirmed of a subject
not itself either found its way in from outside or is the characteristic
Act of that subject; and supposing the predicated attribute to show no
variation of presence and absence but to be always present, then, if the
subject is a Real Being so also is the accidental in an equal degree;
or, failing Real Being, it at least belongs to the existents, it exists.
In the case when the subject can be thought of as remaining without its
Act, yet that Act is inbound with it even though to our minds it appears
as a later; when on the contrary the subject cannot be conceived without
the attribute-man, for example, without unity- then the attribute is
either not later but concomitant or, being essential to the existence,
is precedent. In our view, Unity and Number are precedent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn630.md)
