[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn633)  [Next](enn635) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 15

15\. We must repeat: The Collective Being, the Authentic, There, is at
once Being and Intellectual-Principle and the Complete Living Form; thus
it includes the total of living things; the Unity There is reproduced by
the unity of this living universe in the degree possible to it- for the
sense-nature as such cannot compass that transcendental unity- thus that
Living-All is inevitably Number-Entire: if the Number were not complete,
the All would be deficient to the extent of some number, and if every
number applicable to living things were not contained in it, it would
not be the all-comprehending Life-Form. Therefore, Number exists before
every living thing, before the collective Life-Form.

Again: Man exists in the Intellectual and with him all other living
things, both by possession of Real-Being and because that is the
Life-Form Complete. Even the man of this sphere is a member of the
Intellectual since that is the Life-Form Complete; every living thing by
virtue of having life, is There, There in the Life-form, and man is
There also, in the Intellectual, in so far as he is intellect, for all
intelligences are severally members of That. Now all this means Number
There. Yet even in Intellect Number is not present primally; its
presence There is the reckoning of the Acts of Intellectual-Principle;
it tallies with the justice in Intellectual-Principle, its moral wisdom,
its virtues, its knowledge, all whose possession makes That Principle
what it is.

But knowledge- must not this imply presence to the alien? No; knowledge,
known and knower are an identity; so with all the rest; every member of
Intellectual-Principle is therefore present to it primally; justice, for
example, is not accidental to it as to soul in its character as soul,
where these virtues are mainly potential becoming actual by the
intention towards Intellectual-Principle and association with it.

Next we come to Being, fully realized, and this is the seat of Number;
by Number, Being brings forth the Beings; its movement is planned to
Number; it establishes the numbers of its offspring before bringing them
to be, in the same way as it establishes its own unity by linking pure
Being to the First: the numbers do not link the lower to the First; it
suffices that Being is so linked; for Being, in taking form as Number,
binds its members to itself. As a unity, it suffers no division,
remaining self-constant; as a thing of division, containing its chosen
total of members, it knows that total and so brings forth Number, a
phase therefore of its content: its development of part is ruled by the
powers of Number, and the Beings it produces sum to that Number. Thus
Number, the primal and true, is Principle and source of actuality to the
Beings.

Hence it is that in our sphere, also, Number accompanies the coming to
be of particular things and to suppose another number than the actual is
to suppose the production of something else or of nothing.

These then are the primal numbers; they are numerable; the numbers of
the other order are of a double character; as derived from the first
numbers they are themselves numerable but as acting for those first they
are measures of the rest of things, numbering numbers and numerables.
For how could they declare a Decad save in the light of numbers within
themselves?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](enn635)
