[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn622)  [Next](enn624.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. We have to enquire into the existence of the Numbers in the
Intellectual. Are they Ideas added to the other Ideas? Or are they no
more than necessary concomitants to the Ideas?

In the latter case, Being, as the first \[in the Intellectual\] would
give us the conception of the Monad; then since Being produces motion
and rest, Three exists; and so on for all the other members of the realm
of Being. Or perhaps there is one monad for each member, or a monad for
the first, with a dyad for its next, since there exists a series, and a
corresponding number for every successive total, decad for ten, and so
on.

If, on the contrary, Number is a direct production of the
Intellectual-Principle \[an Idea in itself\], there is the question
whether it preceded or followed the other Ideas.

Plato, where he says that men arrived at the conception of Number by way
of the changes of day and night- thus making the concept depend upon
variation among things- seems to hold that the things numerable precede
and by their differences produce number: Number then would consist in a
process within the human mind passing onwards from thing to thing; it
results by the fact that the mind takes count, that is when the mind
traverses things and reports their differences; observing pure identity
unbroken by difference, it says One. But there is the passage where he
tells us that the veritable Number has Being, is a Being; this is the
opposed view that Number is no product of the reckoning mind but a
reality in itself, the concept of which is reawakened in the mind by
changes in things of sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn624.md)
