[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn643)  [Next](enn645) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 6

6\. But how can that higher soul have sense-perception?

It is the perception of what falls under perception There, sensation in
the mode of that realm: it is the source of the soul's perception of the
sense-realm in its correspondence with the Intellectual. Man as
sense-percipient becomes aware of that correspondence and accommodates
the sense-realm to the lowest extremity of its counterpart There,
proceeding from the fire Intellectual to the fire here which becomes
perceptible by its analogy with that of the higher sphere. If material
things existed There, the soul would perceive them; Man in the
Intellectual, Man as Intellectual soul, would be aware of the
terrestrial. This is how the secondary Man, copy of Man in the
Intellectual, contains the Reason-Principles in copy; and Man in the
Intellectual-Principle contained the Man that existed before any man.
The diviner shines out upon the secondary and the secondary upon the
tertiary; and even the latest possesses them all- not in the sense of
actually living by them all but as standing in under-parallel to them.
Some of us act by this lowest; in another rank there is a double
activity, a trace of the higher being included; in yet another there is
a blending of the third grade with the others: each is that Man by which
he acts while each too contains all the grades, though in some sense not
so. On the separation of the third life and third Man from the body,
then if the second also departs- of course not losing hold on the Above-
the two, as we are told, will occupy the same place. No doubt it seems
strange that a soul which has been the Reason-Principle of a man should
come to occupy the body of an animal: but the soul has always been all,
and will at different times be this and that.

Pure, not yet fallen to evil, the soul chooses man and is man, for this
is the higher, and it produces the higher. It produces also the still
loftier beings, the Celestials \[Daimons\], who are of one Form with the
soul that makes Man: higher still stands that Man more entirely of the
Celestial rank, almost a god, reproducing God, a Celestial closely bound
to God as a man is to Man. For that Being into which man develops is not
to be called a god; there remains the difference which distinguishes
souls, all of the same race though they be. This is taking "Celestial"
\["Daimon"\] in the sense of Plato.

When a soul which in the human state has been thus attached chooses
animal nature and descends to that, it is giving forth the
Reason-Principle- necessarily in it- of that particular animal: this
lower it contained and the activity has been to the lower.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](enn645)
