[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn619)  [Next](enn621.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 1

1\. It is suggested that multiplicity is a falling away from The Unity,
infinity being the complete departure, an innumerable multiplicity, and
that this is why unlimit is an evil and we evil at the stage of
multiplicity.

A thing, in fact, becomes a manifold when, unable to remain
self-centred, it flows outward and by that dissipation takes extension:
utterly losing unity it becomes a manifold since there is nothing to
bind part to part; when, with all this outflowing, it becomes something
definite, there is a magnitude.

But what is there so grievous in magnitude?

Given consciousness, there will be, since the thing must feel its exile,
its sundrance from its essence. Everything seeks not the alien but
itself; in that outward moving there is frustration or compulsion; a
thing most exists not when it takes multiplicity or extension but when
it holds to its own being, that is when its movement is inward. Desire
towards extension is ignorance of the authentically great, a movement
not on the appropriate path but towards the strange; to the possession
of the self the way is inward.

Consider the thing that has taken extension; broken into so many
independent items, it is now those several parts and not the thing it
was; if that original is to persist, the members must stand collected to
their total; in other words, a thing is itself not by being extended but
by remaining, in its degree, a unity: through expansion and in the
measure of the expansion, it is less itself; retaining unity, it retains
its essential being.

Yet the universe has at once extension and beauty?

Yes; because it has not been allowed to slip away into the limitless but
is held fast by unity; and it has beauty in virtue of Beauty not of
Magnitude; it needed Beauty to parry that magnitude; in the degree of
its extension it was void of beauty and to that degree ugly. Thus
extension serves as Matter to Beauty since what calls for its ordering
is a multiplicity. The greater the expansion, the greater the disorder
and ugliness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](enn621.md)
