[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn640)  [Next](enn642.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. What then is there to prevent man having been the object of planning
There?

No: all stands in that likeness, nothing to be added or taken away; this
planning and reasoning is based only on an assumption; things are taken
to be in process and this suggests planning and reasoning; insist on the
eternity of the process and planning falls to the ground. There can be
no planning over the eternal; that would imply forgetfulness of a first
state; further, if the second state were better, things stood ill at
first; if they stood well, so they must remain.

Only in conjunction with their causes are things good; even in this
sphere a thing is good in virtue of being complete; form means that the
thing is complete, the Matter duly controlled; this control means that
nothing has been left crude; but something is so left if anything
belonging to the shape be missing-eye, or other part. Thus to state
cause is to state the thing complete. Why eyes or eyebrows? For
completion: if you say "For preservation," you affirm an indwelling
safeguard of the essence, something contributory to the being: the
essence, then, preceded the safeguard and the cause was inbound with the
essence; distinct, this cause is in its nature a part of the essence.

All parts, thus, exist in regard to each other: the essence is
all-embracing, complete, entire; the excellency is inbound with the
cause and embraced by it; the being, the essence, the cause, all are
one.

But, at this, sense-perception- even in its particular modes- is
involved in the Idea by eternal necessity, in virtue of the completeness
of the Idea; Intellectual-Principle, as all-inclusive, contains in
itself all by which we are brought, later, to recognise this perfection
in its nature; the cause, There, was one total, all-inclusive; thus Man
in the Intellectual was not purely intellect, sense-perception being an
addition made upon his entry into birth: all this would seem to imply a
tendance in that great Principle towards the lower, towards this sphere.

But how could that Principle have such perception, be aware of things of
sense? Surely it is untenable on the one hand that sense-perception
should exist There, from eternity, and on the other that only upon the
debasement of the soul should there be sense-perception here and the
accomplishment in this realm of the Act of what was always a power in
that?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn642.md)
