[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn712)  [Next](enn714.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 10

10\. But how comes the soul not to keep that ground?

Because it has not yet escaped wholly: but there will be the time of
vision unbroken, the self hindered no longer by any hindrance of body.
Not that those hindrances beset that in us which has veritably seen; it
is the other phase of the soul that suffers and that only when we
withdraw from vision and take to knowing by proof, by evidence, by the
reasoning processes of the mental habit. Such logic is not to be
confounded with that act of ours in the vision; it is not our reason
that has seen; it is something greater than reason, reason's Prior, as
far above reason as the very object of that thought must be.

In our self-seeing There, the self is seen as belonging to that order,
or rather we are merged into that self in us which has the quality of
that order. It is a knowing of the self restored to its purity. No doubt
we should not speak of seeing; but we cannot help talking in dualities,
seen and seer, instead of, boldly, the achievement of unity. In this
seeing, we neither hold an object nor trace distinction; there is no
two. The man is changed, no longer himself nor self-belonging; he is
merged with the Supreme, sunken into it, one with it: centre coincides
with centre, for on this higher plane things that touch at all are one;
only in separation is there duality; by our holding away, the Supreme is
set outside. This is why the vision baffles telling; we cannot detach
the Supreme to state it; if we have seen something thus detached we have
failed of the Supreme which is to be known only as one with ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](enn714.md)
