[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn705)  [Next](enn707.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 3

3\. What then must The Unity be, what nature is left for it?

No wonder that to state it is not easy; even Being and Form are not
easy, though we have a way, an approach through the Ideas.

The soul or mind reaching towards the formless finds itself incompetent
to grasp where nothing bounds it or to take impression where the
impinging reality is diffuse; in sheer dread of holding to nothingness,
it slips away. The state is painful; often it seeks relief by retreating
from all this vagueness to the region of sense, there to rest as on
solid ground, just as the sight distressed by the minute rests with
pleasure on the bold.

Soul must see in its own way; this is by coalescence, unification; but
in seeking thus to know the Unity it is prevented by that very
unification from recognising that it has found; it cannot distinguish
itself from the object of this intuition. Nonetheless, this is our one
resource if our philosophy is to give us knowledge of The Unity.

We are in search of unity; we are to come to know the principle of all,
the Good and First; therefore we may not stand away from the realm of
Firsts and lie prostrate among the lasts: we must strike for those
Firsts, rising from things of sense which are the lasts. Cleared of all
evil in our intention towards The Good, we must ascend to the Principle
within ourselves; from many, we must become one; only so do we attain to
knowledge of that which is Principle and Unity. We shape ourselves into
Intellectual-Principle; we make over our soul in trust to
Intellectual-Principle and set it firmly in That; thus what That sees
the soul will waken to see; it is through the Intellectual-Principle
that we have this vision of The Unity; it must be our care to bring over
nothing whatever from sense, to allow nothing even of soul to enter into
Intellectual-Principle: with Intellect pure, and with the summit of
Intellect, we are to see the All-Pure.

If quester has the impression of extension or shape or mass attaching to
That Nature he has not been led by Intellectual-Principle which is not
of the order to see such things; the activity has been of sense and of
the judgement following upon sense: only Intellectual-Principle can
inform us of the things of its scope; its competence is upon its priors,
its content and its issue: but even its content is outside of sense; and
still purer, still less touched by multiplicity, are its priors, or
rather its Prior.

The Unity, then, is not Intellectual-Principle but something higher
still: Intellectual-Principle is still a being but that First is no
being but precedent to all Being; it cannot be a being, for a being has
what we may call the shape of its reality but The Unity is without
shape, even shape Intellectual.

Generative of all, The Unity is none of all; neither thing nor quantity
nor quality nor intellect nor soul; not in motion, not at rest, not in
place, not in time: it is the self-defined, unique in form or, better,
formless, existing before Form was, or Movement or Rest, all of which
are attachments of Being and make Being the manifold it is.

But how, if not in movement, can it be otherwise than at rest?

The answer is that movement and rest are states pertaining to Being,
which necessarily has one or the other or both. Besides, anything at
rest must be so in virtue of Rest as something distinct: Unity at rest
becomes the ground of an attribute and at once ceases to be a simplex.

Note, similarly, that, when we speak of this First as Cause, we are
affirming something happening not to it but to us, the fact that we take
from this Self-Enclosed: strictly we should put neither a This nor a
That to it; we hover, as it were, about it, seeking the statement of an
experience of our own, sometimes nearing this Reality, sometimes baffled
by the enigma in which it dwells.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](enn707.md)
