[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn706)  [Next](enn708) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 4

4\. The main part of the difficulty is that awareness of this Principle
comes neither by knowing nor by the Intellection that discovers the
Intellectual Beings but by a presence overpassing all knowledge. In
knowing, soul or mind abandons its unity; it cannot remain a simplex:
knowing is taking account of things; that accounting is multiple; the
mind, thus plunging into number and multiplicity, departs from unity.

Our way then takes us beyond knowing; there may be no wandering from
unity; knowing and knowable must all be left aside; every object of
thought, even the highest, we must pass by, for all that is good is
later than This and derives from This as from the sun all the light of
the day.

"Not to be told; not to be written": in our writing and telling we are
but urging towards it: out of discussion we call to vision: to those
desiring to see, we point the path; our teaching is of the road and the
travelling; the seeing must be the very act of one that has made this
choice.

There are those that have not attained to see. The soul has not come to
know the splendour There; it has not felt and clutched to itself that
love-passion of vision known to lover come to rest where he loves. Or
struck perhaps by that authentic light, all the soul lit by the nearness
gained, we have gone weighted from beneath; the vision is frustrate; we
should go without burden and we go carrying that which can but keep us
back; we are not yet made over into unity.

From none is that Principle absent and yet from all: present, it remains
absent save to those fit to receive, disciplined into some accordance,
able to touch it closely by their likeness and by that kindred power
within themselves through which, remaining as it was when it came to
them from the Supreme, they are enabled to see in so far as God may at
all be seen.

Failure to attain may be due to such impediment or to lack of the
guiding thought that establishes trust; impediment we must charge
against ourselves and strive by entire renunciation to become
emancipate; where there is distrust for lack of convincing reason,
further considerations may be applied:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](enn708)
