[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn704)  [Next](enn706.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 2

2\. It may be suggested that, while in the unities of the partial order
the essence and the unity are distinct, yet in collective existence, in
Real Being, they are identical, so that when we have grasped Being we
hold unity; Real Being would coincide with Unity. Thus, taking the
Intellectual-Principle as Essential Being, that principle and the Unity
Absolute would be at once Primal Being and Pure Unity, purveying,
accordingly, to the rest of things something of Being and something, in
proportion, of the unity which is itself.

There is nothing with which the unity would be more plausibly identified
than with Being; either it is Being as a given man is man or it will
correspond to the Number which rules in the realm of the particular; it
will be a number applying to a certain unique thing as the number two
applies to others.

Now if Number is a thing among things, then clearly so this unity must
be; we would have to discover what thing of things it is. If Number is
not a thing but an operation of the mind moving out to reckon, then the
unity will not be a thing.

We found that anything losing unity loses its being; we are therefore
obliged to enquire whether the unity in particulars is identical with
the being, and unity absolute identical with collective being.

Now the being of the particular is a manifold; unity cannot be a
manifold; there must therefore be a distinction between Being and Unity.
Thus a man is at once a reasoning living being and a total of parts; his
variety is held together by his unity; man therefore and unity are
different- man a thing of parts against unity partless. Much more must
Collective Being, as container of all existence, be a manifold and
therefore distinct from the unity in which it is but participant.

Again, Collective Being contains life and intelligence- it is no dead
thing- and so, once more, is a manifold.

If Being is identical with Intellectual-Principle, even at that it is a
manifold; all the more so when count is taken of the Ideal Forms in it;
for the Idea, particular or collective, is, after all, a numerable
agglomeration whose unity is that of a kosmos.

Above all, unity is The First: but Intellectual-Principle, Ideas and
Being, cannot be so; for any member of the realm of Forms is an
aggregation, a compound, and therefore- since components must precede
their compound- is a later.

Other considerations also go to show that the Intellectual-Principle
cannot be the First. Intellect must be above the Intellectual Act: at
least in its higher phase, that not concerned with the outer universe,
it must be intent upon its Prior; its introversion is a conversion upon
the Principle.

Considered as at once Thinker and Object of its Thought, it is dual, not
simplex, not The Unity: considered as looking beyond itself, it must
look to a better, to a prior: looking simultaneously upon itself and
upon its Transcendent, it is, once more, not a First.

There is no other way of stating Intellectual-Principle than as that
which, holding itself in the presence of The Good and First and looking
towards That, is self-present also, self-knowing and Knowing itself as
All-Being: thus manifold, it is far from being The Unity.

In sum: The Unity cannot be the total of beings, for so its oneness is
annulled; it cannot be the Intellectual-Principle, for so it would be
that total which the Intellectual-Principle is; nor is it Being, for
Being is the manifold of things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](enn706.md)
