[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](enn700)  [Next](enn702.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Section 20

20\. The difficulty will be raised that God would seem to have existed
before thus coming into existence; if He makes Himself, then in regard
to the self which He makes He is not yet in being and as maker He exists
before this Himself thus made.

The answer is that we utterly must not speak of Him as made but sheerly
as maker; the making must be taken as absolved from all else; no new
existence is established; the Act here is not directed to an achievement
but is God Himself unalloyed: here is no duality but pure unity. Let no
one suspect us of asserting that the first Activity is without Essence;
on the contrary the Activity is the very reality. To suppose a reality
without activity would be to make the Principle of all principles
deficient; the supremely complete becomes incomplete. To make the
Activity something superadded to the essence is to shatter the unity. If
then Activity is a more perfect thing than essence and the First is all
perfect, then the Activity is the First.

By having acted, He is what He is and there is no question of "existing
before bringing Himself into existence"; when He acted He was not in
some state that could be described as "before existing." He was already
existent entirely.

Now assuredly an Activity not subjected essence is utterly free; God's
selfhood, then, is of his own Act. If his being has to be ensured by
something else, He is no longer the self-existent First: if it be true
to say that He is his own container, then He inducts Himself; for all
that He contains is his own production from the beginning since from the
beginning He caused the being of all that by nature He contains.

If there had been a moment from which He began to be, it would be
possible assert his self-making in the literal sense; but, since what He
is He is from before all time, his self-making is to be understood as
simultaneous with Himself; the being is one and the same with the making
and eternal "coming into existence."

This is the source also of his self-disposal- strictly applicable if
there were a duality, but conveying, in the case of a unity, a disposing
without a disposed, an abstract disposing. But how a disposer with
nothing to dispose? In that there is here a disposer looking to a prior
when there is none: since there is no prior, This is the First- but a
First not in order but in sovereignty, in power purely self-controlled.
Purely; then nothing can be There that is under any external
disposition; all in God is self-willing. What then is there of his
content that is not Himself, what that is not in Act, what not his work?
Imagine in Him anything not of his Act and at once His existence ceases
to be pure; He is not self-disposing, not all-powerful: in that at least
of whose doing He is not master He would be impotent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 21](enn702.md)
