[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](glg01)  [Next](glg03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3WHK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gateless Gate*, by Ekai, called Mu-mon, tr. Nyogen Senzaki and Paul
Reps \[1934\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. Hyakujo's Fox

Once when Hyakujo delivered some Zen lectures an old man attended them,
unseen by the monks. At the end of each talk when the monks left so did
he. But one day he remained after they had gone, and Hyakujo asked him:
"Who are you?"

The old man replied: "I am not a human being, but I was a human being
when the Kashapa Buddha preached in this world. I was a Zen master and
lived on this mountain. At that time one of my students asked me whether
or not the enlightened man is subject to the law of causation. I
answered him: 'The enlightened man is not subject to the law of
causation.' For this answer evidencing a clinging to absoluteness I
became a fox for five hundred rebirths, and I am still a fox. Will you
save me from this condition with your Zen words and let me get out of a
fox's body? Now may I ask you: Is the enlightened man subject to the law
of causation?"

Hyakujo said: "The enlightened man is one with the law of causation."

At the words of Hyakujo the old man was enlightened. "I am emancipated,"
he said, paying homage with a deep bow. "I am no more a fox, but I have
to leave my body in my dwelling place behind this mountain. Please
perform my funeral as a monk." Then he disappeared.

The next day Hyakujo gave an order through the chief monk to prepare to
attend the funeral of a monk. "No one was sick in the infirmary,"
wondered the monks. "What does our teacher mean?"

After dinner Hyakujo led the monks out and around the mountain. In a
cave, with his staff he poked out the corpse of an old fox and then
performed the ceremony of cremation.

That evening Hyakujo gave a talk to the monks and told them this story
about the law of causation.

Obaku, upon hearing the story, asked Hyakujo: "I understand that a long
time ago because a certain person gave a wrong Zen answer he became a
fox for five hundred rebirths. Now I want to ask: If some modern master
is asked many questions and he always gives the right answer, what will
become of him?"

Hyakujo said: "You come here near me and I will tell you."

Obaku went near Hyakujo and slapped the teacher's face with his hand,
for he knew this was the answer his teacher intended to give him.

Hyakujo clapped his hands and laughed at this discernment. "I thought a
Persian had a red beard," he said, "and now I know a Persian who has a
red beard."

 

*Mumon's comment:* "The enlightened man is not subject." How can this
answer make the monk a fox?

"The enlightened man is one with the law of causation." How can this
answer make the fox emancipated?

To understand this clearly one has to have just one eye.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Controlled or not controlled?  
The same dice shows two faces.  
Not controlled or controlled,  
Both are a grievous error*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Gutei's Finger](glg03)
