[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](glg27)  [Next](glg29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3WHK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gateless Gate*, by Ekai, called Mu-mon, tr. Nyogen Senzaki and Paul
Reps \[1934\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28. Blow Out the Candle

Tokusan was studying Zen under Ryutan. One night he came to Ryutan and
asked many questions. The teacher said: "The night is getting old. Why
don't you retire?"

So Tokusan bowed and opened the screen to go out, observing: "It is very
dark outside."

Ryutan offered Tokusan a lighted candle to find his way. Just as Tokusan
received it, Ryutan blew it out. At that moment the mind of Tokusan was
opened.

"What have you attained?" asked Ryutan. "From now on," said Tokusan, "I
will not doubt the teacher's words."

The next day Ryutan told the monks at his lecture: "I see one monk among
you. His teeth are like the sword tree, his mouth is like the blood
bowl. If you hit him hard with a big stick, he will not even so much as
look back at you. Someday he will mount the highest peak and carry my
teaching there."

On that day, in front of the lecture hall, Tokusan burned to ashes his
commentaries on the sutras. He said: "However abstruse the teachings
are, in comparison with this enlightenment they are like a single hair
to the great sky. However profound the complicated knowledge of the
world, compared to this enlightenment it is like one drop of water to
the great ocean." Then he left that monastery.

 

*Mumon's comment:* When Tokusan was in his own country he was not
satisfied with Zen although he had heard about it. He thought: "Those
Southern monks say they can teach Dharma outside of the sutras. They are
all wrong. I must teach them." So he traveled south. He happened to stop
near Ryutan's monastery for refreshments. An old woman who was there
asked him: "What are you carrying so heavily?"

Tokusan replied: "This is a commentary I have made on the Diamond Sutra
after many years of work."

The old woman said: "I read that sutra which says: 'The past mind cannot
be held, the present mind cannot be held, the future mind cannot be
held.' You wish some tea and refreshments. Which mind do you propose to
use for them?"

Tokusan was as though dumb. Finally he asked the woman: "Do you know of
any good teacher around here?"

The old woman referred him to Ryutan, not more than five miles away. So
he went to Ryutan in all humility, quite different from when he had
started his journey. Ryutan in turn was so kind he forgot his own
dignity. It was like pouring muddy water over a drunken man to sober
him. After all, it was an unnecessary comedy.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*A hundred hearings cannot surpass one seeing,  
But after you see the teacher, that one glance cannot surpass a hundred
hearings.  
His nose was very high  
But he was blind after all*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. Not the Wind, Not the Flag](glg29)
