[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36083)  [Next](cc36085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.x"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p1"></span><span id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>[Acts
9:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#039)<span id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p2"></span>**39.** And Peter arose and came with them,
whom, when he was come, they brought into the upper chamber, and all the
widows stood about her weeping, and showing the coats and garments which
Dorcas made when she was with them. **40.** And when they were all put
out, Peter kneeled down and prayed; and, turning himself toward the
corpse, he said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes; and when she
saw Peter, she sat up. **41.** And he reached out his hand, and lifted
her up, and when he had called the saints and widows, he restored
\[exhibited\] her alive. **42.** That was noised through all Joppa, and
many believed in the Lord. **43.** And it happened that he stayed many
days at Joppa with a certain man, named Simon, a tanner.

<span id="xvi.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.x-p4"></span><span id="xvi.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p5"></span>**39.** *And Peter arose.* It is doubtful
whether the messengers declared to Peter the (matter and) cause why they
fet \[sent for\] him; yet it is more like to be true, that they
requested him absolutely that he would come to work a miracle. But there
ariseth another question, whether he knew God’s purpose or not? First,
if he should mistrust the success, he should go with them unadvisedly? I
answer, although he did not yet know what the Lord would do, yet can he
not be blamed for yielding to the request of the brethren. Also, there
were other reasons why he should come; to wit, to mitigate their sorrow;
to strengthen them with godly exhortations, lest they should faint,
being discouraged with the death of one woman; to establish the Church,
which was as yet tender, and but as it were an infant. Lastly, this one
thing ought to have been sufficient for him, because in refusing he
should have been thought proudly to despise his brethren,
notwithstanding we must know this also, that so often as the Lord
determined to work some miracle by his apostles, he did always direct
them by the secret motion of the Spirit. I do not doubt but that
although Peter were not yet certain of the life of Tabitha, yet did he
undoubtedly perceive that God was his guide and conductor in that
journey, so that he addressed himself to go not unadvisedly, though
being uncertain of the event.  <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638)

<span id="xvi.x-p7"></span>*All the widows.* Luke expresseth in this
place the cause for which Tabitha was raised from death; to wit because
God pitied the poor, and did at their desire restore the woman to life.
There were also other ends. For seeing she liveth two lives, those
virtues which Luke commended before are adorned in her person, but the
chief end is, that the glory of Christ may be set forth. For God could
have kept her alive longer; neither doth he change his purpose, as being
moved with repentance when he doth restore her to life again, but
because many of the disciples were weak and novices, who had need of
confirmation, God declareth by the second life of Tabitha, that his Son
is author of life. Therefore God did respect the poor and widows in such
sort, that, by relieving their poverty, he established in their minds
the faith of his gospel; for in this miracle he gave ample matter of
profiting.

<span id="xvi.x-p8"></span><span id="xvi.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p9"></span>**40.** *When they were all put forth.* When
as he taketh a time to pray, he seemeth as yet to doubt what will be the
end. When he healed AEneas he brake out into these words, without making
any stop, *AEneas, Jesus Christ make thee whole.* But as the operation
of the Spirit is not always alike and the same, it may be that though he
knew the power of God, yet he went forward unto the miracle by degrees.
Yet it seemeth to be an absurd thing, that he putteth all the saints out
of the chamber, for whom it had been better to have seen it with their
eyes. But because the Lord had not as yet revealed the time when, and
the manner how, he would show forth his power, he desired to be alone,
that he might the more fitly pray. Also it might be, that he knew some
other reason which moved him to do this, which we know not. It is
recorded in the Sacred History, (<span id="xvi.x-p9.1"></span>[1Ki
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#023)<span id="xvi.x-p9.1"></span>,)
that Elias did the same. For he being alone, and not so much as the
mother of the child with him, doth stretch himself thrice upon the dead
corpse. For the Spirit of God hath his vehement motions, which, if any
man will square out according to the common use of men, or measure by
the sense of the flesh, he shall do wickedly and unjustly. We must this
think, when as Peter, as it were doubting, seeketh a by place, he
preventeth superstition, lest any man should ascribe to his power the
work of God, whereof he was only a minister, For he which withdrew
himself from company, and did pray so instantly, did plainly confess
that the matter was not in his own hand. Therefore, when Peter wisheth
to know what pleaseth the Lord, he confesseth that he alone was the
author of the work. Kneeling in time of prayer is a token of humility,
which hath a double profit, that all our members may be applied unto the
worship of God, and that the external exercise of the body may help the
weakness of the mind; but we must take heed so often as we kneel down,
that the inward submission of the heart be answerable to the ceremony,
that it be not vain and false.  <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639)

<span id="xvi.x-p11"></span>*Turning towards the corpse.* This seemeth
also to be contrary to reason, that he speaketh unto a corpse without
feeling; but this speaking unto the dead corpse was one point of the
vehemency whereunto the Spirit of God enforced Peter. And if any man
desire a reason, this form of speech doth more lively express the power
of God in raising the dead, than if it should be said in the third
person, let this body receive life again and live. Therefore, when as
Ezekiel doth shadow the deliverance of the people under a figure of the
resurrection:

<span id="xvi.x-p12"></span>“O dead bones,” (saith he,) “hear the word
of the Lord,”  
(<span id="xvi.x-p12.2"></span>[Eze
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#004)<span id="xvi.x-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.x-p13"></span>And Christ saith,

<span id="xvi.x-p14"></span>“The time shall come when the dead shall
hear  
the voice of the Son of God,”  
(<span id="xvi.x-p14.3"></span>[Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="xvi.x-p14.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.x-p15"></span>For this was indeed the voice of Christ,
which was uttered by the mouth of Peter, and gave \[back\] breath to the
body of Tabitha. The circumstances following serve to confirm the
certainty of the miracle.

<span id="xvi.x-p16"></span><span id="xvi.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p17"></span>**41.** Luke repeateth, again, in the end
that she was showed openly to the disciples; whence we gather that she
was raised again, rather for other men’s sake than for her own.
Brain-sick fellows,  <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) who dream
that the soul of man is only a blast which vanisheth away until the day
of the resurrection, snatch at this place to prove their doting withal.
To what end was it (say they) to call back the soul of Tabitha into the
prison of the body, where it should suffer such misery, if it were
received into blessed rest? As if it were not lawful for God to have
respect of his glory as well in death as in life; and as if this were
not the true felicity of the godly to live and die to him, yea, as if
Christ were not to us a vantage, as well by living as dying, (<span
id="xvi.x-p18.2"></span>[Php 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span
id="xvi.x-p18.2"></span>,) when we dedicate ourselves to him. Therefore,
there shall no inconvenience follow, if the Lord had greater respect to
his own glory than to Tabitha, although, as the commodity  <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641) of the faithful is always annexed to
the glory of God, this turned to her greater good that she revived, that
she might be a more excellent instrument of God’s goodness and power.

<span id="xvi.x-p20"></span><span id="xvi.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p21"></span>**42.** *And many believed.* Now appear
manifold fruits of the miracle, for God comforted the poor, a godly
matron was restored to the Church, in whose death it suffered great
loss, and many are called unto the faith; for although Peter were \[had
been\] a minister of so great power, yet he keepeth not the men in
\[on\] himself; but doth rather direct them unto Christ.

<span id="xvi.x-p22"></span><span id="xvi.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p23"></span>**43.** When as he saith that Peter dwelt
with a tanner, we may hereby gather of what manner of men the church of
Joppa did consist, for if the chieftains of the city had been converted
to Christ, some one of them would have lodged Peter; for it had been too
cruel a thing to suffer an apostle of Christ to be so despised.
Therefore, the Lord did gather together there, as every where, a church
of the common sort of men, that he might throw down the pride of the
flesh; and also thereby appeareth Peter’s courtesy, in that he
vouchsafeth to lodge with a man of that calling; although it seemeth
that he was rather a merchant of some good estimation, than one of the
basest sort of workmen. For Luke will say afterwards that there were
there some which ministered unto Peter, whereby it appeareth that he was
well and honestly used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_638"></span>[639](cc36084.htm#fr_638) <span
id="xvi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.x-p6.1"></span>Suspensus
licet atque... incertus,” though in suspense and uncertain.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[640](cc36084.htm#fr_639) <span
id="xvi.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.x-p10.1"></span>Ne fallax
sit ac lusoria,” that it be not elusory and fallacious.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[641](cc36084.htm#fr_640) <span
id="xvi.x-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p18"></span> “<span id="xvi.x-p18.1"></span>Fanatici
quidam,” certain fanatics.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[642](cc36084.htm#fr_641) <span
id="xvi.x-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p19"></span> “<span id="xvi.x-p19.1"></span>Utilitas,”
advantage, interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc36085)
