[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36101)  [Next](cc36103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span><span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
12:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)<span
id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>**12.** And, considering, he came into the
house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many
were gathered and praying. **13.** And when Peter had knocked at the
entry-door, a maid came out to hearken, named Rhoda. **14.** And when
she knew Peter’s voice, she opened not the door for joy, but running in,
she told that Peter stood without. **15.** But they said to her, Thou
art mad. But she affirmed more vehemently that it was so. But they said,
It is his angel. **16.** But. Peter continued knocking: when they had
opened, they saw him, and they were astonished. **17.** But after that
he had beckoned to them with the hand, that they should hold their
peace, he told them how God had brought him out of prison. And he said,
Tell James and the brethren these things. And he departed thence, and
went into another place. **18.** After that it was day, there was no
small ado amongst the soldiers, what was become of Peter. **19.** And
when Herod had sought him, and could not find him, so soon as he knew
the matter, he commanded the keepers to be carried away, \[executed.\]

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.iii-p4"></span><span id="xix.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p5"></span>**12.** *Into the house of Mary* It
appeareth that she was a matron of rare godliness, whose house was, as
it were, a certain temple of God, where the brethren did use to meet
together. And Luke saith that there were many assembled there, because,
seeing they could not all meet together in one place without fear of
some tumult, they came together in diverse places of the city in
companies, as they could conveniently. For, doubtless, there were other
companies gathered together elsewhere, because it is not to be thought
that (at such times as many of the faithful did give themselves to
prayer) the apostles were not in like sort occupied, and one house could
not hold so many. And we must always mark the circumstance of time,
because, even in the heat of the enemy’s cruelty, the godly were,
notwithstanding, assembled together. For if, at any time, this exercise
be profitable, then is it most necessary when hard conflicts approach.

<span id="xix.iii-p6"></span><span id="xix.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p7"></span>**15.** *When he did knock at the gate.*
Whereas they think that the maid is mad, which telleth them that Peter
was come; we gather by this, that they did not hope or look for Peter’s
deliverance, and yet we will not say that they prayed without faith;
because they looked for some other success, to with that Peter being
armed with power from heaven, should be ready, whether it were by life
or death, to glorify God,  <span id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758) that
the flock being terrified with the violent invasion of wolves might not
be scattered abroad, that those that were weak might not faint, that the
Lord would put away that whirlwind of persecution. But in that the Lord
granteth them more than they hoped for, he surpasseth their desires with
his infinite goodness. And now that which was done seemeth to them
incredible, that they may be the more provoked to praise his power.

<span id="xix.iii-p9"></span>*It is his angel.* They call him his angel,
who was by God appointed to be his keeper and the minister of his
safety. In which sense Christ saith that the angels of little ones do
always see the face of his Father, (<span id="xix.iii-p9.1"></span>[Mt
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii-p9.1"></span>.)
And what do they gather hence commonly? that every particular man hath a
particular angel, which taketh charge of him; but it is too weak. For
the Scripture doth sometimes testify (<span id="xix.iii-p9.2"></span>[Ex
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)<span id="xix.iii-p9.2"></span>)
that there is one angel given to a great people, and to one man only a
great host. For Elizeus \[Elisha\] his servant had his eyes opened, so
that he saw in the air chariots of fire, which were appointed to defend
the prophet, (<span id="xix.iii-p9.3"></span>[2Ki
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017)<span id="xix.iii-p9.3"></span>.)
And in Daniel there is but one angel of the Persians, and one of the
Grecians named, (<span id="xix.iii-p9.4"></span>[Dan.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)<span id="xix.iii-p9.4"></span>.)
Neither doth the Scripture promise to every man a certain and peculiar
angel, but rather that the Lord hath charged his angels to keep all the
faithful, (<span id="xix.iii-p9.5"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span id="xix.iii-p9.5"></span>;)
also that they pitch their tents about the godly, (<span
id="xix.iii-p9.6"></span>[Ps 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008)<span
id="xix.iii-p9.6"></span>.) Therefore, that vain surmise which is common
touching the two angels of every man is profane. Let this be sufficient
for us, that the whole host of heaven doth watch for the safety of the
Church; and that as necessity of time requireth sometimes one angel,
sometimes more do defend us with their aid. Assuredly, this is
inestimable goodness of God, in that he saith that the angels, who are
the beams of his brightness, are our ministers.

<span id="xix.iii-p10"></span><span id="xix.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p11"></span>**17.** *Tell James and the brethren:* By
brethren I understand not every one that was of the Church but the
apostles and elders. For though it were requisite that the miracle
should be made known to all, yet will Peter worthily for honor’s sake,
have his fellows in office to be certified thereof. Ecclesiastical
writers after Eusebius report that this *James* was one of the
disciples; but forasmuch as Paul reckoneth him in the number of the
three pillars of the Church, (<span id="xix.iii-p11.1"></span>[Ga
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="xix.iii-p11.1"></span>,)
I do not think that a disciple was advanced to that dignity, and the
apostles set aside. Wherefore, I do rather conjecture, that this was
James the son of Alpheus, whose holiness was such, that it caused the
Jews to wonder at it. And there be two reasons for which Peter would
have this joyful message brought unto the brethren; to wit, that he
might rid them of that care which did vex them; secondly, that they
might be encouraged with such an example of God’s goodness to be the
more bold. Whereas he passeth into another place, I think it was done
for this cause, because, forasmuch as the house was well known and
famous, because many of the brethren resorted thither, he might lie hid
elsewhere with less danger. Therefore, he sought a place which was not
so much suspected of the enemy, and that he might not only save himself,
but also his hostess and others.

<span id="xix.iii-p12"></span><span id="xix.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p13"></span>**18.** *When it was day.* Luke returneth
now unto Herod and the soldiers; and he saith that there was no small
ado amongst them. For they could not suspect that Peter was taken from
them by violence, or that he was escaped by some subtle shift. Herod
examineth the matter afterward as a judge; but when as he perceived that
the soldiers were in no fault, he himself is also enforced to be a
witness of the deliverance wrought by God. Whereas he commandeth them to
be carried out of his sight, or to be carried to prison, we may thereby
gather, that their faithfulness and diligence were approved and seen;
for if there had been any suspicion of negligence, there was punishment
prepared for them; but the cause why he doth not let them go free was
partly rage, mixed with tyrannous cruelty, and partly shamefacedness.
Though some expound it otherwise, that he commanded that they should be
punished forthwith.  <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759) And
whether, being angry, he delivered them to the hangman, or he was
content to punish them with perpetual imprisonment, it is assuredly an
excellent example of blindness, that whereas he ought to perceive the
power of God, yea, though his eyes were shut, yet doth he not bend,
neither doth he wax more meek, but proceedeth to resist God of obstinate
malice. Thus doth Satan deprive the wicked of understanding, that in
seeing they see not; and the Lord, by smiting them with this horrible
amazedness, doth justly revenge himself and his Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_758"></span>[759](cc36102.htm#fr_758) <span
id="xix.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xix.iii-p8.1"></span>Christi
nomen,” the name of Christ.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[760](cc36102.htm#fr_759) <span
id="xix.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p14"></span> **“**<span
id="xix.iii-p14.1"></span>Extemplo ad Supplicium rapi,” that they should
he immediately dragged off to execution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 12:19-25](cc36103)
