[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36032)  [Next](cc36034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And as they spoke unto the people, the
priests and the governor of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon
them, **2.** Taking it grievously that they taught the people, and
preached, in Jesus’ name, the resurrection from the dead. **3.** And
they laid hands on them, and they put them in prison until the morrow.
For it was now even. tide. **4.** And many of those which heard the word
believed; and the number of men there was about five thousand.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span><span id="xi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**1.** *And as they spoke* Hereby it appeareth
how watchful the wicked be, because they are always ready at an inch to
stop the mouth of the servants of Christ. And, undoubt edly, they came
together, as it were, to quench some great fire; which thing Luke
signifieth, when as he saith that the ruler or captain of the temple
came also; and he addeth, moreover, that they took it grievously that
the apostles did teach. Therefore, they came not upon them by chance,
but of set purpose, that, according to their authority, they might
restrain the apostles, and put them to silence. And yet they have some
show of law and equity; for if any man did rashly intrude himself, it
was the office of the high priest to repress him; and also in like sort,
to keep the people in the obedience of the law and the prophets, and to
prevent all new doctrines. Therefore, when they hear unknown men, and
such as had no public authority, preaching unto the people in the
temple, they seem, according as their office did require, and they were
commanded by God, to address themselves to remedy this. And surely, at
the first blush, it seemeth that there was nothing in this action worthy
of reprehension, but the end doth at length declare that their counsel
was wicked, and their affection ungodly.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>Again, it was a hard matter for the apostles
to escape infamy and reproach, because they, being private and despised
persons, did take upon them public authority; to wit, because, when
things are out of order, many things must be essayed to \[against\] the
common custom, and especially, when we are to avouch and defend religion
and the worship of God, and the ringleaders themselves do stop all ways,
and do abuse that office against God, which was committed unto them by
God. The faithful champions of Christ must swallow up and pass through
this ignominy in \[under\] Popery. For a thousand summers will go over
their heads before any reformation or amendment will wax ripe amongst
them for the better. Therefore, Luke standeth upon this point, when as
he saith that they were grieved because the resurrection was preached in
the name of Christ. For hereupon it followeth that they did hate the
doctrine before they knew the same. He expresseth the Sadducees by name,
as those which were more courageous  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) in this cause. For they were almost
\[usually\] a part of the priests; but because the question is about the
resurrection, they set themselves against the apostles more than the
rest. Furthermore, this was most monstrous confusion amongst the Jews,
in that this sect, which was profane, was of such authority. For what
godliness could remain, when as the immortality of the soul was counted
as a fable, and that freely? But men must needs run headlong after this
sort, when they have once suffered pure doctrine to fall to the ground
amongst them. Wherefore, we must so much the more diligently beware of
every wicked turning aside, lest such a step do follow immediately.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>Some men think that the ruler of the temple
was chosen from among the priests, but I do rather think that he was
some chief captain of the Roman army; for it was a place which was
fortified both naturally and artificially. Again, Herod had built a
tower there, which was called Antonia; so that it is to be thought that
he had placed there a band of soldiers, and that the Roman captain had
the government of the temple, lest it should be a place of refuge for
the Jews, if they had stirred up any tumult, which we may likewise
gather out of Josephus. And this agreeth very well, that the enemies of
Christ did crave the help of the secular power, under color of appeasing
some tumult. In the mean season, they seek favor at the hands of the
Romans, as if they were careful to maintain the right of their empire.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span><span id="xi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**4.** *And many of them which heard* The
apostles are put in prison, but the force of their preaching is spread
far and wide, and the course thereof is at liberty. Of which thing Paul
boasteth very much, that the Word of God is not bound with him, (<span
id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>[2Ti 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md)<span
id="xi.i-p10.1"></span>.) And here we see that Satan and the wicked have
liberty granted them to rage against the children of God; yet can they
not (maugre their heads  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) .md)
prevail, but that God doth further and promote the kingdom of his Son;
Christ doth gather together his sheep; and that a few men unarmed,
furnished with no garrisons, do show forth more power in their voice
alone, than all the world, by raging against them. This is, indeed, no
common work of God, that one sermon brought forth such plentiful fruit;
but this is the more to be wondered at, that the faithful are not
terrified with the present danger, and discouraged from taking up the
cross of Christ together with the faith. For this was a hard beginning
for novices. Christ did more evidently declare by this efficacy and
force of doctrine that he was alive, than if he should have offered his
body to be handled with hand, and to be seen with the eyes. And whereas
it is said that the number of those which believed did grow to be about
five thousand, I do not understand it of those which were newly added,
but of the whole church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc36033.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>Animosiores,”
more zealous.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc36033.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xi.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p11.1"></span>Omnia
machinando,” by all their machinations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 4: 5-12](cc36034.md)
