[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36092)  [Next](cc36094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.viii"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
10:44-48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md)<span
id="xvii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p2"></span>**44.** And as Peter yet spake these
words, the Spirit came down upon all which heard the word. **45.** And
they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came
with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also were poured out the gifts
of the Holy Ghost. **46.** For they heard them speak with tongues, and
glorify God. Then Peter answered, **47.** Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized, who have received the Spirit as well as
we? **48.** And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the
Lord. Then prayed they him to tarry certain days.

<span id="xvii.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.viii-p4"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p5"></span>**44.** *And as Peter yet spake.* God
declareth now by a new miracle, that the doctrine of the gospel is
common as well to the Gentiles as to the Jews. And this is an excellent
seal of the calling of the Gentiles; because the Lord would never have
vouchsafed to bestow upon the Gentiles the graces of his Spirit, unless
it had been to declare that even they were adopted together into the
society of the covenant. These gifts, mentioned by Luke, differ indeed
from the grace of regeneration; and yet, undoubtedly, God did by this
means seal both Peter’s doctrine, and also their faith and godliness
which heard him. He saith that they were *all* endowed with the Spirit,
like as we saw before, that they came all encouraged to learn and obey.

<span id="xvii.viii-p6"></span>This visible sign representeth unto us,
as it were in a table, what an effectual instrument of God’s power the
preaching of the gospel is; for he poured out his Spirit as Peter spake,
to the end he might show that he sendeth not teachers to that end, that
they may beat the air with the vain sound of their voice, but that he
may work mightily by their voice, and may quicken the same by the power
of his Spirit, to the salvation of the godly. Thus doth Paul put the
Galatians (<span id="xvii.viii-p6.1"></span>[Ga
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002)<span id="xvii.viii-p6.1"></span>..md)
in mind, that they received the Holy Ghost by the hearing of faith; and
in another place he saith that he is the minister of the Spirit, and not
of the letter, (<span id="xvii.viii-p6.2"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="xvii.viii-p6.2"></span>..md)
The gift of the tongues, and other such like things, are ceased long ago
in the Church; but the spirit of understanding and of regeneration is of
force, and shall always be of force, which the Lord coupleth with the
external preaching of the gospel, that he may keep us in reverence of
his word, and may prevent the deadly dotings, wherein brain-sick fellows
enwrap themselves, whilst that, forsaking the word, they invent an
erroneous and wandering spirit. But it doth not, nor shall not, always
so fall out, that all those which hear the word with their outward ears,
do or shall also receive the Spirit; and the ministers do seldom light
upon such hearers as Peter had, who are willing, with one consent, to
follow God. Yet he bringeth to pass that all the elect feel in
themselves the consent of the external word, and of the secret power of
the Spirit.

<span id="xvii.viii-p7"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p8"></span>**45.** *The faithful were astonished.*
He calleth them faithful who were as yet possessed with a wicked error.
So the Lord doth not by and by wipe away all clouds of ignorance from
his, and yet they do not darken the praise of faith before God, because
he pardoneth errors and doth vouchsafe to favor it, as if it were pure
and plain. And yet it is a wonder, that seeing they knew that Peter was
sent of God, they would now be amazed, as at some strange and new thing,
because God giveth the grace of his Spirit to those to whom he would
have Christ now preached; but the sudden change is the cause of this,
because, whereas God until that day had separated the Gentiles from his
people as strangers and aliens, he doth now favor them both alike, and
lifteth them up into the like degree of honor. Although we be also
taught by this example, how hard a matter it is for us to wind out
ourselves out of our errors once conceived, especially when they are of
any continuance.

<span id="xvii.viii-p9"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p10"></span>**46.** *For they heard them.* He
expresseth what gifts of the Spirit were poured out upon them, and
therewithal he noteth the use; to wit, that they had variety of tongues
given them, so that they did glorify God with many tongues. Also, it may
be gathered out of this place, that the tongues were given them not only
for necessity, seeing the gospel was to be preached to strangers and to
men of another language, but also to be an ornament and worship to the
gospel. But ambition did afterward corrupt this second use, forasmuch as
many did translate that unto pomp and vain glory which they had received
to set forth the dignity of the heavenly wisdom, as Paul doth sharply
reprove this fault in the Corinthians. Therefore, no marvel if God took
away that shortly after which he had given, and did not suffer the same
to be corrupted with longer abuse.

<span id="xvii.viii-p11"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p12"></span>**47.** *Peter answered.* Peter
reasoneth from the thing to the sign; for, seeing that baptism is an
addition or appurtenance of the spiritual grace, he which hath received
the Spirit is also apt \[fit\] to receive baptism; and this is the
(most) lawful order, that the minister admit those unto the receiving of
the outward sign whom God hath testified to be his children by the mark
and pledge of his Spirit; so that faith and doctrine are first. And
whereas unlearned men infer thereupon that infants are not to be
baptized, it is without all reason. I grant that those who are strangers
from the Church must be taught before the sign of adoption be given
them; but I say, that the children of the faithful which are born in the
Church are from their mother’s womb of the household of the kingdom of
God. Yea, the argument which they use preposterously against us do I
turn back \[retort\] upon themselves; for, seeing that God hath adopted
the children of the faithful before they be born, I conclude thereupon
that they are not to be defrauded of the outward sign; otherwise men
shall presume to take that from them which God hath granted them. As
touching the manifest grace of the Spirit, there is no absurdity
therein, if  <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719.md) it follow after
baptism in them.

<span id="xvii.viii-p14"></span>And as this testimony maketh nothing for
maintenance of their error, so it doth strongly refute the error of the
Papists, who tie the grace of the Spirit to the signs, and think that
the same is fet \[fetched\] from heaven with enchantments,  <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720.md) as those witches did think that they
did pull down the moon with their charms. But forasmuch as Luke saith
that these had the Holy Ghost given them who were not as yet baptized,
he showeth that the Spirit is not included in baptism. Lastly, we must
note that the apostles were content with water alone when as they did
baptize,  <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721.md) and would to God this
plainness had been retained amongst their posterity, and that they had
not gathered here and there divers trifles, whereof baptism is filth in
Popery. They think that the worthiness of baptism is adorned with oil,
salt, spittle, wax-candles, whereas they are rather filthy pollutions
which corrupt the pure and natural \[genuine\] institution of Christ.

<span id="xvii.viii-p17"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p18"></span>**48.** *And he commanded them to be
baptized.* It was not of necessity that baptism should be ministered by
Peter’s hand, as Paul doth likewise testify that he baptized few at
Corinth, for other ministers might take this charge upon them. Whereas
he saith, in the name of the Lord, it must not be restrained unto the
form, as we have said in the third chapter; but because Christ is the
proper scope of baptism, therefore are we said to be baptized in his
name. When as Luke saith, last of all, that Peter was requested by
Cornelius and his kinsmen that he would tarry a few days, he commendeth
in them their desire to profit. They were, indeed, endued with the Holy
Ghost; but they were not so come to the top, but that confirmation was
as yet profitable for them. And, according to their example, so often as
opportunity to profit offereth itself, we must use it diligently; and
let us not swell with pride, which stoppeth the way before doctrine.
 <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_719"></span>[720](cc36093.htm#fr_719.md) <span
id="xvii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xvii.viii-p13.1"></span>Tempore,” in point of time.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[721](cc36093.htm#fr_720.md) <span
id="xvii.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xvii.viii-p15.1"></span>Eamque exorcismis non secus elici putant e
coelo,” and think it can only be brought down from heaven by exorcisms.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[722](cc36093.htm#fr_721.md) <span
id="xvii.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.viii-p16.1"></span>Ad
conferendum baptismum,” in giving baptism.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[723](cc36093.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="xvii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p19"></span> “<span id="xvii.viii-p19.1"></span>Qui
ingressum obstruat doctrinae,” which obstructeth the entrance of
doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc36094.md)
