[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36055)  [Next](cc36057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#017.md)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**17.** And when the time of the promise
drew near, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people increased, and was
multiplied in Egypt, **18.** Until another king arose, which knew not
Joseph: **19.** This man dealt subtilely with our kindred; he
evil-entreated our fathers, that they might cast out their infants, lest
they should be increased.

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Stephen passeth over unto the
deliverance of the people, before which  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) went that innumerable issue which had
increased beyond the ordinary manner in no long space of time.
Therefore, he setteth down this as a singular gift of God, that the
people was increased, to the end we may know that that came not to pass
according to the common or wonted custom of nature. But, on the other
side, God seemeth to take from the Jews all hope, because Pharaoh doth
tyrannously afflict them, and their bondage groweth greater daily. And
when as they are commanded to cast out their male infants, it seemeth
that the destruction of the whole nation was present. There is another
token of deliverance given, when Moses cometh abroad; but because he is
by and by refused and enforced to fly into exile, there remaineth
nothing but mere despair. The sum is this; that God, being mindful of
his promise, did increase the people in time, that he might perform that
which he had sworn to Abraham; but the Jews (as they were unthankful and
froward) did refuse the grace of God, so that they did what they could
to shut up the way before themselves. Furthermore, we must note the
providence of God in this place, whilst that he doth so order the course
of times, that his works have always their opportunity. But men who make
haste disorderly in their desires cannot hope patiently, and be at rest,
until such time as God showeth forth his hand; for this cause, because
they take no heed to that moderation whereof I have spoken. And to the
end God may exercise the faith of his children so often as he appeareth
with joyful tokens of grace, he setteth other things against those on
the other side, which cut off suddenly the hope of salvation. For who
would not have said of the Hebrews, that they were utterly undone, when
as the king’s commandment appointed all the men children to be put to
death? For which cause the meditating upon that doctrine is the most
\[more\] necessary for us, that God doth kill and restore to life; he
leadeth unto hell, and bringeth back again.

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span>**19.** *Dealt subtilely.* The old
interpreter did not translate this amiss, to *deceive.*  <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405.md) For Stephen meaneth that the king of
Egypt did craftily invent new shifts and wicked pretenses, that he might
every now and then lay heavier burdens upon the people, like as almost
all tyrants do; for how unjustly soever they vex their subjects, they
are \[but\] too witty to invent excuses. And it is not to be doubted but
that Pharaoh abused this honest color, that it was not meet that the
Jews, who were sojourners, should have a place of abode in his realm for
nought, and that they should be free from all burthens, seeing they did
enjoy great commodities. Therefore, he deceitfully made them vile
bondslaves of free-men. When Stephen saith that this tyrant knew not
Joseph, hereby it appeareth how soon the remembrance of benefits passeth
away among men, For although we do all with one consent detest
unthankfulness, yet is there no vice more common amongst us.

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span>*Lest they should be increased.* Erasmus
translateth this improperly, in my judgment. For \[<span
id="xiv.iv-p10.1"></span>Ζωογονεισθαι\] expresseth more than *lest their
children should live.* For the word is fet \[fetched\] thence, because
the people doth all always remain alive in the offspring. And,
furthermore Stephen doth not reckon up all the parts of their
evil-entreating, but putteth down one example of extreme cruelty. Whence
we may easily gather how near the whole seed of Abraham was to
destruction. For Pharaoh seemed to have murdered them all with that
commandment as with one stroke of a sword. But such violent barbarism
did the more set forth the unlooked-for and incredible power of God;
because when Pharaoh hath, by all means possible, striven against God,
yet all is in vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc36056.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p6.1"></span>Cujus
praeludium,” as a prelude to which.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc36056.htm#fr_405.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iv-p9.1"></span>Circumvenire,” to circumvent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:20-29](cc36057.md)
