[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36000)  [Next](cc36002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>EDITORS PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>THE present COMMENTARY, necessarily partaking of
the character of the Book which it is designed to illustrate, is more
historical than doctrinal; and hence does not contain so much profound
theological discussion as some of Calvin’s other Commentaries. The
leading topic is the progress of the Gospel under the inspired teachers
to whom its first propagation was entrusted, and, in immediate
connection with this, the Constitution of the Apostolic Church, and the
privileges enjoyed by its members. To this latter point the attention of
the religious world is now more especially directed; and whatever be the
views entertained with regard to it by any reader into whose hands this
Commentary may fall, if he feels aright, he will not think that his
study of the controversy is complete until he has made himself
acquainted with what has been said upon it by such a man as Calvin.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>A work of talent need not be either the less
interesting or the less instructive that it advocates views at variance
with our own. If our opinions have been deliberately and candidly
formed, it is a satisfactory test of their soundness when they continue
unshaken by all that the ablest opponent can urge against them.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The Translation appears to be well executed. It
is, perhaps, not so strictly literal as that of the Commentary on the
Romans, which the CALVIN SOCIETY has already published; but any
difference, in this respect, is more than compensated by the general
superiority of its style. There are occasional obscurities or
mistranslations which the Editor has endeavored, as in the Commentary on
the Romans, to remove by foot-notes; but, on the whole, it is believed
that the present Translation will not suffer by comparison with that of
any Theological Translation of the same period.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>H. B.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page to Featherstone Translation](cc36002.md)
