[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36008)  [Next](cc36010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** To whom also he showed himself
alive, after that he had suffered, in many proofs, while that he is seen
of them by the space o f forty days, and he intreateth of the kingdom of
God. **4.** And when he had gathered them together, he commanded them
that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but that they should wait
for the promise of the Father; whereof, saith he, ye have heard of me:
**5.** Because John truly baptized with water; but you shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost, after a few days.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span><span id="viii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>**3.** *Unto whom, etc* He addeth this,
that he might make the resurrection to be believed, as a thing most
necessary to be known, and without the which the whole gospel falleth
fiat to the ground, neither remaineth there any more faith. And that I
may omit to speak of other discommodities that come by being ignorant of
the resurrection of Christ, the gospel loseth his whole authority,
unless we know and be also fully persuaded that Christ being alive,
speaketh unto us from the heavens. Whereunto Luke hath chiefest respect
in this place. Therefore, that the truth hereof might not be called in
question, he saith that it was proved by many signs and tokens. Those
which Erasmus, following an old interpreter, doth call arguments, I have
translated proofs. For Aristotle doth call that <span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>τεκμηριον, in the first book of his
*Rhetorics,* which is necessary in signs. This is, therefore, that which
I said before, that Christ did make manifest his resurrection unto his
apostles by evident tokens, which did serve instead of necessary proofs,
lest they should doubt of the same. Furthermore, he doth not reckon up
those tokens and signs, saving only that he saith, that Christ did
appear unto them about the space of a month and one-half oftentimes. If
he had but once appeared unto them, it might have been somewhat
suspicious, but in showing himself so often unto them, he dissolveth all
doubts which might arise in their minds, and by this means, also, he
putteth away the reproach of the ignorance which he said was in the
apostles, lest it discredit their preaching.

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>*He intreateth of the kingdom of God* He
telleth us again that the apostles themselves were well taught  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) before such time as they took upon them
to teach others; therefore, whatsoever things they uttered and brought
to light, either by word or by writing, touching the kingdom of God,
they are those speeches which Christ himself uttered. And hereby doth he
briefly set down the end of the doctrine of the gospel; namely, that God
may reign in us. Regeneration is the beginning of this kingdom, and the
end thereof is blessed immortality; the middle proceedings are in a more
ample going forward and increase of regeneration. But that this thing
may appear more evidently, we must first note, that we are born, and
that we live aliens and strangers from the kingdom of God, until such
time as God doth fashion us again unto a new life. Therefore, we may
properly set the world, the flesh, and whatsoever is in man’s nature
against the kingdom of God, as contrary to it. For the natural man is
wholly occupied about the things of this world, and he seeketh felicity
here;  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) in the mean season, we are
as it were banished from God, and he likewise from us; but Christ, by
the preaching of the gospel, doth lift us up unto the meditation of the
life to come. And to the end he may the better bring this to pass, he
reformeth all our earthly affections, and so having striped us out of
the vices of our flesh, he separateth us from the world. And, like as
eternal death is prepared for all those which live after the flesh, so
in as much as the inward man is renewed in us, that we may go forward in
the spiritual life, we draw nearer unto the perfection of the kingdom of
God; which is the society of the glory of God. Therefore, God will reign
in and amongst us now, that he may at length make us partakers of his
kingdom. Hereby we gather that Christ did principally intreat of the
corruption of mankind; of the tyranny of sin, whose bond-slaves we are;
of the curse and guiltiness of eternal death, whereunto we all are
subject, and also of the means to obtain salvation; of the remission of
sins; of the denying of the flesh; of spiritual righteousness; of hope
of eternal life, and of like such things. And if we will be rightly
instructed in Christianity, we must apply our studies to these things.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>**4.** *Gathering them together, he
commanded, etc* They had before done the duty of Apostles; but that
lasted but a while; and, secondly, so far forth that they might with
their preaching awake the Jews to hear their Master. And so that
commandment to teach, which Christ had given them, (<span
id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007)<span id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>,)
whilst he lived with them upon earth, was, as it were, a certain
entrance into their apostleship which was to come, for which they were
not yet ripe. Therefore, their ordinary function was not laid upon them,
until such time as Christ was risen again; but they stirred up their
nation (as I have said) like criers, that they might give ear to Christ.
And then at length, after the resurrection, they were made Apostles, to
publish abroad throughout the whole world that doctrine which was
committed to them. And whereas after they were made Apostles, Christ
commandeth them as yet to abstain from their office, that is done not
without just cause; yea, many causes may be alleged why it should be so.
That filthy forsaking of their Master was yet fresh; many notes and
tokens of unbelief were yet fresh. Whereas, they had been so thoroughly
taught, and had so suddenly forgotten all, they showed a manifest token
of their great dullness of wit. Neither were they free from
sluggishness, which could not otherwise fitly be purged, than by
deferring the promised grace, that he might the more sharpen their
desire. But this cause is chiefly to be noted, that the Lord did appoint
a certain time for the sending of the Spirit, that the miracle might be
the more apparent. Again, he suffered them to rest a while, that he
might the better set forth the greatness of that business which he was
about to commit unto them. And thereby is the truth of the gospel
confirmed, because the Apostles were forbidden to address themselves to
preach the same, until they should be well prepared in succession of
time.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>And they were commanded to stay together,
because they should all have one spirit given them. If they had been
dispersed, the unity should not have been so well known. Though they
were scattered abroad afterwards in divers places, yet because they
brought that which they had from one and the same fountain, it was all
one, as if they always had had all one mouth. Furthermore, it was
expedient that they should begin to preach the gospel at Jerusalem, that
the prophecy might be fulfilled,

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span>“There shall a law go out of Zion,  
and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem,” (<span
id="viii.ii-p12.2"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span>Although the participle <span
id="viii.ii-p13.1"></span>συναλιζομενος, may be diversely translated,
yet Erasmus his translation did please me best, because the
signification of *gathering together* will agree better with the text,
\[context.\]

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>*They should wait for the promise* It was
meet that these should be accustomed to obey first, who should shortly
after lay Christ’s yoke upon the neck of the world. And surely they have
taught us by their example, that we must work and rest at the Lord’s
pleasure alone. For if, during our life, we go on warfare under his
banner and conduct, surely he ought to have no less authority over us
than any earthly captain hath in his army. Therefore, as warlike
discipline requireth this, that no man wage unless he be commanded by
the captain, so it is not lawful for us either to go out, or to attempt
any thing, until the Lord give the watchword; and so soon as he bloweth
the retreat, we must stay, \[halt.\] Moreover, we are taught that we are
made partakers of the gifts of God through hope. But we must mark the
nature of hope as it is described in this place. For that is not hope
which every man feigneth to himself unadvisedly, but that which is
grounded on the promise of God. Therefore Christ cloth not suffer his
apostles to look for whatsoever they will, but he addeth expressly the
promise of the Father. Furthermore, he maketh himself a witness thereof;
because we ought to be so sure and certain, that although all the
engines of hell gainstand us, yet this may remain surely fixed in our
minds, that we have believed God. I know, saith Paul, whom I have
believed, (<span id="viii.ii-p14.1"></span>[2Ti
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span id="viii.ii-p14.1"></span>.)
And here he putteth them in mind of those things which are written in
<span id="viii.ii-p14.2"></span>[John
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="viii.ii-p14.2"></span>,

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span>“I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter, that he may continue with you; I say the Spirit
of truth,” etc.

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span>Again,

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span>“I have spoken these things unto you while
I am with you.” “And the Spirit, whom my Father shall send in my name,
shall teach you all things,” (<span id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>[John
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>,)
etc.

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span>And again,

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span>“When the Spirit of truth shall come, whom
I will send from my Father, he shall bear witness of me,” (<span
id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>[Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span>And again,

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span>“If I shall go hence, I will send you the
Comforter, who shall reprove the world,” (<span
id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span>And he had said long before,

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span>“He which believeth in me, out of his
belly  
shall flow rivers of living water,”  
(<span id="viii.ii-p23.3"></span>[Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span id="viii.ii-p23.3"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p24"></span><span id="viii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p25"></span>**5.** *Because John truly* Christ
repeateth this unto his apostles out of John’s own words. For some part
of them had heard that at John’s mouth, which the Evangelists report, “I
truly baptize you with water, but he that cometh after me shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire.” Now Christ pronounceth that
they shall well perceive that that is true indeed which he said.
Furthermore, this serveth greatly to confirm the sentence next going
before, for it is an argument drawn from the office of Christ. And that
thus: John was sent to baptize with water, he fulfilled his function as
it became the servant of God. The Son of God is sent to baptize with the
Holy Ghost; it remained, therefore, that he do his duty. Neither can it
be otherwise but he must do that which his Father hath commanded him to
do, and for which also he came down into the earth. But it seemeth a
very absurd thing to restrain that unto the visible sending of the Holy
Ghost, which was spoken universally of regeneration.  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) I answer, that Christ did not then only
baptize with the Holy Ghost, when as he sent him under the form of fiery
tongues; for he had baptized his apostles before this; and he baptizeth
all the elect thus daily. But because the sending of the Holy Ghost
after so glorious a sort was a token of the hidden grace wherewith he
doth daily inspire his elect, he doth fitly apply thereunto the
testimony of John. And truly this was as though it had been the common
baptism of the Church. For besides that the apostles did not receive the
Spirit for themselves only, but for the use of all the faithful, there
was also declared the universal favor of Christ towards his Church,
while that he poured out thereupon the gifts of his Spirit in great
abundance.

<span id="viii.ii-p27"></span>Although, therefore, he doth daily baptize
the elect of his Father, yet was this no let why he might not show forth
this token to be remembered above all others, that the apostles might
know that they were only entered by John; and that not in vain, seeing
their perfection was hard at hand. And that is frivolous which some
gather out of this place most commonly,  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) namely, that the baptism of John and the
baptism of Christ were diverse. For here doth not he dispute in this
place of baptism, but maketh only a comparison betwixt the person of
John and the person of Christ. When as John did say that he did baptize
with water only, he did not reason of what sort his baptism was; but
what he himself was; lest he should arrogate that unto himself which was
proper to Christ. As also, the ministers in these days ought not to
speak otherwise of themselves; but they must acknowledge Christ to be
the author of all those things which they do prefigure in the outward
baptism, and leave nothing to themselves save only the outward
administration. For when as these titles are attributed unto baptism,
namely, that it is the laver of regeneration, (<span
id="viii.ii-p28.2"></span>Titus 3:5,) a washing away of sins, the
fellowship of death, and burying with Christ, (<span
id="viii.ii-p28.3"></span>[Ro 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="viii.ii-p28.3"></span>,) and a grafting into the body of Christ, it
is not declared what man, being the minister of the outward sign, doth;
but rather what Christ doth, who only giveth force and efficacy unto the
signs. We must always hold fast this distinction, lest, whilst we deck
man too much, we take from Christ.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

<span id="viii.ii-p30"></span>But here may a question be moved, why he
doth rather name John here than any other; first, It is manifest enough
that John did profess himself to be the minister of the outward sign,
namely, of water, and that Christ was the author of the spiritual
baptism; secondly, Because it was meet that John should decrease and
Christ increase; and, thirdly, Because the apostles did so much esteem
of John, (<span id="viii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Joh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="viii.ii-p30.1"></span>,)
it might have been that thereby the glory of Christ might have been
obscured. Therefore, Christ, to the end he might reclaim them to
himself, telleth them that John did only minister unto them the external
baptism; notwithstanding, he confirmeth them also, lest they should
doubt of the promise; for they did attribute very much unto John, and
therefore were they persuaded that the baptism which they had received
by him was not in vain. Now, if that the verity and force thereof must
be looked for at Christ’s hands, then ought the apostles to hope that
that shall surely be fulfilled which John prefigured.

<span id="viii.ii-p31"></span>So must we, in like manner, think that we
are not in vain baptized with water by men, because Christ, who
commanded the same to be done, will fulfill his office, and baptize us
with the Spirit. So faith draweth a consequent from the outward sign
unto the inward effect; yet doth it not attribute any more than is meet,
either to the sign or to the minister thereof, because in the sign it
only looketh unto the promise, which is Christ’s, and doth acknowledge
him to be the only author of grace. Let us, therefore, use such a mean
that we do in no part diminish Christ’s honor; and yet, nevertheless,
let us hope for that fruit by our baptism which is noted in this place.
By assigning so short a time our Savior maketh them more joyful to hope
well. Whereupon it followeth, that that death was not to be lamented
which brought with it presently so precious fruit. And let us note this
also, that this word baptism is used improperly in this place, that the
contrariety may be full. After the same sort, Paul, in his Epistle unto
the Romans, (<span id="viii.ii-p31.1"></span>[Ro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span id="viii.ii-p31.1"></span>,)
after he hath set down the law of works, to the end that the contrary
may answer on the other side, he useth the law of faith for faith
itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc36009.htm#fr_18) <span
id="viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p7.1"></span>Ab unico
magistro,” by the only master, omitted.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc36009.htm#fr_19) <span
id="viii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p8.1"></span>Et ultimum
bonum,” and it is his final good, omitted.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc36009.htm#fr_20) <span
id="viii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p26"></span> “<span
id="viii.ii-p26.1"></span>Generaliter de gratia regenerationis,”
generally of the grace of regeneration.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc36009.htm#fr_21) <span
id="viii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p28.1"></span>Ex hoc
loco et similibus vulgo colligunt,” commonly gather out of this and
similar passages.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc36009.htm#fr_22) <span
id="viii.ii-p28.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p29.1"></span>Christum
spoliemus,” we rob Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 1:6-8](cc36010)
