[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36089)  [Next](cc36091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p1"></span><span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
10:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030)<span id="xvii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p2"></span>**30.** Then saith Cornelius, Four days ago,
until this hour, I was fasting; and about the ninth hour I prayed at my
house; and behold a man stood before me in a shining garment, **31.**
Who said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thy alms is come into
remembrance before God. **32.** Therefore send men to Joppa, and fetch
Simon, whose surname is Peter; this man lodgeth in the house of Simon
the tanner; when he shall be present he shall speak to thee. **33.**
Therefore, after that hour I sent unto thee, and thou hast done well
that thou art come, Therefore, all we are now present before God, to
hear all things which are appointed for thee of God.

<span id="xvii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.v-p4"></span><span id="xvii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p5"></span>Because this answer of Cornelius containeth
only the bare repetition of the history, I shall not need to stand long
about that. The sum is, that he called Peter at the commandment of God.

<span id="xvii.v-p6"></span>**30.** *I was fasting.* Many Greek books
 <span id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686) have <span
id="xvii.v-p7.2"></span>ημην, *I sat*. The old interpreter omitteth the
word fasting, which I think was done through error or negligence,
because it is expressed in all the Greek books.  <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) Furthermore, he maketh express mention
of fasting, partly that we may know that he prayed not coldly, or
overfields  <span id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) at that time;
secondly, that the vision may be the less suspected. For doubtless the
brain of a man that is fasting (where there is moderate sobriety) doth
not easily admit any strong imaginations, wherein appear images and
strange forms, whereby men are deceived.  <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) Therefore Cornelius’ meaning is, that
he was earnestly bent to pray, at such time as the angel appeared to
him, and that his mind was free from all such lets which use to make men
subject to fantasies and imaginations.  <span
id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690) And to the same end tendeth the
circumstance of time, that this was done when it was now fair daylight,
three hours before the going down of the sun.

<span id="xvii.v-p12"></span>*A man stood in shining garment.* He
calleth him a man, whom he knew was an angel of God; but it is a common
thing for the name of the visible form wherein God or his angels appear
to be translated unto him or them; so Moses doth sometimes call them
angels, and sometimes men, which appeared to Abraham in shape of men.
The shining garment was a token of heavenly glory, and, as it were a
sign of the divine Majesty which appeared  <span
id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) in the angel. The evangelists declare,
that there was such brightness in Christ’s garment when he showed his
glory to the three disciples in the mount. The same thing do they
witness of the angels which were sent to testify Christ’s resurrection.
For, as the Lord beareth with our infirmity thus far that he commandeth
his angels to descend under form of our flesh, so he casteth out upon
them certain beams of his glory, that the commandments which he hath
committed to them may be the more reverenced and believed. Here ariseth
a question, whether that were a true and natural body, and whether that
were a garment in deed, or Cornelius did only see such a shape and show;
and though this be not so necessary to be known, and we can scarce
affirm any thing for a truth,  <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692)
yet it seemeth to me more probable as touching conjecture, that God to
whom it belongeth to create all things gave to the angel a true body,
and did clothe the same with a most gorgeous garment; but so soon as the
angel had ended his embassage, I think he was restored to his own
nature, the body and garment being brought to nought, and that he
suffered no human thing  <span id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) so long
as he was in the shape of man.

<span id="xvii.v-p16"></span><span id="xvii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p17"></span>**33.** *Therefore, we are all now
present.* To the end Peter may be more ready and willing to teach,
Cornelius affirmeth that himself and the rest will be apt to be taught,
and ready to obey God; for this serveth not a little to move the teacher
to take pains with the hearers, when as he hopeth assuredly that they
shall profit thereby, These words, *before God,* may have a double
meaning; they may either be an oath, or Cornelius may thereby simply
profess that that company was gathered together at his house, as in the
sight of God, that they may hear man’s voice in like sort as if it
proceeded out of God’s own mouth. Whethersoever you choose, there shall
be always one end;  <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694) for to the
end Cornelius may the more procure the credit of his sincerity, he
testifieth that he hath God before his eyes, whom no man may mock by
dissimulation; and assuredly, so often as the Word of God is set before
us, we must thus think with ourselves, that we have not to deal with a
mortal man, but that God is present, and doth call us. For, from this
respect of God ariseth the majesty of God’s word, and reverence in
hearing the same. Notwithstanding, he seemeth to promise unadvisedly for
others in a matter so weighty, for who can be a fit borrow \[cautioner\]
for another man’s faith? But because every man had promised obedience
for himself, he doth, for good causes, hope that they were so
affectioned; and, undoubtedly, we may think that they had promised that
they would be obedient to his sayings so soon as the matter was showed
them, and that even then every one confirmed by himself that which one
had spoken in the name of all.

<span id="xvii.v-p19"></span>*To hear all things.* This only is true
faith when we embrace not the one half of the Word of God alone, but
addict \[subject\] ourselves wholly unto it; and yet, notwithstanding,
there be few examples in the world of this full and universal faith, for
the more part doth not submit themselves to the doctrine of God, as if
they had made a covenant with God, save only so far forth as it pleaseth
them. If any thing displease them they either carelessly contemn or
mislike the same. But Cornelius doth wisely distinguish between God and
man, for he maketh God the author of the doctrine, and leaveth nothing
for man besides the ministry and embassage. “Thou shalt” saith he, “have
attentive scholars, and those which will be obedient in all things which
God hath commanded thee; that he alone may be principal, and thou only
his minister; that, he alone may speak but out of thy mouth,” which
thing God prescribeth to all his servants in the person of Ezekiel.

<span id="xvii.v-p20"></span>“Take” saith he, “the word out of my mouth,
and thou shalt show unto them from me,”  
(<span id="xvii.v-p20.2"></span>[Eze
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007)<span id="xvii.v-p20.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_686"></span>[687](cc36090.htm#fr_686) <span
id="xvii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p7"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p7.1"></span>Codices,”
manuscripts.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[688](cc36090.htm#fr_687) <span
id="xvii.v-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p8"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p8.1"></span>Codicibus,”
manuscripts.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[689](cc36090.htm#fr_688) <span
id="xvii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p9"></span> “<span
id="xvii.v-p9.1"></span>Defunctorie,” perfunctorily.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[690](cc36090.htm#fr_689) <span
id="xvii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p10"></span> “<span
id="xvii.v-p10.1"></span>Hallucinationes in spectris,” spectral
delusions.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[691](cc36090.htm#fr_690) <span
id="xvii.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p11"></span> “<span
id="xvii.v-p11.1"></span>Phantasmatibus ac spectris,” phantasms and
specters.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[692](cc36090.htm#fr_691) <span
id="xvii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p13"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p13.1"></span>Quae
fulgere... debuit,” which must have been refulgent.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[693](cc36090.htm#fr_692) <span
id="xvii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p14.1"></span>Pro
certo,” for certain.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[694](cc36090.htm#fr_693) <span
id="xvii.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p15"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p15.1"></span>Neque
tamen humani quidquam passum,” and that he had no human property.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[695](cc36090.htm#fr_694) <span
id="xvii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p18"></span> “<span id="xvii.v-p18.1"></span>Idem
semper erit finis,” the result will be the same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 10:34-38](cc36091)
