[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36002)  [Next](cc36004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD HENRY,  
EARL OF HUNTINGTON,

<span id="iv-p2"></span>LORD HASTINGS, ETC.,

<span id="iv-p3"></span>Knight Of The Most Honorable Order Of The
Garter, And Lord President Of The Queen’s Majesty’s Counsel Established
In The North Parts,

<span id="iv-p4"></span>CHRISTOPHER FETHERSTONE WISHETH INCREASE OF
SPIRITUAL GIFTS, LONG LIFE, AND HAPPY DAYS.

<span id="iv-p5"></span>If that (Right Honorable) I should prefix any
long and tedious preface before this work in commendation of your honor,
— I should of some be suspected of flattery; if in praise of these
learned Commentaries, — it should seem a thing superfluous, seeing they
sufficiently commend themselves; if in excuse of those faults which are
by me in translating hereof committed, — some censuring Cato would
condemn me, because I would take in hand a work so weighty, being not
able to be without fault, and by craving pardon for faults laying open
my folly. Omitting, therefore, those things which might carry with them
such inconveniences, I hasten unto that whereof I am chiefly to speak;
namely, to lay open the causes moving me to dedicate this my simple
translation unto your honor.

<span id="iv-p6"></span>Your deserts of God’s church, your singular
zeal, your unfeigned faith, your sincere profession, your especial care
to advance God’s glory, and to root out Papistry, your faithfulness
towards your prince, have been such, that this realm generally, but my
countrymen in the north parts, my native soil, specially, have, and
shall have, great cause to praise God for you in the day of their
visitation, even when it shall please God of his great mercy to behold
them with favor-able countenance, and to take from them in greater
measure that blindness and superstition, wherein they had been long time
nousled, and being fast bred by the bone, is not yet (through want of
means) gotten out of the flesh. Seeing all these virtues are in you to
be found; seeing both this church and country have found you so
beneficial, whom ought not these things to provoke to show all
thankfulness towards your honor?

<span id="iv-p7"></span>Again, when this history of the Acts of the
Apostles was first penned in Greek by Luke, it was dedicated to noble
Theophilus. When M. Calvin did the second time publish his Commentaries
thereupon in Latin, he presented them unto one who was in mind a noble
Theophilus. Lest, therefore, this work, now published in English, should
by dedication be any whit debased, I have made choice of your honor,
being no less a noble Theophilus than those before mentioned.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>Another thing, which is not so much a cause as
an encouragement, is that courtesy which your honor showeth to those
which present unto you any exercises of learning, how simple soever they
be, whereof I have had full good experience even in my tender years;
namely, at such time as I was trained up in the city of Carlisle, under
that man, in his calling painful, and to the commonwealth profitable, M.
Hayes, whom for that duty which to him I owe I name. At which time,
though those exercises which unto your honor we then presented were
simple, yet were they so courteously of you received, that the
remembrance thereof doth even now encourage me to presume to offer unto
you some weightier matter.

<span id="iv-p9"></span>The last, but not the least, is, the
consideration of that great and undeserved kindness, which all my
friends in general, but especially my brother, your honor’s servant,
have found at your hands, which, to rip up at large, would be too
tedious. In their behalf, therefore, Right Honorable, as also in mine
own, as a small testimony of a thankful heart, I present unto your honor
this work; simple, if you respect the translation, but most excellent,
if you consider the matter. And thus, humbly craving pardon for my
boldness, and much more humbly beseeching the Lord to bless you in the
reading hereof, I conclude, fearing prolixity. The Lord of heaven bless
you, and grant that: as you have been heretofore a good Theophilus, so
you may continue to the glory of God, the increasing of his Church, and
the profit of this commonwealth.

<span id="iv-p10"></span>From Maighfield in Sussex, this 12th of
October, 1585.

<span id="iv-p11"></span>Your Honor’s most humble and obedient,  
and in Christ at commandment,

<span id="iv-p12"></span>CHRISTOPHER FETHERSTONE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Featherstone's To the Reader](cc36004)
