[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36086)  [Next](cc36088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
10:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#007.md)<span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**7.** And after that the angel which spake
to Cornelius was departed, he called two of his servants, and a godly
soldier, of those which did wait on him: **8.** And when he had told
them all things, he sent them to Joppa. **9.** On the morrow, as they
journeyed, and drew nigh to the city, Peter went up into the highest
part of the house to pray, about the sixth hour; **10.** And he was
fasting; therefore he would eat. And in the mean season, while they made
ready, there fell upon him an excess of mind.  <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668.md) **11.** He saw heaven open, and a
vessel coming down upon him like to a great sheet, knit at the four
corners, and let down to the earth; **12.** Wherein were all four-footed
beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and birds of
heaven. **13.** And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kill and
eat. **14.** And Peter said, Not so, Lord; because I have never eaten
any common or unclean thing. **15.** And the voice said to him again,
Make not thou those things common which God hath made clean. **16.** And
this was done thrice; and the vessel was taken up again into heaven.

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span>**7.** *And after that the angel.* Luke
declareth here how ready Cornelius was to obey when as he maketh no
tarriance, but doth that with all diligence which he was commanded to
do. And this was the cause that he was so forward, because he believed
the promise; as want of faith is the cause why we are so slow to follow
God. Angels come not flying to us from heaven that they may appoint us
certain men, but that voice of Christ soundeth in all men’s cars.

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span>“Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you,”  
(<span id="xvii.ii-p7.2"></span>[Mt
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="xvii.ii-p7.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span>How is it that of an hundred scarce one or
two will stir one foot, that some creep so little that they profit but a
little, but because we do not indeed believe the promise? Therefore, let
us learn that we must not drive off from day to day, but every man must
hasten thither whither he is called, so soon as he heareth the voice of
God.

<span id="xvii.ii-p9"></span>*Two of his servants.* Cornelius had this
reward for being so diligent in teaching his family, that he had
faithful and honest servants who were willing to do him service; and
also such as that he might commit any thing to them. On the other side,
the Lord doth oftentimes punish masters with just punishments who have
no regard to instruct their families. For they find those justly
stubborn and unfaithful whom they would not frame unto godliness and the
fear of God, and also they are afraid of their treachery.

<span id="xvii.ii-p10"></span>*A godly soldier.* Forasmuch as this
soldier was much conversant with Cornelius, he had also taught him to
fear God, as well as his household servants. It is meet that we call to
mind here that which I touched before, that there is no kind of life
which excuseth us but that we must worship God purely. For a soldier’s
life was at that time most corrupt; for they were fallen unto filthy
licentiousness, from the ancient discipline, and yet the Spirit of God
beareth record in this place of the godliness of soldiers. Wherefore,
there is no cause why they should require a calling that is free from
worshipping God, under color of warfare, who would by one means or other
be free from all righteousness. If they deny that they can serve God
because they be soldiers, they shall have these two soldiers meet judges
and witnesses against them at the last day, who shall condemn them. And
in the mean season, those brain-sick fellows are condemned who cry that
it is unlawful for Christians to carry weapons. For these men were
warriors, and yet godly, and when they embrace Christ they forsake not
their former kind of life; they cast not away their armor as hurtful,
nor yet forsake their calling.

<span id="xvii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p12"></span>**8.** Whereas Cornelius expoundeth the
whole matter to the soldier and his servants, it tendeth to this end,
that he may the more encourage them to give ear to the commandment,
which they see is rather a commandment of God than of man; and he is not
afraid to make known unto them so great a matter whom he had instructed
well before.

<span id="xvii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p14"></span>**9.** *On the morrow, as they journeyed.*
As Luke declared that Cornelius was admonished by an oracle to send for
Peter, so now he setteth down another vision, whereby Peter is commanded
to come to him. Whereby it appeareth that all this matter was governed
by the wonderful counsel of God, who doth both make Cornelius apt to be
taught, yea, he kindleth in him a study and desire to learn and, on the
other side, maketh Peter willing to take in hand to teach him. But we
must note the circumstances whereby he maketh the history more evident.

<span id="xvii.ii-p15"></span>*Peter went up upon the house,* that he
might pray alone by himself; for a quiet and lone place is a great help
to prayer, which thing Christ himself did not omit, that the mind, being
free from all things which might call it away, might be the more earnest
and bent toward God. And the Jews had another manner of houses and
buildings than we use; for they had walks upon the tops of their houses.
The sixth hour was then noon. And it is not to be doubted but that he
got himself to prayer then according to his custom. For because we are
drawn away with divers businesses,  <span
id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669.md) and there is no end of turmoiling,
unless we bridle ourselves, it is good to have certain hours appointed
for prayer, not because we are tied to hours, but lest we be unmindful
of prayer, which ought to be preferred before all cares and business.
Finally, we must think the same thing of time which we think of place;
to wit, that they are certain remedies whereby our infirmities is
holpen; which, if the apostles counted fit for them, how much must more
the sluggish and slow use the same?

<span id="xvii.ii-p17"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p18"></span>**10.** *Excess of mind.* Because our
minds are wholly, as it were, set upon the earth, to the end Peter might
the better comprehend the oracle, it was meet that his mind should be,
as it were, moved from his place and carried up; and by this means was
he prepared to receive the oracle, when as he is carried up above the
world after an unwonted manner.

<span id="xvii.ii-p19"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p20"></span>**11.** The opening of heaven signifieth,
in my judgment, another thing in this place than in the seventh chapter.
For it is said there that heaven was opened to Stephen, that he did
behold the glory of Christ; in this place Peter saw our heaven which we
see divided, so that a sheet came thence.

<span id="xvii.ii-p21"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p22"></span>**12.** If any man ask how he could see a
great multitude of living creatures at once, the question is easily
answered. For Luke saith, *All manner,* because there were there divers
kinds mixed one with another. Therefore he beginneth not at the first
kind, that he may prosecute the number unto the last. Again, we must not
measure this seeing according to the manner of men, because the trance
gave Peter other eyes. But before we go any farther we must know the end
of the vision. Some dispute more subtilely about the same than the place
requireth, in my judgment. Therefore, I think that it is generally
showed to Peter that the difference which God had made in times past is
now taken away. And as he had put difference between living creatures,
so, having chosen to himself one people, he counted all nations unclean
and profane.

<span id="xvii.ii-p23"></span>Now the difference between living
creatures being taken away, he teacheth by the consequent that there is
no such disagreement among men any longer as there was in times past,
and that there is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian. Hereby
Peter is admonished that he do not abhor the Gentiles as being unclean.
Undoubtedly, God meant to encourage Peter to come to Cornelius without
fear; but he had separated one people to himself from the rest, as saith
Moses in his song, when as the Most High did distribute the nations, he
put his lot in Jacob, etc., (<span id="xvii.ii-p23.1"></span>[De
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span id="xvii.ii-p23.1"></span>;.md)
therefore he called it his inheritance and peculiar people.

<span id="xvii.ii-p24"></span>According to this order, it had not been
lawful to Peter to bring the covenant of salvation unto the Gentiles;
for that was to take the children’s bread and to cast it to dogs, (<span
id="xvii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Mt
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026.md)<span
id="xvii.ii-p24.1"></span>,) unless, peradventure, they would be
circumcised, and embrace the Jewish religion; for it was lawful to
receive such as did yield themselves. Wherefore, when as the apostles
were sent before to preach the gospel, they were forbidden to turn in
unto the Gentiles, (<span id="xvii.ii-p24.2"></span>[Mt
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii-p24.2"></span>..md)
And forasmuch as the preaching of the gospel is a most holy and weighty
matter, Peter ought not to have attempted any thing therein with a
doubting and wavering mind. Therefore, to the end he may be assured of
his calling, God showeth manifestly, as in a picture, that the legal
difference between the clean and unclean is abolished; whence he may
gather that the wall which was heretofore between the Jews and the
Gentiles is now pulled down. And Paul saith, that it is a mystery hid
from the beginning of the world, that the Gentiles are made partakers of
the same salvation with the people of God, and ingrafted into one body,
(<span id="xvii.ii-p24.3"></span>[Eph
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016.md)<span id="xvii.ii-p24.3"></span>;
<span id="xvii.ii-p24.4"></span>[Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii-p24.4"></span>..md)

<span id="xvii.ii-p25"></span>Therefore Peter durst never have opened
the gate of heaven unto the Gentiles, unless God himself had made a
plain way and entrance for all men, by taking away the wall of
separation. I said even now that there was no time wherein it was not
lawful to admit the Gentiles unto the worship of God, so they were
circumcised; but so long as they continued in uncircumcision they were
strangers with God. But now God made the covenant of life common to all
the whole world, which he had shut up in one nation, as in a treasure.
Whence we gather that this vision is not a little profitable for us;
for, when as it teacheth that the difference between Jews and Gentiles
continued only for a season, it is as much as if God should pronounce
from heaven that he receiveth all people of the world into favor, that
he may be God over all. Finally, we have an evident proclamation from
heaven, which putteth us in hope of eternal life.

<span id="xvii.ii-p26"></span>But some men will object that Peter was
taught before concerning this matter; for he and the rest were commanded
to preach the gospel throughout the whole world, (<span
id="xvii.ii-p26.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span
id="xvii.ii-p26.1"></span>.) Therefore, he was either ignorant of his
calling, or else this vision was superfluous. I answer, that there was
such and so great difficulty in the novelty itself, that they could not
acquaint themselves therewith by and by. They knew both the prophecies
of the prophets, and the late commandment of Christ concerning the
calling of the Gentiles by the gospel; but when they come to the push,
they doubted nevertheless, being stricken with the strangeness of the
thing. Wherefore, it is no marvel if the Lord confirm Peter with a new
sign, concerning which thing we must also say somewhat as yet in the
next chapter.

<span id="xvii.ii-p27"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p28"></span>**13.** *A voice from heaven.* The voice
came from heaven as did the sheet, that Peter might know that both came
from God; neither had the sight done him any good, unless God had with
this voice made clean those things which were before unclean. Whereas
some pick an allegory out of the word kill, as if God did signify that
men are sacrificed to him by the spiritual sword of the gospel; I do not
prosecute that, but plainness pleaseth me better, that God doth take
away by this voice the law concerning the choice of beasts, that he may
also teach that he rejecteth no people, (<span
id="xvii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md)<span
id="xvii.ii-p28.1"></span>.) For if by the former word be meant
*sacrificing,* what shall *eat* signify?

<span id="xvii.ii-p29"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p30"></span>**14.** *Not so, Lord.* This is the voice
of him which doth as well refuse, as also object to God his own
commandment; for he is afraid, for good causes, to touch that which he
knew was forbidden him in the law of God, (<span
id="xvii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Le
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021.md)<span id="xvii.ii-p30.1"></span>,
etc.) Therefore he objecteth to God the law which he himself made, lest
he should break the same unadvisedly. There was a certain show of
repugnancy between the law and the vision; therefore Peter is not hasty,
but desireth first to have his doubt dissolved before he depart from
observing the law. Yet it is a strange matter why Peter resisted more in
meats than did Abraham in killing his son; for Abraham \[might have\]
had more things to object, (<span id="xvii.ii-p30.2"></span>[Gen.
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#010)<span id="xvii.ii-p30.2"></span>..md)
I dare not here say that that befell Peter which is too common among
men, to stand more about outward and small matters than about the chief
points of the law; I rather make that answer which is out of doubt, that
Abraham’s mind was so persuaded, and that he was furnished with such
power of the Spirit, that he overcame with 1ofty and heroical fortitude
all those things which might have hindered him. But the Spirit of God
wrought slenderly,  <span id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) in Peter;
whereby we are taught that every small or light thing doth cause us to
doubt, unless the Lord do furnish us with counsel and constancy to
overcome all fear. Yet Peter dealeth very godly and very religiously, in
that being in doubt amidst divers cogitations, he dare do nothing until
it better appear what he ought to follow. *Common* signifieth in this
place profane. For because the Lord (as we have said) had chosen the
Jews to be a peculiar people, he had prescribed unto them this rite and
manner of living, that it might distinguish them from the profane
Gentiles. Therefore, whatsoever the Gentiles did use contrary to the
rule of the law, that did they call common, because there was nothing
pure or holy but that which God had appointed for the use of his people.

<span id="xvii.ii-p32"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p33"></span>**15.** *God hath made clean.* He speaketh
of meats; but this sentence must be extended unto all parts of the life.
It is word for word, *That which God hath made clean, do not thou make
profane;* but the sense is, It is not for us to allow or condemn any
thing; but as we stand and fall by the judgment of God alone, so is he
judge of all things, (<span id="xvii.ii-p33.1"></span>[Ro
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span id="xvii.ii-p33.1"></span>..md)
As touching meats, after the abrogating of the law, God pronounceth that
they are all pure and clean. If, on the other side, there start up a
mortal man, making a new difference, forbidding certain, he taketh unto
himself the authority and power of God by sacrilegious boldness. Of this
stamp were the old heretics, Montanus, Priscillianus, the Donatists, the
Tatians, and all the Encratites. Afterwards the Pope, to the end he
might bind all those sects in a bundle, made a law concerning meats. And
there is no cause why the patrons of this impiety should babble that
they do not imagine any uncleanness in meats, but that men are forbidden
to eat flesh upon certain days, to tame the flesh. For seeing they eat
such meats as are most fit, both for delicacy and also for riot, why do
they abstain from eating bacon, as from some great offense, save only
because they imagine that that is unclean and polluted which is
forbidden by the law of their idol? With like pride doth the tyranny of
the Pope rage in all parts of life; for there is nothing wherein he
layeth not snares to entangle the miserable consciences of men. But let
us trust to the heavenly oracle, and freely despise all his inhibitions.
We must always ask the mouth of the Lord, that we may thereby be assured
what we may lawfully do; forasmuch as it was not lawful even for Peter
to make that profane which was lawful by the Word of God.

<span id="xvii.ii-p34"></span>Furthermore, this is a place of great
importance to beat down the frowardness of men, which they use too much
in perverse judgments. There is no man almost which doth not grant
liberty to himself to judge of other men’s doings. Now, as we are
churlish and malicious, we lean more toward the worse part, so that we
take from God that which is his. This voice alone ought to suffice to
correct such boldness, That it is not lawful for us to make this or that
unclean, but that this power belongeth to God alone. And also in these
words is given us to understand, that the Jews were not therefore the
holy people of the Lord, because they excelled through their own
worthiness, but only by reason of God’s adoption. Now, after that God
had received the Gentiles into the society of the covenant, they have
all equal right.

<span id="xvii.ii-p35"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p36"></span>**16.** *This was done thrice.* The
repetition of the vision served for the confirmation of Peter, lest any
doubt  <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) should remain in his
mind. Whence we gather how deeply the observing of the law was rooted in
his mind. And I know no reason why God left him in a dump,
\[perplexed,\] until, by the event which followed, he might learn the
cause of the vision, save only because being astonished he did not
desire to know what this thing meant; although it was all in good time,
that the messengers of Cornelius should come shortly after to interpret
it. The *vessel* was at length taken up again into heaven, that Peter
might be certified that this message came from heaven, \[God.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_668"></span>[669](cc36087.htm#fr_668.md) <span
id="xvii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p3.1"></span>Mentis
excessus,” a suspension of mind or thought, a trance.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[670](cc36087.htm#fr_669.md) <span
id="xvii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p16.1"></span>Totum
fere diem,” almost the whole day, omitted.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[671](cc36087.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="xvii.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p31.1"></span>Lente,”
slowly.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[672](cc36087.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="xvii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="xvii.ii-p37.1"></span>Vel
anxietas vel scrupulus,” or anxiety or scruple, omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 10:17-23](cc36088.md)
