[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36107)  [Next](cc36109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.iv"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p1"></span><span id="xx.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016)<span id="xx.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p2"></span>**16.** And Paul rose, and when he had given
a token of silence with the hand, he said, Men and brethren, which fear
God, hear. **17.** The God of this people did choose our fathers, and
exalted the people, when they were strangers in the land of Egypt; and
he brought them thence with an high arm. **18.** And about forty years
he suffered their manners in the wilderness. **19.** And having
destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land
for an inheritance. **20.** After these things, about four hundred and
fifty years, he gave them judges, until Samuel the prophet. **21.**
Afterward they required a king, and God gave them Saul, the son of Cis,
a man of the tribe of Benjamin, forty year’s. **22.** And when he had
taken him away, he raised up to them David to be king, of whom bearing
witness, he said, I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man according
to my heart, who shall do all my will. **23.** Of whose seed God,
according to promise, raised to Israel the Savior, Jesus.

<span id="xx.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.iv-p4"></span><span id="xx.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p5"></span>**16.** We must note the state of this
sermon, lest we think that he uttered words in vain. Paul seemeth,
indeed, to begin even at the very first beginning, but he speaketh
nothing but that which is most convenient for the present purpose. His
purpose is to bring the Jews unto the faith of Christ; and that he may
the better do this, it is needful to declare that they excel other
nations in this one thing, because the Savior was promised them, whose
kingdom is their principal and only felicity. This is, therefore, Paul’s
beginning, that whereas they were chosen in times past to be the
peculiar people of God; whereas they had so many benefits bestowed upon
them from time to time, though they showed themselves most unworthy,
this did depend upon the promise of the Messiah, and did tend to that
end, that God might govern them by the hand of the Messiah; and that
therefore they have nothing whereof they may boast, unless they be
gathered under their Head; yea, that unless they receive him when he is
offered, the covenant of life which God had made with their fathers
shall be void, and the adoption shall be frustrate. This is the drift of
the first part of the sermon: that this is the principal point of the
law and the foundation of God’s covenant, that they have Christ for
their Captain and Governor, that he may restore all things among them;
that without him religion cannot stand, and that they shall be most
miserable without him. Thence Paul passeth unto another member, that
Jesus, whom he preacheth, is Christ indeed, through whom salvation is
offered to the people; also he declareth the means of the redemption
purchased by him. Furthermore, he intreateth of his power and office,
that they may know what good things they ought to hope for at his hands.
The conclusion containeth a chiding; for he threateneth to them horrible
judgment, if they refuse the author of salvation, who offereth himself,
even of his own accord, whom earnestly to desire the law and prophets
provoke. This is, in a manner, the sum; now let us discuss every point
by itself.

<span id="xx.iv-p6"></span>*Men and brethren.* Because Paul knew that
there were many bastardly sons of Abraham, or such as were grown out of
kind,  <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) he calleth the Jews to
whom he speaketh by a double name. First, he calleth them brethren,
having respect unto common kindred, notwithstanding he showeth
therewithal that they shall be true Israelites if they fear God, and
that even then they are likewise true hearers, because “the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom.” In like sort he maketh the faithful
attentive, and purchaseth audience among them, as if he should say,
Seeing many boast that they are sons of Abraham, who were unworthy of
such honor, show yourselves to be no bastardly seed. Let us learn by
this that it is not a fault common to one age only, that good and
sincere worshippers being mixed with hypocrites, have the name of the
Church common among them. But we must have a great care hereof, that we
be indeed that which we are called; which thing the true fear of
Almighty God will bring to pass, and not the external profession alone.

<span id="xx.iv-p8"></span><span id="xx.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p9"></span>**17.** *The God of this people.* This
preface did witness that Paul did go about no new thing, which might
lead away the people from the law of Moses. There is but one God, who is
God of all nations; but he calleth him God of that people, to whom he
had bound himself, and who was worshipped amongst the posterity of
Abraham, amongst whom alone true and pure religion was to be found. To
the same end tendeth that which is added immediately, *He chose our
fathers.* For he testifieth by these words that he seeketh nothing less
 <span id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) than that they may fall away
from the true and living God, who hath separated them from the residue
of the world. Neither do I doubt but that he did more manifestly express
that he did not preach to them an unknown or strange God, but the same
who revealed himself long ago to their fathers; so that he doth briefly
comprehend the sound knowledge of God, grounded in the law, that their
faith, conceived out of the law and prophets, may continue firm.

<span id="xx.iv-p11"></span>Notwithstanding, he doth, in the mean
season, commend and set forth the free love of God toward that people.
For how came it to pass that only the children of Abraham were the
Church and inheritance of God, save only because it pleased God to
dissever them from other nations? For there was no worthiness to
distinguish them; but the difference began at the love of God, wherewith
he did freely love Abraham.

<span id="xx.iv-p12"></span>Of this free love of God, Moses doth
oftentimes put the Jews to mind, as <span id="xx.iv-p12.1"></span>[Deut.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#014),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034)<span id="xx.iv-p12.1"></span>, and
in other places; wherein God did set before us a mirror of his wonderful
counsel, in that finding no excellence in Abraham, an obscure person and
miserable idolater, he doth, notwithstanding, prefer him before all the
world. Furthermore, this election was common to all the people, as was
also circumcision, whereby God did adopt to himself the seed of Abraham;
but there was also a more hidden election, whereby severing to himself a
few of many children of Abraham, he did declare, that not all who came
of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh are reckoned in the
spiritual stock.

<span id="xx.iv-p13"></span>*He did drive out a people.* Paul teacheth
that all those benefits which God bestowed afterwards upon the Jews, did
proceed and flow from that free favor which he did bear toward their
fathers. For this was the cause that they were delivered by the
wonderful power of God, and brought by his hand into the possession of
the land of Canaan, after that he had driven out so many nations for
their sake. For it is no small matter for the land to be deprived of her
inhabitants, that she might receive strangers. This is the fountain and
root of all good things whereunto Paul calleth us, that God chose the
fathers. This was the reason and cause which moved God to so great
patience, that he would not cast off that rebellious people, who should
otherwise have destroyed themselves a thousand times with their own
wickedness. Therefore, where the Scripture maketh mention that their
sins were pardoned, it saith that God remembered his covenant. He saith
that they were *exalted,* though they were *strangers,* that they may
remember how worthy and gorgeous their deliverance was.

<span id="xx.iv-p14"></span><span id="xx.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p15"></span>**18.** *He suffered their manners.* The
compound verb hath greater force and grace in the Greek, whereby the
mercifulness of God is expressed in suffering the people, whom he knew
to be stubborn and disobedient. And Paul giveth us to understand again,
that the election of God was the cause that his goodness did strive with
the wickedness of the people.  <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799)
Notwithstanding, we must note that God did so take pity upon his elect
people, whilst that he will continue firm in his purpose, that he did,
notwithstanding, sharply punish the rebellious and wicked. He spared the
people indeed, so that he did not quite destroy them, as he might by
good right; but he found also means that their wickedness might not
remain unpunished. And so that of Isaiah was fulfilled,

<span id="xx.iv-p17"></span>“If the multitude shall be as the sand of
the sea,  
a remnant shall be saved,” (<span id="xx.iv-p17.2"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="xx.iv-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.iv-p18"></span><span id="xx.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p19"></span>**20.** *He gave them judges.* Under this
name the Scripture comprehendeth rulers and governors; and here is
another testimony of the infinite goodness of God toward the Jews, in
that he pardoned so many backslidings in them. For it is likely that
Paul handled those things more at large, which Luke gathereth briefly.
And we know what was the estate of the people during all that time,
seeing that through untamed wantonness they did ever now and then shake
off the yoke. They were often punished with most grievous plagues, yet
so soon as they were once humbled, God delivered them from the tyranny
of their enemies. So that he saved the body thereof alive, amidst many
deaths, four whole ages and one-half. And hereby it appeareth how
unworthy they were of the favor of God, which they did despise and
reject so often, unless the constancy of the election had gotten the
victory. For how is it that God is never wearied, but that he keepeth
promise with those who are truce-breakers an hundred times, save only
because turning his eyes toward his Christ, he hath not suffered his
covenant, grounded in him, to decay or perish?

<span id="xx.iv-p20"></span><span id="xx.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p21"></span>**21.** *Afterward they desire.* And this
change was all one as if they would quite and manifestly overthrow the
government which he had appointed, whereof God himself complaineth in
Samuel, (<span id="xx.iv-p21.1"></span>[1 Sam.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007)<span id="xx.iv-p21.1"></span>.) But
the stability of the election saved them from being punished as such
madness did deserve; yea, the wicked and unlawful desire of the people
was to God a new and incredible occasion to erect the kingdom whence
Christ should afterward come. For how is it that the scepter came to the
tribe of Judah, save only because the people were desirous to have a
king? And assuredly the people dealt wickedly; but God, who knoweth how
to use evil things well, turned that offense into safety. Whereas Saul
was thrown down from the kingdom, it served to reprove the fault of the
people, (<span id="xx.iv-p21.2"></span>[1Sa
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028)<span id="xx.iv-p21.2"></span>,)
but immediately when the kingdom is established in David’s family the
prophecy of Jacob was verified, (<span id="xx.iv-p21.3"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="xx.iv-p21.3"></span>.)

<span id="xx.iv-p22"></span><span id="xx.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p23"></span>**22.** *I have found David, my servant.*
This title was not so much cited in praise of the person, as that Paul
might make the Jews more attentive to receive Christ. For the Lord doth
testify that his mind was thoroughly set upon David for no light cause,
but he commandeth in him some singular thing; and by extolling him so
highly, his intent is to lift up the minds of the faithful unto Christ
in his person. The place is taken out of the fourscore and ninth Psalm,
(<span id="xx.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ps
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020)<span id="xx.iv-p23.1"></span>.)
Only Paul putteth in that which is not there to be found, that David was
the son of Isai, \[Jesse,\] which amplifieth the grace of God. For
seeing that Isai \[Jesse\] was a breeder of cattle, it was a wonderful
work of God to take the least of his sons from the sheepfolds, and to
place him in the throne of the kingdom. By the word *found,* God meaneth
that he had gotten such a man as he would. Not that David had brought to
pass by his own travel and industry that he should meet God, being such
a one, but the phrase is taken from the common custom of men.

<span id="xx.iv-p24"></span>But the question is, Seeing that David fell
so grievously, how God giveth testimony of his continual obedience? We
may answer two ways; for God had respect rather unto the continual
course of his life, than unto every of his particular actions. Secondly,
he did thus set him forth, not so much for his own merit as for his
Christ’s sake. Assuredly he had deserved, by one wicked fact, eternal
destruction for him and his, and, so much as in him lay, the way of the
blessing of God was shut up, that there might nothing but vipers’ seed
come of Bathsheba. But that so filthy a fact, in the death of Uriah,
(<span id="xx.iv-p24.1"></span>[2Sa
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#027)<span id="xx.iv-p24.1"></span>)
turneth to a contrary end by the wonderful counsel of God, because
Solomon is born and cometh of that unlooked-for wedlock, which was full
of treachery, and, finally, polluted with many spots. And though David
sinned grievously, yet because he followed God all the course of his
life, he is praised without exception, that he showed himself obedient
to God in all things; though (as I have said before) the Spirit carrieth
us into a farther thing; yea, the common calling of all the faithful in
Christ, the head, is here depicted out to us.

<span id="xx.iv-p25"></span><span id="xx.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p26"></span>**23.** *According to promise.* This clause
doth also prove that which I have already said elsewhere, that in
sending Christ, the Lord had respect only unto his own faithfulness and
goodness; for he sent him because he had promised so to do. And as the
promise doth testify that salvation was free, so it doth also purchase
no small credit to the gospel; because it appeareth by this that Christ
came not at a sudden, of whom there was never anything spoken; but that
he who was promised from the beginning was now given in his time. But
the promises which Luke here toucheth by the way are famous and well
known. And they were so common among the Jews, that they called Christ
commonly by no other name but the Son of David, (<span
id="xx.iv-p26.1"></span>[Mt 22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span
id="xx.iv-p26.1"></span>; <span id="xx.iv-p26.2"></span>[Mt
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022)<span id="xx.iv-p26.2"></span>.)
He saith that Jesus was raised up to Israel; because, though salvation
belong to the whole world, yet was he first a minister of circumcision
to fulfill the promises made to the fathers, (<span
id="xx.iv-p26.3"></span>[Ro 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span
id="xx.iv-p26.3"></span>.) He translated the Hebrew name *Jesus* into
<span id="xx.iv-p26.4"></span>σωτηρ in Greek. So that he uttered one
thing twice, and yet here is no superfluous repetition; because he meant
to declare that Christ is indeed and doth perform that which the name
given him by God, by the voice of the angel, doth import.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_797"></span>[798](cc36108.htm#fr_797) <span
id="xx.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p7.1"></span>Degeneres,”
degenerate.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[799](cc36108.htm#fr_798) <span
id="xx.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p10.1"></span>Nihil se
minus captare,” that there is nothing he less desires.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[800](cc36108.htm#fr_799) <span
id="xx.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p16.1"></span>Sustinendo
populo,” in sustaining the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:24-26](cc36109)
