[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36082)  [Next](cc36084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ix"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Acts
9:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036)<span id="xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p2"></span>**36.** And there was a certain disciple at
Joppa called Tabitha, which, if you interpret it, is called Dorcas. This
woman was full of good works and alms which she did. **37.** And it
happened in those days that she was sick, and died. And when they had
washed her, they laid her in an upper parlour. **38.** And forasmuch as
Lydda was near to Joppa, the disciples, who had heard that Peter was
there, sent two men to him, requesting him that he would come to them.

<span id="xvi.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ix-p4"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p5"></span>**36.** There followeth a more famous token
of Christ’s power, by how much it is more hard to restore life to a dead
body, than to restore health to a man that is sick. But Luke doth first
commend the person of Tabitha on whom the miracle was showed, and that
with a double title; to wit, that she was Christ’s disciple, and that
she approved her faith with good works and alms. He hath oftentimes
already put this word *disciple* for a Christian man; and lest we should
think that that name was proper to men only, he attributeth the same to
a woman. And this title teacheth us that Christianity cannot be without
doctrine; and that that form of learning is prescribed, that the same
Christ may be Master to all. This is the chiefest praise, this is the
beginning of holy life, this is the root of all virtues, to have learned
of the Son of God the way to live, and the true life. The fruits of good
works proceed afterward from faith. By good works I mean the duties of
love, wherewith our neighbors are helped; and Luke placeth the chief
kind in alms. The commendation of liberality is great, because, as the
Holy Ghost doth witness, it containeth in itself the sum of a godly and
perfect life. Now we see what titles Tabitha hath. For religion toward
God or faith goeth first; secondly, that she exercised herself in
helping the brethren, and specially in relieving the poverty of the
poor. For by use it is come to pass, that all that help wherewith the
poor, and those which are in misery, are helped, is called <span
id="xvi.ix-p5.1"></span>ελεημοσυνη. Tabitha is rather a Syrian word than
an Hebrew, which Luke did turn into Greek, that we might know that it
was not like to the virtues of the holy women, and that she was debased
in such a simple name;  <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) for
Dorcas signifieth a goat; but the holiness of her life did easily wipe
away the blot of a name not very seemly.

<span id="xvi.ix-p7"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p8"></span>**37.** *It happened that she was sick.* He
saith in plain words that she was sick, that he may the more plainly
express her death which followed. To the same end he saith that the
corpse was washed and laid in an upper chamber; therefore, these
circumstances serve to make the miracle to be believed. Whereas they
carry her not straightway to the grave, but lay her in the upper part of
the house, that they may keep her there, we may thereby gather that they
had some hope of recovering her life. It is likely that the rite of
washing, whereof Luke maketh mention, was most ancient; and I do not
doubt but that it came from the holy fathers by continual course of
times, as if it had been delivered from hand to hand, that in death
itself some visible and of the resurrection might comfort the minds of
the godly, and lift them up unto some good hope; to wit, seeing the
manifestation of eternal life was not so evident, yea, seeing that
Christ, the pledge and substance of eternal life, was not as yet
revealed, it was requisite that both the obscurity of doctrine, and also
the absence of Christ, should be supplied by such helps. Therefore they
washed the bodies of the dead, that they might once  <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) stand before the judgment-seat of God,
being clean.  <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) Finally, there was
the same reason for washing the dead which was for the living; the daily
washing put them in mind of this, that no man can please God save he who
should be purged from his filthiness. So, in the rite of burying, God
would have some sign extant whereby men might be admonished that they
went polluted out of this life by reason of that filthiness which they
had gathered in the world. Washing did no more help those which were
dead than burial, but it was used to teach the living;  <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) for because death hath some show of
destruction, lest it should extinguish the faith of the resurrection, it
was requisite that contrary shows should be set against it, that they
might represent life in death. The Gentiles also took to themselves this
ceremony, for which cause Ennius saith*, A good woman did wash and
anoint Tarquinius’s corpse.* But (their) imitation was but apish  <span
id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637) in this thing, as in all other
ceremonies. And Christians also have taken to themselves this example
unadvisedly, as if the observation of a figure used under the law ought
to continue always; for at the beginning of the gospel, although the
necessity were abolished, yet the use was lawful, until such time as it
might grow out of use in tract of time. But the monks do at this day no
less imitate Judaism than did the Gentiles in times past, without choice
and judgment, for they wash corpses, that they may bury Christ in
shadows, which, being buried with him in his grave, ought never to have
been used any more.

<span id="xvi.ix-p13"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p14"></span>**38.** *The disciples, which had heard,*
The washing of the corpse showeth that the disciples knew not what would
come to pass, for by this means they make the corpse ready to be buried.
Yet this is some token of hope, that they lay her in an upper chamber,
and send to Peter. Furthermore, they murmur not against God, neither do
they cry out that it is an unmeet thing; but they humbly crave God’s
help, not that they will make Tabitha immortal, but their only desire is
to have her life prolonged for a time, that she may yet profit the
Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_633"></span>[634](cc36083.htm#fr_633) <span
id="xvi.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.ix-p6.1"></span>Ut sanctae
mulieris virtutibus non fuisse conforme sciremus, et in nomine parum
honorifico fuisse quasi dejectam,” that we might know that it was not
suitable to the virtues of a holy woman, and that she was, as it were,
degraded by a name far from honorable.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[635](cc36083.htm#fr_634) <span
id="xvi.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p9"></span> “<span id="xvi.ix-p9.1"></span>Ut pura
aliquando ad Dei tribunal sisterentur,” that they might one day stand
pure at the judgmentseat of God.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[636](cc36083.htm#fr_635) <span
id="xvi.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p10"></span> “<span
id="xvi.ix-p10.1"></span>Quotidianae ablutiones,” their daily ablutions.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[637](cc36083.htm#fr_636) <span
id="xvi.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p11"></span> “<span
id="xvi.ix-p11.1"></span>Superstites,” survivors.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[638](cc36083.htm#fr_637) <span
id="xvi.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p12"></span> “<span
id="xvi.ix-p12.1"></span>Praepostera,” preposterous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 9:39-43](cc36084)
