[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36035)  [Next](cc36037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
4:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019.md)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**19.** And Peter and John answered them, and
said, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you rather
than to God, judge ye. **20.** For we cannot but speak those things
which we have seen and heard. **21.** And when they had threatened them,
they let them go, finding nothing. for which they might punish them,
because of the people; for all men did glorify God because of that which
was done. **22.** For the man was more than forty years old on whom the
sign of healing was showed. **23.** Furthermore, when they were let go,
they came to their fellows, and told them whatsoever things the priests
and elders had said.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**19.** *Whether it be right.* Let us
remember to whom they make this answer. For this council did undoubtedly
represent the Church; but because they do abuse their authority, the
apostles say flatly that they are not to be obeyed. And (as men use to
do in an evident matter) they refer over the judgment unto their
adversaries for a reproach unto them. Furthermore it is worth the
noting, that they set the authority of God against their decrees; which
thing should be done out of season, unless they were the enemies of God,
who notwithstanding, were otherwise the ordinary pastors of the Church.
Moreover, the apostles express a farther thing also to wit, that the
obedience which men use toward evil and unfaithful pastors, howsoever
they hold the lawful government of the Church, is contrary to God. This
question doth the Pope answer pleasantly,  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) because he saith that all those things
are divine oracles whatsoever it hath pleased him to blunder out
un-advisedly.  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) By this means the
danger of contrariety is taken away. But the bishops can challenge no
more at this day than God had given then to the order of the priests.
Therefore, this is a toy too childish, \[viz.\] that they can command
nothing but that which is agreeable to the commandment of God.  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) Yea, rather the thing itself declareth
evidently that there shall be no conflict then if they suffer their vain
and unbridled lust to range freely, having vanquished and renounced the
doctrine of Christ.

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span>Therefore, by what title soever men be
called, yet must we hear them only upon this condition, if they lead us
not away from obeying God. So that we must examine all their traditions
by the rule of the Word of God. We must obey princes and others which
are in authority, yet so that they rob not God (who is the chief King,
Father, and Lord) of his right and authority. If we must observe such
modesty in politic \[civil\] government, it ought to be of far more
force in the spiritual government of the Church. And lest, according to
their wonted pride, they think that their authority is abated, when God
is extolled above them, Peter draweth them away from such pleasant
flattering of themselves, telling them that this matter must be
determined before the judgment-seat of God; for he saith plainly
*before* \[in the sight of\] God; because, howsoever men be blinded, yet
will God never suffer any man to be preferred before him. And surely the
Spirit did put this answer in the mouth of the apostles, not only to the
end he might repress the furiousness of the enemies, but that he might
also teach us what we ought to do, so often as men become so proud, that
having shaken off the yoke of God, they will lay their own yoke upon us.
Therefore, let us then remember this holy authority of God, which is
able to drive away the vain smoke of all man’s excellency.

<span id="xi.iv-p10"></span><span id="xi.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p11"></span>**20.** *For we cannot* Many things which
are found out by hearing and seeing may, yea, ought to be concealed,
when as the question is concerning the redeeming of peace. For this is a
point of discourtesy and of wicked stubbornness to move and raise a
tumult about unnecessary matters; but the apostles do not speak
generally, when as they say they cannot but speak. For the gospel of
Christ is now in hand, wherein consisteth both the glory of God and the
salvation of men. It is an unmeet thing, and sacrilegious wickedness,
that the same should be suppressed by prohibitions and menacings  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) of men; for God commandeth that his
gospel be preached, especially since they did know that they were chosen
to be witnesses and preachers of Christ, and that God had opened their
mouth. Therefore, whosoever putteth them to silence, he endeavoreth so
much as he is able to abolish the grace of God, and fordo \[destroy\]
the salvation of men. And if so be that a prohibition so wicked do stop
our mouths, woe be to our sluggishness. Now, let all men see what
confession God requireth at their hands, lest, when they keep silence
because of men, they hear a fearful voice proceed out of the mouth of
Christ, whereby their unfaithfulness shall be condemned. And as for
those which are called unto the office of teaching, let them be
terrified with no threatenings of men, with no color of authority, but
let them execute  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) that office
which they know is enjoined them by God. Woe be unto me, saith Paul, if
I preach not the gospel, because the function is committed unto me,
(<span id="xi.iv-p13.2"></span>[1Co
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010)<span id="xi.iv-p13.2"></span>..md)
Neither ought we only to set this commandment of God against the
tyrannous commandments of men, but also against all lets which Satan
doth oftentimes thrust in to break off and hinder the course of the
gospel. For we have need of a strong buckler to bear off such sore
assaults, which all the ministers of Christ do feel; but howsoever we
speed, this is a brazen wall, that the preaching of the gospel doth
please God, and therefore that it can for no cause be suppressed.

<span id="xi.iv-p14"></span><span id="xi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p15"></span>**21.** *And when they had threatened them.*
And here is the end of sedition, that the wicked cease not to breathe
out their fury, yet are they bridled by the secret power of God, so that
they cannot tell how to do any hurt.  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) How is it that being content with
threatenings, they do not also rage against their bodies, save only
because the power of God doth bind them as a chain? Not that the fear of
God doth prevail with them, for it is the regard of the people alone
which hindereth them; but the Lord doth bind them with his bonds, though
they be ignorant thereof. Luke commendeth unto us the providence of God
in preserving his children; and though it be hidden from the wicked, yet
we may behold the same with the eyes of faith, Furthermore, the
wonderful counsel of God doth show itself here, in that the glory of
Christ is furthered by those which are his most deadly enemies. For
whereas the priests do assemble themselves together, it is not done
without great rumor. All men wait for some rare and singular event; the
apostles depart, being let loose and acquitted. Therefore, the
adversaries are not only vanquished, but they confirm the gospel against
their will. Notwithstanding, it is expedient for us to mark again, that
the faithful do so get the victory, that they are always humbled under
the cross. For they are threatened again, and straitly charged, that
they teach not henceforth in the name of Christ. Therefore, they do not
so get the upper hand that they do not triumph, save only under the
reproach of the cross. Whereas Luke saith that they did *all glorified
God,* he noteth the fruit of the miracle now the second time, although
it may be that they were not all brought unto the perfect end. For that
man which is touched with the feeling of the power of God, and doth not
come unto Christ, neither hath his faith confirmed by the miracle he
stayeth, as it were, in the midway. Yet this was some thing, though not
all, that the power of God was acknowledged in the healing of the man,
so that the adversaries being ashamed, did cease off from their fury, or
at least give back a little.

<span id="xi.iv-p17"></span><span id="xi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p18"></span>**23.** *Furthermore when they were let go.*
It shall appear by and by to what end they declared to the other
disciples what things had befallen them, to wit, that they might be the
more emboldened and encouraged by the grace of God hereafter; secondly,
that they might arm themselves with prayer against the furious
threatenings of their enemies; and thus must the children of God do, one
must prick forward another, and they must join hand in hand, that they
may vanquish the common adversary fighting under Christ’s banner. They
consider  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md) with themselves what
dangers hang over their heads, to the end they may be the more ready to
enter  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) the same, although they
see their enemies press sore upon them; yet lest it should grieve them
 <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) to have a new combat ever now
and then, they assure  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md)
themselves that they shall be invincible  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) through the same power of God whereby
they got the victory before. And it is to be thought (although Luke
makes no mention thereof) that the apostles being contented with their
former answer, did not contend with those furies, \[furious men;\] and
yet we must persuade ourselves that they were not so forgetful of their
former constancy that they did submit themselves unto their ungodly
decree like slaves.  <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc36036.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>Hanc
quaestionem lepide diremit Papa,” the Pope wittily disposes of this
question.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc36036.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p7.1"></span>Effutire,” to
babble forth.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc36036.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p8.1"></span>Non posse eos
nisi ex Dei mandato praecipere,” that no command can possibly proceed
from them without being agreeable to the will of God.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc36036.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p12"></span> “<span
id="xi.iv-p12.1"></span>Interdictis,” the interdicts.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc36036.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p13.1"></span>Libere,”
freely, omitted.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc36036.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p16.1"></span>Ut illis
nocendi via non pateat,” that they have no means of doing harm.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc36036.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p19.1"></span>Reputent,”
let them consider.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc36036.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p20.1"></span>Obcundis,”
to obviate or face them.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc36036.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p21.1"></span>Ne pigeat,”
let it not grieve them.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc36036.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p22.1"></span>Confidant,”
let them confide.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc36036.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p23.1"></span>Semper
inexpugnabiles,” always invincible.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc36036.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="xi.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="xi.iv-p24.1"></span>Ut
serviliter excipient,” as servilely to submit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 4:24-31](cc36037.md)
