[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36028)  [Next](cc36030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
3:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#017.md)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**17.** And now, brethren, I know that
through ignorance you did it, as did also your rulers. **18.** And God
hath fulfilled all things which he had spoken by the mouth of his
prophets, that Christ should suffer. **19.** Repent, therefore, and be
converted, that your sins may be forgiven, **20.** When the times of
refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send
him that was preached before, Jesus Christ: **21.** Whom heaven must
contain until the time that all things be restored, which he hath spoken
by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the beginning of the world,
\[or set before your eyes and represented.\]

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span><span id="x.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**17.** Because it was to be doubted, lest,
being cast down with despair, they should refuse his doctrine, he doth a
little lift them up. We must so temper our sermons that they may profit
the hearers, for unless there be some hope of pardon left, the terror
and fear of punishment doth harden men’s hearts with stubbornness; for
that of David is true, That we fear the Lord when we perceive that he is
unto us favorable, and easy to be pacified, (<span
id="x.iii-p5.1"></span>[Ps 130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004.md)<span
id="x.iii-p5.1"></span>.) Thus doth Peter lessen the sin of his nation,
because of their ignorance; for it had been impossible for them to have
suffered and endured this conscience, if they had denied the Son of God,
and delivered him to be slain, wittingly and willingly; and yet will he
not flatter them, when as he saith that they did it through ignorance;
but he doth only somewhat mitigate his speech, lest they should be
overwhelmed and swallowed up of despair. Again, we must not so take the
words as if the people did sin simply of ignorance, for under this there
did lie hid hypocrisy; but as wickedness or ignorance doth abound, the
action is named of the one or the other. This is, therefore, Peter’s
meaning, that they did it rather through error and a blind zeal, than
through any determined wickedness; but a question may be moved here, if
ally man have offended wittingly and willingly, whether he shall surely
fall into despair or not? I answer, that he doth not make mention in
this place of all manner of sin; but only of the denying of Christ, and
of the extinguishing of the grace of God, so much as in them did lie. If
any man be desirous to know more concerning this, he may read the first
chapter of the First Epistle to Timothy, (<span
id="x.iii-p5.2"></span>[1Ti 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013.md)<span
id="x.iii-p5.2"></span>.)

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>*As did also your rulers.* First, this
seemeth to be an improper comparison, for the scribes and the priests
were carried headlong with a wonderful madness, and they were full of
wicked unfaithfulness;  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) but the
perverse study and zeal of the law did prick forward the people. Again,
the people were incensed against Christ, inasmuch as their rulers did
provoke them thereunto. I answer, that they were not all of one mind,
for without doubt many of them were like unto Paul, unto whom that doth
truly appertain, which he writeth elsewhere of the princes and rulers of
this world, if they had known the wisdom of God they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory; therefore, he speaketh not generally of all
the rulers; but if any of them be curable, them doth he invite to
repentance.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span><span id="x.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span>**18.** *And God* Hereby it appeareth more
plainly to what end he made mention of ignorance; for when he telleth
them that God hath accomplished those things which he had foretold, he
doth so touch their offense in the death of Christ, that it turneth to
their salvation. Ignorance, saith he, hath made you guilty, yet God hath
brought that to pass which he had determined, that Christ should redeem
you by his death. This is a most notable consideration, when as we
ponder and consider with ourselves, that through the wonderful counsel
of God our evils are turned to another end to us, yet this doth no whir
excuse us, for so much as in us lieth we cast away  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) ourselves by sinning; but that
conversion whereof I have spoken is a notable work of God’s mercy,
whereof we must speak, and which we must extol with humility. The Jews
did what they could to extinguish all hope of life in the person of
Christ; and yet, nevertheless, that death gave life as well to them as
to the whole world. We must also remember that which we saw elsewhere,
lest there should any false and absurd opinion creep in, that Christ was
laid open to the lust of the wicked, that God is made the chief author
by whose will his only Son did suffer.

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span><span id="x.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span>**19.** *Repent* We must note, that when he
exhorteth unto repentance, he doth also declare that there is remission
of sins prepared for them before the face of God. For, as I said of
late, no man can be stirred up to repentance, unless he have salvation
set before him; but he which doth despair of pardon, being, as it were,
given over unto destruction already, doth not ‘fear to run headlong
against God obstinately. Hereby it cometh to pass that the Papists
cannot deliver the doctrine of repentance. They babble, indeed, very
much concerning the same; but because they overthrow the hope of grace,
it cannot be that they should persuade their disciples unto the study of
repentance. Moreover, I confess that they babble a little touching
forgiveness of sins; but because they leave men’s souls in doubt and in
fearfulness, and, furthermore, do cast them as it were into a labyrinth,
(or place out of which they know not how to come,) this part of the
doctrine being corrupt, they confound the other also.

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span><span id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span>**20.** *That when* If we follow Erasmus and
the old interpreter, this sentence shall be unperfect,  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) which may be made perfect, thus: *When
the time of refreshing shall come, you may also enjoy this refreshing;*
when Christ shall come to judge the world, you may find him a redeemer
and not a Judge. But because Beza doth fitly translate it, *After that
they shall come,* it is better to retain that which is not so racked;
 <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) so you resolve it thus: That
sins are so forgiven against the day of the last judgment; because,
unless we be cited to appear before God’s judgment-seat we are not
greatly careful to pacify God. First of all, we must note, that he
setteth before them the day of judgment, to the end the former
exhortation may take the greater effect. For there is nothing which doth
more prick us, than when we are taught that we must once give an
account. For so long as our senses are holden and kept in this world,
they are drowned, as it were, in a certain drowsiness,  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) that I may so call it. Wherefore the
message of the last judgment must sound as a trumpet to *cite* us to
appear before the judgment-seat of God. For then at last being truly
awaked, we begin to think of a new life. In like sort, when Paul
preached at Athens, God saith, that he doth now will all men to repent;
because he hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the world, (<span
id="x.iii-p17.2"></span>[Acts 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span id="x.iii-p17.2"></span>..md)
The sum is this, that Christ, who is now unto us a Master, when as he
teacheth us by the gospel, is appointed of the Father to be a Judge, and
shall come in his due time; and that, therefore, we must obey his
doctrine betimes, that we may gather the fruit of our faith then.

<span id="x.iii-p18"></span>But some man may object, that Peter speaketh
otherwise of the last day. For this doth not serve to make them afraid,
when he saith, *the time of refreshing.* I answer, that there is a
double prick, wherewith the faithful are pricked forward when as they
are told of the last judgment. For the profit of faith doth not appear
in this world, yea rather it seemeth to go well with the despisers of
God; but the life of the godly is full of miseries. Therefore our hearts
should oftentimes faint and quail, unless we should remember that the
day of rest shall come, which shall quench all the heat of our trouble,
and make an end of our miseries. The other prick whereof I spoke is
this, when as the fearful judgment of God causeth us to shake off
delicacy and drowsiness. So Peter mixeth in this place threatenings with
promises, partly to the end he may allure the Jews unto Christ, and
partly that he may prick them forward with fear. Furthermore, this is a
thing much used in the Scripture, as it speaketh either unto the
reprobate, or unto the elect, sometimes to make the day of the Lord
doleful and fearful, sometimes to make the same pleasant and to be
wished for. Peter therefore doth very well, who, whilst that he putteth
the Jews in good hope of pardon, doth make the day of Christ pleasant to
them, to the end they may desire the same.

<span id="x.iii-p19"></span>*And shall send him.* He saith expressly
that Christ shall be Judge, to the end they may know that the contempt
of the gospel shall not be unpunished. For how should not Christ punish
the same? In the meanwhile, this doth greatly comfort the faithful, when
as they know that it shall be in his hand to give salvation, who doth
now promise and offer the same. He addeth, moreover, that he shall come
who is now preached unto them. Whereby he taketh away all excuse of
ignorance. As if he should say, Christ is preached unto you now before
he come to judge the world; to the end that those who will embrace him
may receive the fruit of their faith at that day; and to the end that
others, who shall refuse him, may be punished for their unbelief.
Although the Grecians do read this two ways; for some books  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md) have <span
id="x.iii-p20.2"></span>προκεκηρυγμενον, that is, *preached before;* and
other some <span id="x.iii-p20.3"></span>προκεχειρισμενον, that is,
*showed, or set before their eyes.* But both have one sense, to wit,
that Christ is not offered unto them in vain now by the doctrine of the
gospel; because he shall be sent the second time by his Father to be a
Judge, armed and prepared to render vengeance, unless they embrace him
now for their Redeemer.

<span id="x.iii-p21"></span><span id="x.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p22"></span>**21.** *Whom the heaven must contain.*
Because men’s senses are always bent and inclined towards the gross and
earthly beholding of God and Christ, the Jews might think with
themselves that Christ was preached, indeed, to be raised up from the
dead, yet could they not tell where he was; for no man did show them
where he was. Therefore Peter preventeth them, when he saith that he is
in heaven. Whereupon it followeth that they must lift up their minds on
high, to the end they may seek Christ with the eyes of faith, although
he be far from them,  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) although
he dwell without the world in the heavenly glory. But this is a doubtful
 <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md) speech; because we may as well
understand it that Christ is contained or comprehended in the heavens,
as that he doth comprehend the heavens. Let us not therefore urge the
word, being of a doubtful signification; but let us content ourselves
with that which is certain, that we must seek for Christ nowhere else
save only in heaven, whilst that we hope for the last restoring of all
things; because he shall be far from us, until our minds ascend high
above the world.

<span id="x.iii-p25"></span>*Until the time of restoring* As touching
the force and cause, Christ hath already restored all things by his
death; but the effect doth not yet fully appear; because that restoring
is yet in the course, and se, consequently, our redemption, forasmuch as
we do yet groan under the burden of servitude. For as the kingdom of
Christ is only begun, and the perfection thereof is deferred until the
last day, so those things which are annexed thereunto do now appear only
in part. Therefore, if at this day we see many things confused in the
world, let this hope set us upon foot and refresh us, that Christ shall
once come that he may restore tall things. In the mean season, if we see
the relics of sin hang on us, if we be environed on every side with
divers miseries, if the world be full of wasting and scattering abroad,
let us bewail these miseries, yet so that we uphold with the hope of
restoring. And this is the reason why Christ doth not appear by and by,
 <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) because the warfare of the
Church is not yet full,  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) whose
time, seeing it is appointed by God, it is not for us to prevent the
same.  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md)

<span id="x.iii-p29"></span>*Which he spoke.* I do not expound this of
the times alone, but I refer it unto the whole period; so that the sense
is this: That whatsoever he had spoken before of the kingdom of Christ
is witnessed by all the prophets. Certes, the gospel doth win no small
credit hereby, that so soon as God began to show himself to the world,
he did always set Christ before them; after that he began to speak unto
the fathers, he did always lay this foundation of doctrine. By the same
argument Paul commendeth the gospel, both in the beginning of his
Epistle to the Romans, (<span id="x.iii-p29.1"></span>[Ro
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span id="x.iii-p29.1"></span>,.md)
and also in the end, (<span id="x.iii-p29.2"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span id="x.iii-p29.2"></span>,.md)
to wit, that it is no new thing, but promised even from the beginning.
 <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) This is true antiquity, which
is able to purchase credit to doctrine: when as God himself is the
author, the holy prophets the witnesses, and the continual course of
times confirmeth the testimony. This confirmation was especially
necessary for the Jews, who being brought up in the doctrine of the law,
ought to admit nothing but that which agreeth therewith. Therefore Peter
doth command them only to mind those things which the prophets have
testified of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc36029.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="x.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p7.1"></span>Perfidia,”
perfidy.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc36029.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p10.1"></span>Perdimus,”
destroy.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc36029.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="x.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p15.1"></span>Ecliptica,”
elliptic.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc36029.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="x.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p16.1"></span>Coactum,”
forced.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc36029.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="x.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p17.1"></span>Quodam, ut
ita loquar veterno obruti sunt,” are oppressed, so to speak, with a kind
of lethargy.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc36029.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="x.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p20.1"></span>Codices,”
manuscripts.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc36029.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="x.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p23.1"></span>Quamvis
immensa locorum distamia sit remotus,” although, in respect of place, he
is at an immense distance from them.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc36029.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="x.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p24.1"></span>Ambigua
lequtio,” an ambiguous expression.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc36029.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="x.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p26.1"></span>Statim,”
immediately.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc36029.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="x.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p27.1"></span>Completa,”
complete.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc36029.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="x.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p28"></span> “<span
id="x.iii-p28.1"></span>Antivertere,” anticipate.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc36029.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="x.iii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p30"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p30.1"></span>Ab ultima
aetate,” from the remotest age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 3:22-24](cc36030.md)
