[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36050)  [Next](cc36052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
6:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**11.** Then they suborned men, which
said, We have heard this man speak blasphemous words against Moses and
God. **12.** And they moved the people, and the elders, and the scribes.
And invading him, they took him and brought him into the council.
**13.** And they brought forth false witnesses) which said, This man
ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and the
law. **14.** For we have heard him say, That this Jesus of Nazareth
shall destroy this place, and shall change the ordinances which Moses
hath given us. **15.** And when all which sat in the council had
beholden him, they saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Being overcome with the power of
the Spirit, they give over disputing, but they prepare false witnesses,
that with false and slanderous reports, they may oppress him; whereby it
appeareth that they did strive with an evil conscience. For what can be
more unmeet than in their cause to lean unto lies?  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) Admit he were a wicked man, and
guilty, yet he must not have false witness borne against him.  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md) But hypocrites, which shroud
themselves under zeal, do carelessly grant themselves leave to do that.
We see how the Papists at this day corrupt manifest places of Scripture,
and that wittingly, whilst that they will falsely wrest testimonies
against us. I confess, indeed, that they offend for the most part
through ignorance; yet can we find none of them which doth not grant
himself liberty to corrupt both the sense and also the words of the
Scripture, that they may bring our doctrine into contempt;  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md) yea, they slander us monstrously even
in the pulpit. If you ask these Rabbins, whether it be lawful to slander
a man or no, they will deny that it is lawful generally; but when they
come unto us, good zeal doth excuse them, because they think that
nothing is unlawful which may burden us or our cause; therefore they
flatter themselves in lying, falsehood, and dogged impudence. Such
hypocrisy did also blind them of whom Luke speaketh in this place, which
used false witness to put Stephen to death; for when Satan reigneth, he
doth not only prick forward the reprobate unto cruelty, but also blind
their eyes, so that they think that they may do whatsoever they will. We
are specially taught by this example, how dangerous the color of good
zeal is, unless it be governed by the Spirit of God; for it breaketh out
always into furious madness, and, in the mean season, it is a marvelous
visor to cover all manner of wickedness.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>**14.** *We have heard* It shall full
well appear by Stephen’s defense, that he never spake anything touching
Moses or the temple without reverence; and yet, notwithstanding, this
was not laid to his charge for nothing, for he had taught the abrogating
of the law. But they are false witnesses in this, and suborned to lie,
because they corrupt purposely those things which were well and godly
spoken. So Christ was enforced to clear himself, that he came, not to
destroy the law, but to fulfill the law; because, when he had preached
of abrogating the ceremonies, the wicked wrested this unto another
purpose, as if he meant to abolish and take away the whole law.
Furthermore, they wrested that wickedly unto the temple of Jerusalem,
which he spake of his body. What, was it not objected to Paul, that he
taught, “That evil is to be done, that good may come thereof?”

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>Therefore, there is no cause why we
should wonder at this day that that is so falsely misconstrued which we
teach godly, well, and profitably; yea, we must rather persuade
ourselves thus, that the doctrine of the gospel can never be handled so
warily and moderately, but that it shall be subject to false
accusations; for Satan, who is the father of lying, doth always bestir
himself in his office. Again, because there be many things which are
contrary to the reason of the flesh, men are inclined to nothing more
than to admit false reports, which corrupt the true and sincere sense of
doctrine. This malice of Satan, and the sleights, ought to make us more
wary and more circumspect that no preposterous thing, or anything that
is improperly spoken, escape us, wherewith they may be armed to fight
against us; for we must carefully cut off from the wicked that occasion
whereat they snatch. And if we see that, doctrine, which is by us well
and godly delivered, corrupted, deformed, and torn in pieces with false
reports, we must not repent that we have begun, neither yet is there any
cause why we should be more slack hereafter; for it is not meet that we
should be flee from the poisoned and venomous bitings of Satan, which
the Son of God himself could not escape. In the mean season, it is our
part and duty to dash and put away those lies wherewith the truth of God
is burdened, like as we see Christ free the doctrine of the gospel from
unjust infamy. Only let us so prepare ourselves that such indignity and
dishonest dealing may not hinder us in our course.

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>Because we teach that men are so corrupt,
that they are altogether slaves unto sin and wicked lusts, the enemies
do thereupon infer this false accusation, that we deny that men sin
willingly, but that they are enforced thereunto by some other means, so
that they are not in the fault, neither bear any blame; yea, they say
farther, that we quench altogether all desire to do well. Because we
deny that the works of holy men are for their own worthiness
meritorious, because they have always some fault or imperfection in
them, they cavil that we put no difference between the good and the
evil.  <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md) Because we say that man’s
righteousness consisteth in the grace of God alone, and that godly souls
can find rest nowhere else, save only in the death of Christ; they
object that by this means we grant liberty to the flesh, (to do
whatsoever it will,) that the use of the law may no longer remain. When
as we maintain the honor of Christ, which they bestow as it pleaseth
them here and there, after that they have rent it in a thousand pieces
like a prey; they feign that we are enemies to the saints, they falsely
report that we seek the licentiousness of the flesh instead of the
liberty of the Spirit. Whilst that we endeavor to restore the Supper of
the Lord unto his pure and lawful use; they cry out impudently that we
overthrow and destroy the same. Others also which take away all things,
as did the Academics, because that doth not please them which we teach
concerning the secret predestination of God, and that out of the
Scriptures, lay to our charge despitefully, that we make God a tyrant
which taketh pleasure in putting innocent men to death, seeing that he
hath already adjudged those unto eternal death which are as yet unborn,
and other such things as can be said on this behalf; whereas,
notwithstanding, they are sufficiently convicted that we think
reverently of God, and that we speak no otherwise than he teacheth with
his own mouth. It is a hard matter to endure such envy, yet must we not
therefore cease off to defend a good cause. For the truth of God is
precious in his sight, and it ought also to be precious unto us,
although it be unto the reprobate the savor of death unto death, (<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>But now I return unto Stephen’s
accusation, the principal point whereof is this, that he blasphemed God
and Moses. They do, for good considerations, make the injury common to
God and to Moses, because Moses had nothing in his doctrine which was
his own or separated from God. They prove this, because he spake
blasphemously against the temple and the law; furthermore, they make
this the blasphemy, because he said that the coming of Christ had made
an end of the temple and the ceremonies. It is not credible that Stephen
spake thus as they report; but they maliciously wrest those things which
were spoken well and godly, that they may color their false accusation;
but although they had changed nothing in the words, yet Stephen was so
far from doing any injury to the law and the temple, that he could no
way better and more truly praise the same. The Jews did suppose that the
temple was quite dishonored, unless the shadowy estate thereof should
endure for ever, that the law of Moses was frustrate and nothing worth,
unless the ceremonies should be continually in force. But the excellency
of the temple and the profit of the ceremonies consist rather in this,
whilst that they are referred unto Christ as unto their principal
pattern. Therefore, howsoever the accusation hath some color, yet is it
unjust and wicked. And although the fact come in question, that is,
whether the matter be so as the adversaries lay to his charge,
notwithstanding the state \[of the question\] is properly \[one\] of
quality, for they accuse Stephen, because he taught that the form of the
worship of God which was then used should be changed; and they interpret
this to be blasphemy against God and Moses; therefore the controversy is
rather concerning right (as they say) than the fact itself; for the
question is, Whether he be injurious and wicked against God and Moses,
who saith, that the visible temple is an image of a more excellent
sanctuary, wherein dwelleth the fullness of the Godhead, and who
teacheth that the shadows of the law are temporal?

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>*This Jesus of Nazareth.* They speak thus
of Christ disdainfully, as if the remembrance of him were detestable.
Nevertheless, it may be gathered out of their accusations, that Stephen
did, in the abrogating of the law, set the body against the shadows, and
the substance against the figure; for if ceremonies be abolished by
Christ, their truth is spiritual. The Jews, which would have them
continue for ever, did consider nothing in them but that which was
gross, carnal, earthly, and which might be seen with the eyes. Briefly,
if the use of ceremonies were continual, they should be frail and should
vanish away, because they should have nothing but the only external
show, so that they should have no soundness. Therefore, this is their
true perpetuity, when as they are abrogated by the coming of Christ;
because it followeth hereupon that the force and effect thereof doth
consist in Christ.

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>*Shall change the ordinances.* It is out
of all doubt that Stephen meant this of the ceremonial part only; but
because men are wont to be more addicted to external pomp, these men
understand that which was spoken, as if Stephen would bring the whole
law to nothing. The principal *precepts* of the law did indeed concern
the spiritual worship of God, faith, justice, and judgment; but because
these men make more account of the external *rites,* they call the rites
which are commanded concerning the sacrifices, *ordinances of Moses,* by
excellency. This was bred by the bone from the beginning of the world,
and it will never out of the flesh so long as it lasteth.  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md) As at this day the Papists acknowledge
no worship of God save only in their visors; although they differ much
from the Jews, because they follow nothing but the frivolous invention
of men for the ordinances of God.

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>**15.** *And when they had beheld.* Men
do commonly in places of judgment turn their eyes toward the party
arraigned, when as they look for his defense. He saith that Stephen
appeared like to an angel; this is not spoken of his natural face, but
rather of his present countenance. For whereas the countenance of those
which are arraigned useth commonly to be pale, whereas they stammer in
their speech, and show other signs of fear, Luke teacheth that there was
no such thing in Stephen, but that there appeared rather in him a
certain majesty. For the Scripture useth sometimes to borrow a
similitude of angels in this sense; as <span
id="xiii.iii-p19.1"></span>[1Sa
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#009.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p19.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.iii-p19.2"></span>[2Sa
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p19.2"></span>; <span id="xiii.iii-p19.3"></span>[2Sa
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#027.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p19.3"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc36051.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p6.1"></span>Quam in
mendaciis causae suae praesidium constituere,” than to place the defense
of their cause in lies.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc36051.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p7.1"></span>Non
tamen falsis testimoniis est oppremendus,” he ought not to be borne down
with false testimony.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc36051.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p8.1"></span>Ut
doctrinam nostram reddant odiosam,” that they may bring odium on our
doctrine.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc36051.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>Bonorum et malorum discrimen a nobis tolli,”
that we destroy the distinction between good and evil.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc36051.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p17.1"></span>Hoc ab
initio mundi fuit ingenium, et erit usque in finem,” this has been the
disposition from the beginning of the world, and will be even to the
end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc36052.md)
