[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36088)  [Next](cc36090.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
10:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023.md)<span
id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p2"></span>The day following Peter went forth with
them, and certain of the brethren that were of Joppa accompanied him.
**24.** And the next day they entered into Cesarea. And Cornelius waited
for them, having called his kinsfolks and friends together. **26.** And
when Peter entered in, Cornelius meeting him, and falling down at his
feet, worshipped him. **26.** But Peter lifted him up, saying, Arise, I
am also a man. **27.** And when he had talked with him, he entered in,
and he found many assembled together. **28.** And he said to them, You
know that it is wickedness for a man that is a Jew to join himself to a
man that is a stranger, or to enter in unto him; but God hath showed to
me that no man must be called common or unclean. **29.** For this cause
I came without gainsaying, when I was called; therefore, I demand for
what cause ye have called me.

<span id="xvii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p5"></span>*The day following he went forth.* It
should seem that they arrived a little before night  <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) because they were not as yet entered
the city at noon, and the vision which was showed thrice asked no small
time. Therefore, when they had taken their rest all night, they address
themselves to return. Again, there was a point of courtesy in that some
of the faithful do accompany Peter, who were sent, as it is to be
thought, by the whole church, to bring him even to Cesarea. These men
journey with Peter for goodwill and honor’s sake; but the Lord bringeth
them, that they may be witnesses of his grace. So that they are
bountifully rewarded for their thankfulness, when as for confirmation of
their faith they see the kingdom of Christ spread abroad even unto the
Gentiles.

<span id="xvii.iv-p7"></span>**24.** *Cornelius waited for them.* Luke
doth not only commend the godly affection of Cornelius in this point,
that he waited earnestly for Peter’s coming, but because he would have
his friends and kinsfolks to be companions with him in the faith. This
was a thing not without great danger, to call together a company of men,
that they might embrace a new kind of religion. And there wanted not
reasons, under color whereof he might have flattered \[excused\]
himself; for he was not commanded to call others to accompany him, but
rather they were passed over, and he himself was chosen to be made
partaker of so great goodness; but he considered with himself how much
he was indebted  <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md) both to the
glory of God, and also to the salvation of his brethren. He knew that it
was an unjust thing, and a point of discourtesy, to provide for himself
alone, and not to regard others. He counted it a point of filthy
carelessness  <span id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676.md) to hide the
treasure of the gospel under the ground. Therefore, he did that which
the Lord requireth of all his by Isaiah and Micah, that every one exhort
his brother (taking him as it were by the hand) unto the faith.

<span id="xvii.iv-p10"></span>Therefore, Cornelius hath taught us by his
example, that when God revealeth himself unto us we must not choke the
light of his knowledge with sloth or fear, but we must rather endeavor
that our faith may shine before others to give light, and to show the
way to them; for the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven is not such,
that even the least portion can be taken from us, if many be made
partakers thereof; but if others be made co-heirs with us, it shall
rather increase our glory, Furthermore, we must mark how far he is from
vainglory; for he calleth them to be his school-fellows, being himself
ready to learn. This is the true study of godliness, when as together
with zeal there appeareth such plainness,  <span
id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677.md) that we are not ashamed to depend upon
the mouth of God. For many are pricked forward with ambition, to employ
themselves in teaching the ignorant; and foolish babbling discovereth
their folly, when as they huddle out words more earnestly, and they
would have none heard but themselves. But this alone ought to be the
drift of all men, to bring themselves and all the whole world under God,
that when men are subdued unto true humility, he alone may have the
preeminence. Let not him which excelleth in the faculty and grace of
teaching refuse to teach his brethren, so that he be free from boasting,
and proud desire to excel. Let him to whom it was not granted to be a
teacher keep himself within his bounds. Let neither of them desire
mastership, as James teacheth them; but let one so edify another, that
neither the learned, neither the unlearned, be ashamed to be brought
into order.

<span id="xvii.iv-p12"></span>Notwithstanding, it is demanded,  <span
id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678.md) what kinsfolks he could have in Judea,
seeing that he was an alien, and was come thither only by reason of war,
which continued but for a short time? As I affirm nothing, so I embrace
this as most probable, that he had some in his garrison which were his
kinsmen; for neighbors, and those which were of acquaintance were wont
to serve under one captain. And we need not doubt of this, but that
Cornelius’ kinsmen were desirous to be under him, forasmuch as he was a
centurion. He calleth familiar friends <span
id="xvii.iv-p13.2"></span>αναγκαιους, as those are called of the Latins,
Necessarii, which are nearer together.  <span
id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679.md)

<span id="xvii.iv-p15"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p16"></span>**25.** *Falling down at his feet, he
worshipped.* Here is the word <span
id="xvii.iv-p16.1"></span>προσεκυνησεν, which signifieth to testify
honor or worship, either by bowing the knee or ducking down the head, or
by any other gesture. Now, the question is, whether Peter refuteth this
worship for modesty’s sake only, or he disalloweth it as a thing
altogether unlawful? It appeareth that Cornelius’ fact displeased Peter,
by the reason which is by and by added, *Arise, for even I am a man.*
For we may gather that there was some divine thing in that worship,
because he did ascribe unto mortal man the honor which is due to God
alone. But we must not think that Cornelius did count Peter instead of
God; for if he translated God’s honor unto mortal man, where is that
godliness and religion, with the title whereof he was of late adorned?
Therefore, I think that he meant nothing less than to spoil God of his
lawful worship, that he might give it to man; but forasmuch as he meant
to give singular honor unto the prophet and apostle of Christ, he fell
into an immoderate token of reverence, and so he offended in excess.

<span id="xvii.iv-p17"></span>For it can scarce be expressed in words
how prone men are to fall to superstition, when as that honor is given
to the ministers of Christ, which hath any small show of divine worship;
for we fall easily unawares into that whereof we thought full little.
There were less danger in a king or in the chief chieftains of this
world; for he which falleth down before a king keepeth himself within
the bounds of earthly and civil honor. But the case standeth otherwise
in the ministers of Christ; for as their office is spiritual, so if any
man fall down at their feet to worship them, this honor hath in it some
spiritual thing. For we must put a difference between civil worship,
which men use among themselves in respect of civil order, and that under
which is contained religion, or which respecteth directly the honor of
God; as also between laws which are made for temporal regimen, or which
bind the conscience. For certain foolish men are deceived too far, who
think that kneeling is in this place condemned simply and of itself. But
this is that which I said, Cornelius doth not here salute his proconsul,
or the emperor, after any civil sort; but being stricken with wondering
when he saw Peter, he honoreth him as he would have honored God, if he
had been present; so that he giveth man more than is meet, having, as it
were, forgotten himself. He thought nothing less (as I have already
said) than to rob God of any part of his honor, that he might give that
to man which he took from him. But when as the worship which is given to
man hath somewhat which is, as it were, linked with the honor of God,
men fall into a fault contrary to their hope and opinion, so that they
extol man above his degree, and give him the worship which is due to
God.

<span id="xvii.iv-p18"></span>The Papists, omitting that distinction,
snatch only at one member for they handle religious worship only. To the
end they may ascribe some part thereof, with some honest color, unto
creatures, they cut \[subdivide\] it into latria, dulia, and hyperdulia.
They give latria to God alone; as if they should say, that the adoration
of worship is due to him alone. They make dulia common to the dead and
their bones, to images and pictures. They assign their hyperdulia to the
Virgin Mary, and to the cross whereon Christ hanged. That I may omit to
say that they babble through childish ignorance, how many of them do
understand that rotten distinction? Neither do I speak only of the
common sort, but of the chieftains. Therefore, all their worshippings
must needs be infected and corrupt with wicked superstition, seeing they
unadvisedly match creatures with God. But Luke saith not in this place
that Cornelius gave to Peter latria, (or the honor due to God;) he useth
only the general word worshipped, and he addeth, notwithstanding, that
he was reproved, because he did wickedly extol man higher than became
him. Surely, if that new opinion concerning the adoration which is
called dulia had any place, Peter ought to have admonished Cornelius
that he should not go beyond dulia. But because no worship whereunto
religion is annexed, and the respect of God’s honor, doth leave to God
his honor untouched, what man soever it have; therefore, Peter is
content with this one only reason that he is a man. Moreover, I would
gladly know of the Papists, whether they think that John was so
blockish, that he would take the honor due to God, which they call
latria, and give it to the angel? Surely, there was nothing else that
caused him to worship the angel, save only too much and preposterous
reverence, and that in honor of God, whose glory shone in the angel;
notwithstanding his fact is condemned. Therefore, to the end we may give
God that which is his own, let the spiritual worship, under which is
comprehended religion, remain whole and sound to him.

<span id="xvii.iv-p19"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p20"></span>**28.** *Ye know that it is not lawful.*
This seemeth to be no friendly preface, and such as may rather harden
 <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680.md) than win their hearts, when as
they hear that they are accounted so unclean, that with their
familiarity and conference they pollute the saints; which must needs be
a great reproach for them. But it was needful for Peter thus to speak,
lest they should suspect that he had an evil conscience, because,
contrary to the custom delivered by the fathers, he came.  <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681.md) But when as he affirmeth that he was
sent of God, all such suspicion is taken away and purged. Moreover, he
mitigateth very well by these words the offense which did stick in their
minds, by reason of an old grudge which was between the Jews and the
Gentiles, so that he could by no means have entered his speech better,
For he pronounceth that those are now clean who were before unclean, so
that they have mutual fellowship now with the saints. Furthermore,
whereas he said that it was wickedness for the Jews to go in unto the
Gentiles, we must know that this came not so much from the law, as from
the observation of the fathers. God had forbidden, indeed, that they
should (not) entangle themselves with marriages or covenants, (<span
id="xvii.iv-p22.2"></span>[De 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003.md)<span
id="xvii.iv-p22.2"></span>;) they were never forbidden to eat with them,
or to use the common businesses of life. But lest that familiarity might
entice them into that which was forbidden, they observed the custom
delivered by the fathers, so that they did not company together. It is
to no end to dispute here whether that tradition did bind men’s
consciences; for Peter doth not teach  <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682.md) what is lawful according to God, but
what was commonly used.

<span id="xvii.iv-p24"></span>*No man.* He maketh the sum and end of the
vision more plain, when he referreth that unto men which was spoken of
meats. And whereas he saith, that no man is unclean, it may not be
understood of (all) particular persons; for it is certain that all
unbelievers are polluted with uncleanness of conscience, so that they
pollute those things which are otherwise pure, when as they do but touch
them. Paul also saith that their children remain unclean until they be
cleansed by faith. Finally, if faith alone do purge and purify the
hearts of men, unbelief doth make the same profane. But Peter  <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683.md) compareth the Jews and the Gentiles
together in this place; and because the wall of separation was pulled
down, and the covenant of life  <span id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684.md)
is now common to them both alike, he saith that those are not to be
counted aliens who are made partakers of God’s adoption.

<span id="xvii.iv-p27"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p28"></span>**29.** We must also note that which he
addeth, that *he came without gainsaying*, For this is the holy silence
of faith, when as without murmuring against God we receive that meekly
which he commandeth, abandoning  <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685.md)
all contrary reasons which intrude themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_674"></span>[675](cc36089.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p6.1"></span>Sub
vesperum,” towards evening.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[676](cc36089.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p8.1"></span>Quantum...
deberet,” how much he owed.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[677](cc36089.htm#fr_676.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p9.1"></span>Foedae
socordiae,” shameful sloth.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[678](cc36089.htm#fr_677.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p11"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iv-p11.1"></span>Simplicitas,” simplicity, singleness of mind.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[679](cc36089.htm#fr_678.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p13"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iv-p13.1"></span>Quaeritur tamen,” it is asked, however.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[680](cc36089.htm#fr_679.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p14.1"></span>Qui
arctiore vinculo inter se conjuncti sunt,” who are bound together by a
closer tie.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[681](cc36089.htm#fr_680.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p21"></span> “<span
id="xvii.iv-p21.1"></span>Exasperet,” exasperate.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[682](cc36089.htm#fr_681.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p22.1"></span>Quasi
legis contemptor,” as if he had been a despiser of the law, omitted.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[683](cc36089.htm#fr_682.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p23.1"></span>Ex
professo,” professedly, omitted.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[684](cc36089.htm#fr_683.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p25.1"></span>Tantum,”
only, omitted.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[685](cc36089.htm#fr_684.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p26.1"></span>Et
salutis,” and salvation, omitted.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[686](cc36089.htm#fr_685.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="xvii.iv-p29.1"></span>Procul
abigendo,” driving far away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 10:30-33](cc36090.md)
