[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36009)  [Next](cc36011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**6.** And when they, were gathered
together, they asked him, saying, Lord, dost thou at this time restore
the kingdom unto Israel? **7.** And he said unto them, It is not for you
to know the times and the seasons, which the Father hath placed in his
own ­power. **8.** But you shall receive power when as the Spirit shall
come up. on you: and you shall be witnesses unto me, as well at
Jerusalem as in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the farthest part of
the earth.

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span><span id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>**6.** He showeth that the apostles were
gathered together when as this question was moved, that we may know that
it came not of the foolishness of one or two that it was moved, but it
was moved by the common consent of them all; but marvelous is their
rudeness, that when as they had been diligently instructed by the space
of three whole years, they betray no less ignorance than if they had
heard never a word. There are as many errors in this question as words.
They ask him as concerning a kingdom; but they dream of an earthly
kingdom, which should flow with riches, with dainties, with external
peace, and with such like good things; and while they assign the present
time to the restoring of the same. they desire to triumph before the
battle; for before such time as they begin to work they will have their
wages. They are also greatly deceived herein, in that they restrain
Christ’s kingdom unto the carnal Israel, which was to be spread abroad,
even unto the uttermost parts of the world. Furthermore, there is this
fault in all their whole question, namely, that they desire to know
those things which are not meet for them to know. No doubt they were not
ignorant what the prophets did prophesy concerning the restoring of
David’s kingdom, they had oftentimes heard their Master preach
concerning this matter. Lastly, It was a saying common in every man’s
mouth, that, in the most miserable captivity of the people, they should
all be comforted, with the expectation of the kingdom that should be.
Now, they hoped for the restoring hereof at the coming of the Messias,
and hereupon was it that so soon as the apostles saw their Master Christ
risen from the dead, they straightway began to think thereupon; but, in
the meantime, they declared thereby how bad scholars they were under so
good a Master. Therefore doth Christ briefly comprehend  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) in this short answer all the errors
whereinto they fell in this their question, as I shall straightway
declare. To restore, in this place, doth signify to set up again that
which was fallen, and through many ruins grown out of fashion; for out
of the dry stock of Isai \[Jesse\] should spring a Branch, and the
tabernacle of David, which was laid waste,  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) should be erected and set on foot again.

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span><span id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>**7.** *It is not for you to know, etc.*
This is a general reprehension of the whole question. For it was too
curious for them to desire to know that whereof their Master would have
them ignorant; but this is the true means to become wise, namely, to go
as far forward in learning as our Master Christ goeth in teaching, anal
willingly to be ignorant of those things which he doth conceal from us.
But forasmuch as there is naturally engendered in us a certain foolish
and vain curiosity, and also a certain rash kind of boldness, we must
diligently observe this admonition of Christ, whereby he correcteth both
these vices. But to the end we may know what his meaning is hereby, we
must mark the two members which he joineth together. “It is not for you”
(saith he) “to know those things which the Father hath placed in his own
power.” He speaketh, indeed, of the times and seasons; but seeing there
is the like reason in other things, we must think this to be a universal
precept, That being contented with the revelation of God, we think it an
heinous crime to inquire any further. This is the true mean between the
two extremes. The Papists, that they may have somewhat wherewith to
cloak their gross ignorance, say for themselves, that they omit the
hidden mysteries of God, as though our whole faith and religion did
consist upon any thing else than upon the hidden mysteries of God; then
may we take our leave of Christ and his gospel, if we must abstain
utterly from the hidden mysteries of God. But we must keep, as I said
before a mean herein; for we must be desirous to learn so far as our
heavenly Master doth teach us; but as for such things as he will have us
ignorant of, let mine be so bold as to inquire after them that we may be
wise with sobriety. Therefore, so often as we are vexed with this
foolish desire of knowing more than we ought, let us call to mind this
saying of Christ, “It is not for you to know.” For unless we will burst
in against his will and commandment, this shall have force and strength
enough to restrain the outrageousness of our wits.

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span>Now, as touching the foreknowledge of
times, Christ condemneth only the searching out thereof which reacheth
beyond the measure of God’s revelation; and that is to be noted out of
the second member, as before I have said, “which the Father hath placed
in his own power.” Truth it is, that God hath in his own power winter
and summer, and the rest of the seasons of the year, cold and heat, fair
weather and foul. But because he hath testified that the course of the
years shall be perpetual, (<span id="viii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ge
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p10.1"></span>,) he is said not to have placed that in his
own power which he hath revealed unto men. What thing soever the
philosophers or husbandmen do comprehend or understand by art, by
learning, by judgment, or experience, all that doth God not retain unto
himself, because he hath after a certain sort revealed it unto them,
(<span id="viii.iii-p10.2"></span>[Ge
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p10.2"></span>.) The same opinion must we have of the
prophets; for it was their office to know those things which God did
reveal. But we must be ignorant of the secret events of things, as
touching the time to come; for there is nothing which may make us more
slack in doing our duties, than too careful an inquisition herein, for
we will always take counsel according to the future event of things; but
the Lord, by hiding the same from us, doth prescribe unto us what we
ought to do. Here ariseth a conflict, because we will not willingly
suffer God to have that which is his own, namely, the sole government
and direction of things which are to come; but we cast ourselves into a
strange and inordinate carefulness. To conclude, Christ forbiddeth us to
apply those things unto ourselves, which God doth challenge as proper to
himself alone. Of this sort is the foreknowledge of those things which
God hath taken to himself to govern and direct, according to his own
pleasure, far contrary to our opinion, and otherwise than we could
invent.  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span><span id="viii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>**8.** *You shall receive power.* Our
Savior Christ doth here call them back as well unto the promise of God
as also unto his commandment, which was the readiest way to bridle their
curiosity. Curiosity doth rise almost always either of idleness or else
of distrust; distrust is cured by meditating upon the promises of God.
And his commandments do tell us how we ought to occupy ourselves and
employ our studies. Therefore, he commandeth his disciples to wait for
the promise of God, and to be diligent in executing their office
whereunto God had called them. And in the mean season he noteth  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) their great hastiness, in that they did
preposterously catch at those gifts which were proper unto the Holy
Spirit, when as they were not as yet endued with the same. Neither did
they take the right way herein, in that being called to go on warfare,
they desire (omitting their labor) to lake their ease in their inn.
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) Therefore, when he saith, *you
shall receive power,* he admonisheth them of their imbecility, lest they
follow before the time those things whereunto they cannot attain. It may
be read very well either way, You shall receive the power of the Spirit;
or, The Spirit coming upon you; yet the latter way seemeth to be the
better, because it doth more fully declare their defect trod want, until
such time as the Spirit should come upon them.

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span>*You shall be my witnesses* He correcteth
two errors of theirs in this one sentence. For, first, he showeth that
they must fight before they can triumph; and, secondly, that the nature
of Christ’s kingdom was of another sort than they judged it to have
been. Therefore, saith he, *You shall be my witnesses;* that is, the
husbandman must first work before he can reap his fruits. Hence, nay we
learn that we must first study how we may come unto the kingdom of God,
before we begin to dispute  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) about
the state of the life to come. Many there be which do curiously inquire
what manner \[of\] blessedness that shall be which they shall enjoy
after they shall be received into the everlasting kingdom of heaven, not
having any care how they may come to enjoy the same.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) They reason concerning the quality of the
life to come, which they shall have with Christ; but they never think
that they must be partakers of his death, that they may live together
with him, (<span id="viii.iii-p18.2"></span>[2Ti
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p18.2"></span>.) Let every man, therefore, apply himself in
his work which he hath in hand; let us fight stoutly under Christ’s
banner; let us go forward manfully and courageously  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) in our vocation, and God will give fruit
in due time (and tide.) There followeth another correction, when he
saith, that they must be his *witnesses.* For hereby he meant to drive
out of his disciples’ minds that fond and false imagination which they
had conceived of the terrestrial kingdom, because he showeth unto them
briefly, that his kingdom consisteth in the preaching of the gospel.
There was no cause, therefore, why they should dream of riches,  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) of external principality, or any other
earthly thing, whilst they heard that Christ did then reign when as he
subdueth unto himself (all the whole) world by the preaching of the
gospel. Whereupon it followeth that he doth reign spiritually, and not
after any worldly manner. And that which the apostles had conceived of
the carnal kingdom proceeded from the common error of their nation;
neither was it marvel if they were deceived herein.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) For when we measure the same with our
understanding, what else can we conceive but that which is gross and
terrestrial? Hereupon it cometh, that, like brute beasts, we only desire
that which is commodious for our flesh, and therefore we rather catch
that which is present. Wherefore, we see that those which held opinion,
that Christ should reign as a king in this world a thousand years  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) fell into the like folly. Hereupon, also,
they applied all such prophecies as did describe the kingdom of Christ
figuratively by the similitude of earthly kingdoms unto the commodity of
their flesh; whereas, notwithstanding, it was God’s purpose to lift up
their minds higher. As for us, let us learn to apply our minds to hear
the gospel preached, lest we be entangled in like errors, which
prepareth a place in our hearts for the kingdom of Christ.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span>*In all Judea* Here he showeth, first,
that they must not work for the space of one day only, while that he
assigneth the whole world unto them, in which they must publish the
doctrine of the gospel. Furthermore, he refuteth  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) the opinion which they had conceived of
Israel. They supposed those to be Israelites only which were of the seed
of Abraham according to the flesh. Christ testifieth that they must
gather thereunto all Samaria; which, although they were nigh in
situation, yet were they far distant in mind and heart. He showeth that
all other regions far distant, and also profane, must be united unto the
holy people, that they may be all partakers of one and the same grace.
It is evident (<span id="viii.iii-p25.2"></span>[Joh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p25.2"></span>.md)
how greatly the Jews did detest the Samaritans. Christ commanded that
(the wall of separation being broken down) they be both made one body,
(<span id="viii.iii-p25.3"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p25.3"></span>,) that his kingdom may be erected
everywhere. By naming Judea and Jerusalem, which the apostles had tried
 <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) to be full of most deadly enemies,
he foretelleth them of the great business and trouble which was prepared
for them, that he may cause them to cease to think upon this triumph
which they hoped to have been so nigh at hand.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) Neither could they be a little afraid to
come before so cruel enemies, more to inflame their rage and fury. And
here we see how he giveth the former place unto the Jews, because they
are, as it were, the first-begotten, (<span
id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>[Ex
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>.) Notwithstanding, he calleth those Gentiles
one with another, which were before strangers from the hope of
salvation, (<span id="viii.iii-p27.3"></span>[Eph
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011.md)<span
id="viii.iii-p27.3"></span>.) Hereby we learn, that the gospel was
preached everywhere by the manifest commandment of Christ, that it might
also come unto us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc36010.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p6.1"></span>Perstringit,” reprimand.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc36010.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p7.1"></span>Misere
dissipatum,” miserably laid waste.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc36010.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>Supra
ingenii nostri captum,” beyond the reach of our minds.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc36010.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p14.1"></span>Perstringit,” reprimandeth.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc36010.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p15.1"></span>Molliter quiescere,” to take soft repose.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc36010.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>Subtiliter philosophemur,” we subtlely
philosophize.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc36010.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p18.1"></span>Atqui
in primis renunciandum erat mundo,” but they ought, in the first
instance, to renounce the world, omitted.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc36010.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p19.1"></span>Indefessis animis,” with unwearied minds,
indefatigably.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc36010.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>Delicias,” dainties.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc36010.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>Hac in
parte omnes fuisse hallucinatos,” that they all labored under this
hallucination.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc36010.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>Chiliastas,” the Chiliasts.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc36010.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> Transpose thus: As for us, lest we be
entangled in like errors, let us learn to apply our minds to hear the
gospel preached, (a preached gospel,) which prepareth a place in our
heart for the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc36010.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>Oblique refutat,” indirectly refuteth.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc36010.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p25.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>Experti sunt,” experienced.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc36010.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="viii.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p27.1"></span>Ut de
propinquo triumpho cogitare desinant,” that they may cease to think of a
near triumph.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 1:9-11](cc36011.md)
