[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36018)  [Next](cc36020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
2:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**22.** Ye men of Israel, hear these words;
Jesus of Nazareth, a man showed towards you of God, by powers and
wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as you
yourselves know: **23.** Him, I say, have ye taken, being delivered by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, by the hands of wicked
men, and have slain him, having fastened him to the cross. **24.** Whom
God hath raised up, having loosed the sorrows of death, forasmuch as it
was impossible that he should be holden of it.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span><span id="ix.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**22.** *Jesus of Nazareth* Now doth Peter
apply unto his purpose the prophecy of Joel; namely, that the Jews may
thereby know that the time of restoring was present; and that Christ was
given them for this purpose. For this promise was no otherwise to be
fulfilled, save only by the coming of the Mediator. And this is the
right use of all those gifts which we have by Christ, whilst that they
bring us unto Christ, as unto a fountain. But he cometh hither by little
and little. For he doth not by and by in the beginning affirm that Jesus
was Christ; but he saith only that he was a man sent of God; and that
doth he prove by his miracles. Afterward he addeth, that he rose from
death when he was slain. Whereby it appeareth more certainly and more
fully that he was not one of the prophets, but the very Son of God, who
was promised to be the repairer of all things. Let this, therefore, be
the first member, that Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of God by
manifest testimonies, so that he could not be despised as some base and
obscure person. The old interpreter did not evil  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) translate <span
id="ix.iv-p6.2"></span>ὑποδεδειγμενον *approved.* And Erasmus is
deceived, who thinketh that he did read it otherwise; and he himself did
not express Luke’s mind, when as he translated it given.  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) For, seeing that word doth signify among
the Grecians *to show,* whereupon the mathematicians also call those
arguments whereby they set a thing, as it were, before a man’s eyes,
<span id="ix.iv-p7.2"></span>αποδειξεις, or *demonstrations,* Luke meant
to say, that Jesus came not unknown, and without any testimony or
approbation, but that those miracles which God showed by him served to
this end, that he might be famous and excellent. Therefore he saith that
he was showed toward the Jews; because God would have his Son to be
accounted excellent and great among them; as if he should say, that
miracles were not appointed for other nations, but for the Jews, that
they might know that Jesus was sent unto them of God.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>*By great works.* He calleth miracles by
these three names. And because God doth show forth his power in them
after a new and unwonted sort, or doth, at least, procure greater
admiration, they are, for good causes, called *great works.*  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) For we are commonly more moved when
any extraordinary thing doth happen. In which respect they are also
called *wonders,*  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) because they
make us astonished. And for this cause are they called *signs,* because
the Lord will not have men’s minds to stay there, but to be lifted up
higher; as they are referred unto another end. He put in three words, to
the end he might the more extol Christ’s miracles, and enforce the
people, by his heaping and laying of words together, to consider the
same. Furthermore, he maketh not Christ the chief author, but only the
minister; because, as we have already said, he determined to go forward
by degrees. Notwithstanding, here may a question be asked, whether
miracles do suffice to be a sufficient and just approbation \[proof\] or
no? Because by this means inchanters might cause their legerdemain
 <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) to be believed. I answer, that
the juggling casts of Satan do much differ from the power of God. Christ
saith elsewhere, that the kingdom of Antichrist shall be in wonders, but
he addeth by and by, *in lying wonders,* (<span
id="ix.iv-p11.2"></span>[2Th 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)<span
id="ix.iv-p11.2"></span>.) if any man object, that we cannot easily
discern, because he saith that they shall have so great color that they
shall deceive (if it could be) the very elect; I answer again, that this
error proceedeth only from our own want of wit, because we are so dull;
for God doth show his power manifestly enough. Therefore, there is
sufficient approbation of the doctrine and of the ministry in the
miracles which God doth work, so that we be not blind. And whereas it is
not of sufficient force among the wicked, because they may now and then
be deceived with the false miracles of Satan, this must be imputed unto
their own blindness; but whosoever hath a pure heart, he doth also know
God with the pure eyes of his mind, so often as he doth show himself.
Neither can Satan otherwise delude us, save only when, through the
wickedness of our heart, our judgment is corrupt and our eyes blinded,
or at least bleared through our own slothfulness.

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span><span id="ix.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span>**23.** *Him have ye slain.* He maketh
mention of the death of Christ for this cause chiefly, that the
resurrection might the more assuredly be believed. It was a thing full
well known among the Jews that Christ was crucified. Therefore, in that
he rose again, it is a great and wonderful token of his Divine power. In
the mean season, to the end he may prick their consciences with the
feeling of sin, he saith that they slew him; not that they crucified him
with their own hands, but because the people, with one voice, desired to
have him put to death. And although many of the hearers unto whom he
speaketh did not consent unto that wicked and ungodly cruelty, yet doth
he justly impute the same to the nation; because all of them had defiled
themselves either with their silence, or else through their
carelessness. Neither hath the cloak and color  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) of ignorance any place, forasmuch as
he was showed before of God. This guiltiness, therefore, under which he
bringeth them, is a preparation unto repentance.

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>*By the determinate counsel* He removeth a
stumbling-block; because it seemeth, at the first blush, to be a thing
very inconvenient, \[unaccountable,\] that that man whom God had so
greatly adorned, being afterward laid open to all manner of mocking,
doth suffer so reproachful a death. Therefore, because the cross of
Christ doth commonly use to trouble us at the first sight, for this
cause Peter declareth that he suffered nothing by chance, or because he
wanted power to deliver himself, but because it was so determined (and
appointed) by God. For this knowledge alone, that the death of Christ
was ordained by the eternal counsel of God, did cut off all occasion of
foolish and wicked cogitation’s, and did prevent all offenses which
might otherwise be conceived. For we must know this, that God doth
decree nothing in vain or rashly; whereupon it followeth that there was
just cause for which he would have Christ to suffer. The same knowledge
of God’s providence is a step to consider the end and fruit of Christ’s
death. For this meeteth us by and by in the counsel of God, that the
just was delivered  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) for our
sins, and that his blood was the price of our death.

<span id="ix.iv-p17"></span>And here is a notable place touching the
providence of God, that we may know that as well our life as our death
is governed by it. Luke intreateth, indeed, of Christ; but in his person
we have a mirror, which doth represent unto us the universal providence
of God, which doth stretch itself throughout the whole world; yet doth
it specially shine unto us who are the members of Christ. Luke setteth
down two things in this place, the *foreknowledge* and the *decree* of
God. And although the foreknowledge of God is former in order, (because
God doth first see what he will determine, before he doth indeed
determine the same,) yet doth he put the same after the counsel and
decree of God, to the end we may know that God would nothing, neither
appointed anything, save that which he had long before directed to his
\[its\] end. For men do oftentimes rashly decree many things, because
they decree them suddenly. Therefore, to the end Peter may teach that
the counsel of God is not without reason, he coupleth also therewithal
his foreknowledge. Now, we must distinguish these two, and so much the
more diligently, because many are deceived in this point. For passing
over the counsel of God, wherewith he doth (guide and) govern the whole
world, they catch at his bare foreknowledge. Thence cometh that common
distinction, that although God doth foresee all things, yet doth he lay
no necessity upon his creatures. And, indeed, it is true that God doth
know this thing or that thing before, for this cause, because it shall
come to pass; but as we see that Peter doth teach that God did not only
foresee that which befell Christ, but it was decreed by him. And hence
must be gathered a general doctrine; because God doth no less show his
providence in governing the whole world, than in ordaining and
appointing the death of Christ. Therefore, it belongeth to God not only
to know before things to come, but of his own will to determine what he
will have done. This second thing did Peter declare when he said, that
he was delivered by the certain and determinate counsel of God.
Therefore, the foreknowledge of God is another thing than the will of
God, whereby he governeth and ordereth all things.

<span id="ix.iv-p18"></span>Some, which are of quicker sight, confess
that God doth not only foreknow, but also govern with his beck what
things soever are done in this world. Nevertheless, they imagine a
confused government, as if God did give liberty to his creatures to
follow their own nature. They say that the sun is ruled by the will of
God, because, in giving light to us, he doth his duty, which was once
enjoined him by God. They think that man hath free-will after this sort
left him, because his nature is disposed or inclined unto the free
choice of good and evil. But they which think so do feign that God
sitteth idle in heaven. The Scripture teacheth us far otherwise, which
ascribeth unto God a special government in all things, and in man’s
actions. Notwithstanding, it is our duty to ponder and consider to what
end it teacheth this; for we must beware of doting speculations,
wherewith we see many carried away. The Scripture will exercise our
faith, that we may know that we are defended by the hand of God, lest we
be subject to the injuries of Satan and the wicked. It is good for us to
embrace this one thing; neither did Peter mean anything else in this
place. Yea, we have an example set before us in Christ, whereby we may
learn to be wise with sobriety. For it is out of question, that his
flesh was subject to corruption, according to nature. But the providence
of God did set the same free. If any man ask, whether the bones of
Christ could be broken or no? it is not to be denied, that they were
subject to breaking naturally, yet could there no bone be broken,
because God had so appointed and determined, (<span
id="ix.iv-p18.1"></span>[Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)<span id="ix.iv-p18.1"></span>.)
By this example (I say) we are taught so to give the chiefest room to
God’s providence, that we keep ourselves within our bounds, and that we
thrust not ourselves rashly and indiscreetly into the secrets of God,
whither our eyesight doth not pierce.

<span id="ix.iv-p19"></span>*By the hands of the wicked* Because Peter
seemeth to grant that the wicked did obey God, hereupon followeth two
absurdities;  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) the one, either
that God is the author of evil, or that men do not sin, what wickedness
soever they commit. I answer, concerning the second, that the wicked do
nothing less than obey God, howsoever they do execute that which God
hath determined with himself. For obedience springeth from a voluntary
affection; and we know that the wicked have a far other purpose. Again,
no man obeyeth God save he which knoweth his will. Therefore, obedience
dependeth upon the knowledge of God’s will. Furthermore, God hath
revealed unto us his will in the law; wherefore, those men  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) do obey God, who do that alone which
is agreeable to the law of God; and, again, which submit themselves
willingly to his government. We see no such thing in all the wicked,
whom God doth drive hither and thither, they themselves being ignorant.
No man, therefore, will say that they are excusable under this color,
because they obey God; forasmuch as both the will of God must be sought
in his law, and they, so much as in them lieth, do  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) to resist God. As touching the other
point, I deny that God is the author of evil; because there is a certain
noting of a wicked affection in this word. For the wicked deed is
esteemed according to the end whereat a man aimeth. When men commit
theft or murder, they offend  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)
for this cause, because they are thieves or murderers; and in theft and
murder there is a wicked purpose. God, who useth their wickedness, is to
be placed in the higher degree. For he hath respect unto a far other
thing, because he will chastise the one, and exercise the patience of
the other; and so he doth never decline from his nature, that is, from
perfect righteousness. So that, whereas Christ was delivered by the
hands of wicked men, whereas he was crucified, it came to pass by the
appointment and ordinance of God. But treason, which is of itself
wicked, and murder, which hath in it so great wickedness, must not be
thought to be the works of God.

<span id="ix.iv-p24"></span><span id="ix.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p25"></span>**24.** *Having loosed the sorrows of
death.* By the sorrows of death I understand some farther thing than the
bodily sense or feeling. For those which duly consider the nature of
death, because they hear that it is the curse of God, must needs
conceive that God is angry in death. Hence cometh marvelous horror,
wherein there is greater misery than in death itself. Furthermore,
Christ died upon this occasion that he might take upon him our
guiltiness. That inward fear of conscience, which made him so afraid
that he sweat blood when he presented himself before the throne and
tribunal seat of God, did more vex him, and brought upon him greater
horror, than all the torments of the flesh. And whereas Peter saith,
that Christ did wrestle with such sorrows, and doth also declare that he
had the victory, by this it cometh to pass that the faithful ought not
now to be afraid of death; for death hath not the like quality now which
was in Adam; because by the victory of Christ the curse is swallowed up,
(<span id="ix.iv-p25.1"></span>[1Co
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054)<span id="ix.iv-p25.1"></span>.)
We feel, indeed, yet the pricking of sorrows, but such as do not wholly
wound us, whilst that we hold up the buckler of faith against them. He
added a reason, because it was impossible that Christ should be
oppressed by death, who is the author of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc36019.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p6.1"></span>Male,” ill,
improperly.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc36019.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ix.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p7.1"></span>Exhibitum,”
exhibited.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc36019.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p9.1"></span>Virtutes.”

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc36019.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ix.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p10.1"></span>Prodigia,”
prodigies.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc36019.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ix.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p11.1"></span>Suis
imposturis fidem facerent magi,” magians might procure credit for their
impostures.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc36019.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ix.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p14.1"></span>Praetextus,”
pretext.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc36019.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ix.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>Morti
addictum,” subjected to death.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc36019.htm#fr_105) <span
id="ix.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p20.1"></span>Ex duobus
absurdis alterutrum,” one of two absurdities.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc36019.htm#fr_106) <span
id="ix.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p21.1"></span>Demum,”
only.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc36019.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ix.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p22.1"></span>Cupiant,”
desire.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc36019.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ix.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p23.1"></span>Peccant,”
they sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 2:25-31](cc36020)
