[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36034)  [Next](cc36036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
4:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013.md)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**13.** And when they saw the boldness of
Peter and John, and considered that they were men unlearned and
ignorant, they wondered; and they knew them, that they had been with
Jesus. **14.** And when they saw the man that had been healed standing
with them, they could not say against it. **15.** But when they had
commanded them to depart out of the council, they consulted among
themselves, **16.** Saying, What shall we do to these men? For a
manifest sign is done by them, and it is openly known to all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; neither can we deny it. **17.** But lest it be
noised any farther among the people, in threatening let us threaten
them, that they speak not henceforth to any man in this name. **18.**
And then when they had called them, they charged them that they should
not speak at all, or teach, in the name of Jesus.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span><span id="xi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Here may we see an evil conscience;
for being destitute of right and reason, they break out into open
tyranny, the hatred whereof they had essayed to escape. Therefore, he
doth first declare that they were convict, that it may appear that they
did war against God wittingly and willingly like giants. For they see a
manifest work of his in the man which was healed, and yet do they
wickedly set themselves against him. In as much as they know that Peter
and John were men unlearned and ignorant, they acknowledge that there
was somewhat more than belongeth to man in their boldness; therefore
they are enforced to wonder whether they will or no. Yet they break out
into such impudence, that they fear not to seek some tyrannous means to
oppress the truth. When as they confess that it is a manifest sign, they
condemn themselves therein of an evil conscience. When they say that it
is known to all men, they declare that passing over God they have
respect unto men only. For they betray their want of shame thereby, that
they would not have doubted to turn their back if there had been any
color of denial. And when they ask what they shall do, they make their
obstinate wickedness known unto all men. For they would have submitted
themselves unto God, unless devilish fury had carried them away to some
other purpose. This is the spirit of giddiness and madness, therewith
God doth make his enemies drunk. So when they hope shortly after that
they can by threatenings bring it about, that the same shall go no
farther, what can be more foolish? For after they have put two simple
men to silence, shall the arm of God be broken?

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>**17.** *In threatening let us threaten.*
Here may we see what a deadly evil power void of the fear of God is. For
when that religion and reverence which ought doth not reign, the more
holy the place is which a man doth possess, the more boldly  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) doth he rage. For which cause we
\[should\] always take good heed that the wicked be not preferred unto
the government of the Church. And those which are called to this
function must behave themselves reverently and modestly, lest they seem
to be armed to do hurt. But and if it so happen they abuse their honor,
the Spirit declareth there, as in a glass, what small account we ought
to make of their decrees and commandments.  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) The authority of the pastors hath
certain bounds appointed which they may not pass. And if they dare be so
bold, we may lawfully refuse to obey them; for if we should, it were in
us great wickedness, as it followeth now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc36035.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>Audacius,”
audaciously.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc36035.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xi.iii-p9.1"></span>Quam pro
nihilo ducendum sit quicquid decernunt et jubent,” that whatever they
order and decree ought to be held as null.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 4:19-23](cc36036.md)
