[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36099)  [Next](cc36101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** About that time Herod the king
stretched out his hand to afflict certain of the Church. **2.** And he
killed James the brother of John with the sword. **3.** And when he saw
that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to take Peter also. (Then were
the days of sweet \[unleavened\] bread.) **4.** When he had taken him
also, he put him in prison, delivering him to four quaternions of
soldiers to be kept; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the
people. **5.** Therefore, Peter was kept in prison; but continual prayer
was made for him of the Church of \[to\] God.

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span><span id="xix.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**1.** Here followeth new persecution raised
by Herod. We see that the Church had some short truce, that it might, as
it were, by a short breathing, recover some courage against the time to
come, and that it might then fight afresh. So at this day there is no
cause why the faithful, having borne the brunts of one or two conflicts,
should promise themselves rest,  <span id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747)
or should desire such a calling  <span id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748)
as old overworn soldiers use to have. Let this suffice them if the Lord
grant them some time wherein they may recover their strength. This Herod
was Agrippa the greater, \[elder,\] the son of Aristobulus, whom his
father slew. Josephus doth no where call him Herod, it may be, because
he had a brother who was king of Chalcis, whose name was Herod. This man
was incensed to afflict the Church not so much for any love he had to
religion, as that by this means he might flatter the common people which
did otherwise not greatly favor him; or rather, he was moved hereunto
with tyrannical cruelty, because he was afraid of innovation, which
tyrants do always fear, lest it trouble the quiet estate of their
dominion. Yet it is likely that he did shed innocent blood, that,
according to the common craft of kings, he might gratify a furious
people; because St. Luke will shortly after declare that Peter the
apostle was put into prison that he might be a pleasant spectacle.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>*He killed James.* Undoubtedly the cruelty of
this mad man was restrained and bridled by the secret power of God. For
assuredly he would never have been content with one or two murders, and
so have abstained from persecuting the rest, but he would rather have
piled up martyrs upon heaps, unless God had set his hand against him,
and defended his flock. So when we see that the enemies of godliness,
being full of fury, do not commit horrible slaughters, that they may mix
and imbrue all things with blood, let us know that we need not thank
their moderation and clemency for this; but because, when the Lord doth
spare his sheep, he doth not suffer them to do so much hurt as they
would. This Herod was not so courteous, that he would stick to win peace
or the people’s favor with the punishment of an hundred men or more.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>Wherefore, we must think with ourselves that
he was tied by one that had the rule over him, that he might not more
vehemently oppress the Church. He slew James, as, when any sedition is
raised, the heads and captains go first to the pot,  <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749) that the common riff-raft may by their
punishment be terrified. Nevertheless, the Lord suffered him whom he had
furnished with constancy to be put to death, that by death he might get
the victory as a strong and invincible champion. So that the attempts of
tyrants notwithstanding, God maketh choice of sweet-smelling sacrifices
to establish the faith of his gospel. Luke calleth this games which was
slain the brother of John, that he may distinguish him from the son of
Alpheus. For whereas some make him a third cousin of Christ’s, who was
only some one of the disciples, I do not like of that, because I am by
strong reasons persuaded to think that there were no more. Let him that
will, repair to the second to the Galatians. Therefore, I think that the
apostle and the son of Alpheus were all one, whom the Jews threw down
headlong from the top of the temple, whose death was so highly Commended
for his singular praise of holiness.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span><span id="xix.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**3.** *Seeing that it pleased the Jews.* It
appeareth more plainly by this that Herod was not moved either with any
zeal that he had to Moses’ law or with any hatred of the gospel, thus to
persecute the Church; but that he might provide for his own private
affairs, for he proceedeth in his cruelty that he may win the people’s
favor; therefore we must know that there be diverse causes for which the
Church is assaulted on every side. Oftentimes perverse zeal driveth the
wicked headlong to fight for their superstitions, and that they may
sacrifice an offering to their idols by shedding innocent blood; but the
more part is moved with private commodities only, so in times past, at
such time as Nero knew, after the burning of the city, that he was
loathed and hated of the people, he sought by this subtle means to get
into favor again, or, at least, he went about to stay their slanders and
complaints, by putting certain thousands of the godly to death.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>In like sort, that Herod may win the
people’s favor, who did love him but a little, he putteth the Christians
to death. as a price wherewith he might redeem their favor; and such is
our estate at this day, for though all men run by troops upon the
members of Christ,  <span id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750) yet few are
pooked  <span id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751) forward with
superstition; but some sell themselves to antichrist, like profitable
bond-slaves; other some bear with, and commend the outrageous outcries
of monks and the common people. But we, in the mean season, being
abjects, must be glad to bear their mocks; yet there is one comfort
which doth excellently keep us on foot, in that we know that our blood
is precious in the sight of Almighty God, which the world cloth
shamefully abuse; yea, the more shamefully and reproachfully the wicked
do handle us, so much the less shall God’s goodness forsake us.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span><span id="xix.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**4.** *Adding four quaternions of
soldiers.* Luke doth, in this place, declare by circumstances that Peter
was, as it were, shut up in his grave, so that it might seem that he was
quite past hope; for as they divided the day and night into four parts
by three hours, so Herod divided the watches, that four soldiers might
always keep watch, and that one quaternion might succeed another every
third hour. He showeth the cause why he was not forthwith put to death,
because it had been an heinous offense to put him to death in the Easter
holidays; therefore, Herod doth not delay the time as doubtful what to
do, but doth only wait for opportunity; yea, he maketh choice of a time,
when as his gift may be more plausible, because there came a great
multitude together from all parts unto the holy day.  <span
id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752)

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span><span id="xix.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**5.** *But prayers were made.* Luke
teacheth here that the faithful did not, in the mean season, foreslow
\[neglect\] their duty, Peter stood in the forward  <span
id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753) alone; but all the rest fought with
their prayers together with him, and they aided him so much as they were
able. Hereby we do also gather, that they were not discouraged, for by
prayer they testify that they persist so much as they are able in
defense of the cause, for which Peter is in danger of life. This place
teacheth, first, how we ought to be affected when we see our brethren
persecuted by the wicked for the testimony of the gospel, for if we be
slothful, and if we be not inwardly touched with their dangers, we do
not only defy and them of the due duty of love, but also treacherously
forsake the confession of our faith; and, assuredly, if the cause be
common, yea, if they fight for our safety and salvation, we do not only
forsake them, but even Christ and ourselves; and the present necessity
requireth, that they be far more fervent in prayer than commonly they
are, whosoever will be counted Christians. We see some of our brethren
(being brought to extreme poverty) live in exile, others we see
imprisoned, many cast into stinking dungeons, many consumed with fire,
yea, we see new torments oftentimes invented, whereby being long
tormented they may feel death. Unless these provocations sharpen our
desire to pray, we be more than blockish; therefore, so soon as any
persecution ariseth, let us by and by get ourselves to prayer.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span>Also, it is a likely thing that the Church
took greater thought for Peter’s life, because they should have suffered
great loss if he had gone.  <span id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754)
Neither doth Luke say barely that *prayer was made;* but he addeth also,
that it was *earnest* and continual, whereby he giveth us to understand
that the faithful prayed not coldly or over fields;  <span
id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755) but so long as Peter was in the
conflict, the faithful did what they could to help him, and that without
wearisomeness. We must always understand the name of God, which is here
expressed, whensoever mention is made of prayer in the Scripture, for
this is one of the chiefest and first principles of faith, that we ought
to direct our prayers unto God alone, as he challengeth to himself this
peculiar worship, “Call upon me in the day of tribulation,” (<span
id="xix.i-p24.2"></span>[Ps 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span
id="xix.i-p24.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_747"></span>[748](cc36100.htm#fr_747) <span
id="xix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p6.1"></span>Perpetuam.
quietem,” perpetual rest.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[749](cc36100.htm#fr_748) <span
id="xix.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p7.1"></span>Vacationem,”
discharge.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[750](cc36100.htm#fr_749) <span
id="xix.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p10.1"></span>In duces et
capita animadverti solet,” punishment is usually inflicted on the heads
and captains.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[751](cc36100.htm#fr_750) <span
id="xix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p14.1"></span>Insaniant,”
rage against.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[752](cc36100.htm#fr_751) <span
id="xix.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>Incitat,”
instigated by.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[753](cc36100.htm#fr_752) <span
id="xix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p18.1"></span>Ad diem
festum,” to the feast, or festival.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[754](cc36100.htm#fr_753) <span
id="xix.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p21.1"></span>In prima
acie,” in the front rank, the van.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[755](cc36100.htm#fr_754) <span
id="xix.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p23.1"></span>In ejus
morte,” in his death.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[756](cc36100.htm#fr_755) <span
id="xix.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span> “<span
id="xix.i-p24.1"></span>Defunctorie,” perfunctorily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 12:6-11](cc36101)
