[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36045)  [Next](cc36047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
5:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#034)<span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>**34.** And a certain Pharisee, named
Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, precious to all the people, rising in the
council, commanded the apostles to be carried out a little space.
**35.** Then he said unto them, Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves,
what ye intend to do touching these men. **36.** For before these days
there arose one Theudas, saying, that he was some great man, to whom
consented a number of men, about four hundred, who perished; and they
were all scattered abroad which had obeyed him, and were brought to
nought. **37.** After him arose one Judas of Galilee, in the days of the
tribute, and led away much people after him, and he likewise perished;
and all which had obeyed him were scattered abroad. **38.** Now,
therefore, I say unto you, Abstain from these men, and let them atone;
for if this counsel or this work be of men, it shall come to nought:
**39.** But if it be of God, you cannot destroy it; lest, at any time,
ye be found to fight with God.

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span><span id="xii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span>**34.** Luke showeth now after what manner
God brought to nought the fury of the wicked. They were purposed to put
the apostles to death; Gamaliel standeth up amidst them, to break off
that mad consultation. Furthermore, he noteth the circumstances, to the
end we may know how it could be, that one man could prevail so much
against so many. He saith he was a Pharisee which sect was in great
estimation, as we know. He saith that he was in price, or honored
amongst the people; and they feared the people. Hereby it cometh to pass
that they are the more afraid to do any thing contrary to his mind. So
God doth oftentimes set sudden terrors against his enemies, (when they
look not for them,)to stay their violence. Furthermore, Gamaliel
commandeth the apostles to go aside, lest they should be the more
emboldened by his words. For we must not think that he spake thus,
because he did allow  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) the
doctrine of the gospel, or that he meant to defend the same; but because
he saw all the rest inflamed with fury, he being a man moderate and
courteous, doth with sober speech temper that excess.

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span>But if we consider all things well, this
judgment and opinion is unmeet for a wise man. I know that many count it
as an oracle, but it appeareth sufficiently hereby that they judge
amiss, because by this means men should abstain from all punishments,
neither were any wicked fact any longer to be corrected. Yea, all helps
of life were to be refused, which we cannot prolong one moment.  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) Both things are true, that no endeavor
of men can destroy that which is of God; and that that which is of men
is not so strong that it can stand. But he gathereth amiss hence, that
men must sit still and say nothing in the mean season. We must rather
mark what God commandeth us to do, and he will have us to restrain
wickedness. To this end hath he appointed magistrates, and armed them
with the sword; to this end hath he set elders over his Church, to bring
the froward in order, and that they may not suffer sin licentiously to
rage without punishment. Therefore it is gathered amiss that we must
refrain from punishing, because God is sufficient of himself to take
away evils. Although his whole counsel is such, Gamaliel willeth the
scribes and elders to take heed that they make not open war against God.
And he speaketh as it were touching a doubtful matter; whereby it
appeareth that he hath no certainty from the foundation, when as he
doubteth in the quality of the cause, neither dare set down whether it
be good or evil, but doth only command to defer it for a time, until the
cause appear more plainly.

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span>In sum, Gamaliel setteth an evil consequent
from true grounds;  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) because he
applieth that amiss unto the external office and manner of doing which
ought to serve for faith only. On the other side, let this be our logic,
That which is of God must needs stand, though all the world say nay;
therefore faith must stand without all fear, against all the assaults of
Satan and men, seeing faith is under-propped and supported with the
eternal truth of God; although heaven fail, our salvation is safe, which
hath God to be the author and keeper thereof; because God doth defend
the kingdom of Christ, it can never be overthrown with any violence;
because the doctrine of the gospel is grounded in God, howsoever men
resist or shake the same, yet shall it nevertheless continue firm.
Again, although the wicked attempt whatsoever they can, and seek all
means  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) to destroy the Church,
although they furiously strive against Christ and his Church so much as
they are able, yet they shall not prevail, because it is the property of
God to bring the counsels of men to nought; and by this means doth he
punish their rashness. We see that both members are well applied to
faith. But, in the mean season, there is no cause why the servants of
Christ should be less diligent in maintaining the truth; why they should
suffer the Church to decay through their fault;  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) why they should carelessly wink at
their wickedness who endeavor to turn all things topsy-turvy.

<span id="xii.vii-p13"></span><span id="xii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p14"></span>**36.** *There arose one Theudas.* If we
credit Josephus, Gamaliel altereth in this place the true course of the
history. For he reporteth that Judas Gaulanites, who was born in Gamala,
at such time as Quirinius, or Cyrenius, was proconsul, did raise a
tumult with his adherents, because they would not have their goods
taxed;  <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) and that Theudas, at
such time as Cuspius Fadus was procurator, did boast that he was a
prophet of God. And Fadus was sent into Judea by Claudius Caesar. The
former history is recorded in the Eighteenth Book of Antiquities; and
the other in the Twentieth. But I think that when Luke saith, *After him
was there one Judas,* he meant not to note the course of time, as if he
were the latter; but forasmuch as Gamaliel brought in two like examples,
he might put the one in place of the other,  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) without having respect of time.
Therefore the word *post* is as much as *moreover,* or *besides.*

<span id="xii.vii-p17"></span>Furthermore, even these examples wherewith
Gamaliel confirmeth his opinion do not sufficiently agree with the
present cause. For, because they did not by and by resist Judas, that
sedition which he had raised was the occasion of many murders, and at
length he was vanquished with hand and weapon. Theudas also had done far
more hurt, unless he had been put to flight in time by Cuspius Fadus.
But Gamaliel hath respect unto this alone, that men have unlucky success
when as they advance themselves un-advisedly; and that cometh to pass by
the just judgment of God. But because the priests refuse to hearken when
God giveth them good counsel, they are worthy to be made amazed by man
with frivolous reasons, wavering hither and thither through foolish
perplexity. Furthermore, if we cast the time, we shall find that it was
twelve years at least after the death of Christ before the apostles were
beaten. For unto the five years which remained of the government of
Tiberius, we must add three and a half which Caligula reigned. Fadus was
not sent by Claudius into Judea before the second or third year of his
reign. Gamaliel rehearsed not the act within a day or two after.
Therefore that space of time is complete whereof I spake. Wherefore the
constancy of the apostles was the more excellent, who, though they be so
evil rewarded for those long pains which they had endured, yet are they
not discouraged, neither do they cease to hold on as they had begun.

<span id="xii.vii-p18"></span>*That he was some great man.* Some books
 <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) have, Saying that he was
somebody; yet both carry one sense. For he boasted that he was such a
prophet that he could dry up Jordan, that those which were with him
might go over dry foot. Nevertheless, we see how far Gamaliel is from
true knowledge, who compareth the holy ministers of Christ unto seducers
and robbers; although he mitigateth his words afterward, and, inclining
toward the better part, leaveth it indifferent whether they have taken
this matter in hand, having God for their author or no. Yet he speaketh
doubtfully, because he provideth  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) only for quietness, all inquiry being
set apart. This is only to be allowed  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) in his speech, that he feareth
\[deterreth\] the wicked from wicked boldness, because there is nothing
more to be feared than to strive against God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc36046.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.vii-p6.1"></span>Probaret,”
he approved.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc36046.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="xii.vii-p8.1"></span>In
arbitrio nostro,” at our pleasure.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc36046.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span> “<span id="xii.vii-p10.1"></span>Ex veris
principiis perversam consequentiam deducit,” deduces a false consequence
from true principles.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc36046.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span> “<span
id="xii.vii-p11.1"></span>Nullosque non moveant lapides,” and leave not
a stone unturned.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc36046.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xii.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span> “<span
id="xii.vii-p12.1"></span>Ignavia,” sluggishness.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc36046.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p15"></span> “<span id="xii.vii-p15.1"></span>Ne
census ageretur,” to prevent a census from being taken.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc36046.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p16"></span> “<span
id="xii.vii-p16.1"></span>Promiscue miscere,” mix promiscuously,
confound the two.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc36046.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xii.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p19"></span> “<span
id="xii.vii-p19.1"></span>Codices,” manuscripts.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc36046.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xii.vii-p20.1"></span>Consulit,” consulteth.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc36046.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xii.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p21"></span> “<span
id="xii.vii-p21.1"></span>Probandum,” to be approved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 5:40-42](cc36047)
