[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36063)  [Next](cc36065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:54-58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#054)<span id="xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p2"></span>**54.** Furthermore, when they heard these
things, they were cut asunder in their hearts, and they gnashed upon him
with their teeth. **55.** But forasmuch as he was full of the Holy
Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God,
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God; **56.** And he said,
Behold, I see the heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right
hand of God. And they cried with a loud voice, and stopped their ears;
**57.** And with one accord they ran upon him: **58.** And having cast
him out of the city, they stoned him.

<span id="xiv.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p5"></span>**54.** *When they heard.* The beginning of
the action had in it some color of judgment; but at length the judges
cannot bridle their fury. First, they interrupt him with murmuring and
noise, now they break out into envious and deadly cryings,  <span
id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) lest they should hear any one word.
Afterward they hale the holy man (out of the city,) that they may put
him to death. And Luke expresseth properly what force Satan hath to
drive forward the adversaries of the word. When he saith that *they
burst asunder inwardly,* he noteth that they were not only angry, but
they were also stricken with madness. Which fury breaketh out into the
gnashing of the teeth, as a violent fire into flame. The reprobate, who
are at Satan’s commandment, must needs be thus moved with the hearing of
the word of God; and this is the state of the gospel, it driveth
hypocrites into madness who might seem before to be modest, as if a
drunken man who is desirous of sleep be suddenly awakened. Therefore,
Simeon assigneth this to Christ, as proper to him, to disclose the
thoughts of many hearts, (<span id="xiv.xii-p6.2"></span>[Lu
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035)<span id="xiv.xii-p6.2"></span>.)
Yet, notwithstanding, this ought not to be ascribed to the doctrine of
salvation, whose end is rather this, to tame men’s minds to obey God
after that it hath subdued them. But so soon as Satan hath possessed
their minds, if they be urged, their ungodliness will break out.
Therefore, this is an accidentary \[accidental\] evil; yet we are taught
by these examples, that we must not look that the word of God should
draw all men unto a sound mind.

<span id="xiv.xii-p7"></span>Which doctrine is very requisite for us
unto constancy. Those which are teachers cannot do their duty as they
ought, but they must set themselves against the contemners of God. And
forasmuch as there are always some wicked men, which set light by the
majesty of God, they must ever now and then have recourse unto this
vehemency of Stephen. For they may not wink when God’s honor is taken
from him. And what shall be the end thereof? Their ungodliness shall be
the more incensed, so that we shall seem to pour oil into the fire, (as
they say.) But whatsoever come of it, yet must we not spare the wicked,
but we must keep them down mightily, although they could pour out all
the furies of hell. And it is certain that those which will flatter the
wicked do not respect the fruit,  <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) but are faint-hearted through fear of
danger. But as for us, howsoever we have no such success as we could
wish, let us know that courage in defending the doctrine of godliness is
a sweet-smelling sacrifice to God.

<span id="xiv.xii-p9"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p10"></span>**55.** *Forasmuch as he was full.* We
cannot almost express into what straits the servant of Christ was
brought, when he saw himself beset round with raging enemies; the
goodness of his cause was oppressed, partly with false accusations and
malice, partly with violence and outrageous outcries; he was environed
with stern countenances on every side; he himself was haled unto a cruel
and horrible kind of death; he could espy succor and ease no where.
Therefore, being thus destitute of man’s help, he turneth himself toward
God. We must first note this, that Stephen did look unto God, who is the
judge of life and death, (turning his eyes from beholding the world,)
when he was brought into extreme despair of all things, whilst that
there is nothing but death before his eyes. This done, we must also add
this, that his expectation was not in vain, because Christ appeared to
him by and by. Although Luke doth signify, that he was now armed with
such power of the Spirit as could not be overcome, so that nothing could
hinder him from beholding the heavens; therefore Stephen looketh up
toward heaven, that he may gather courage by beholding Christ; that
dying he may triumph gloriously, having overcome death. But as for us,
it is no marvel if Christ do not show himself to us, because we are so
set and tied upon the earth. Hereby it cometh to pass, that our hearts
fail us at every light rumor of danger, and even at the falling of a
leaf. And that for good causes; for where is our strength but in Christ?
But we pass over the heavens, as if we had no help any where else, save
only in the world, Furthermore, this vice can be redressed by no other
means than if God lift us up by his Spirit, being naturally set upon the
earth. Therefore, Luke assigneth this cause, why Stephen looked up
steadfastly toward heaven, because he was full of the Spirit. We must
also ascend into heaven, having this Spirit to be our director and
guide, so often as we are oppressed with troubles. And, surely, until
such time as he illuminate us, our eyes are not so quick of sight, that
they can come unto heaven. Yea, the eyes of the flesh are so dull, that
they cannot ascend into heaven.

<span id="xiv.xii-p11"></span>*He saw the glory of God.* Luke
signifieth, as I have said, that Christ appeared forthwith to Stephen so
soon as he lifted up his eyes towards heaven. But he telleth us before,
that he had other eyes given him than the fleshly eyes, seeing that with
the same  <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) he flieth up unto the
glory of God. Whence we must gather a general comfort, that God will be
no less present with us, if, forsaking the world, all our senses strive
to come to him; not that he appeareth unto us by any external vision, as
he did to Stephen, but he will so reveal himself unto us within, that we
may indeed feel his presence. And this manner of seeing ought to be
sufficient for us, when God doth not only, by his power and grace,
declare that he is nigh at hand, but doth also prove that he dwelleth in
us.

<span id="xiv.xii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p14"></span>**56.** *Behold, I see the heavens.* God
meant not only privately to provide for his servant, but also to wring
and torment his enemies; as Stephen doth courageously triumph over them,
when he affirmeth plainly that he saw a miracle. And here may a question
be moved, how the heavens were opened? For mine own part, I think that
there was nothing changed in the nature of the heavens; but that Stephen
had new quickness of sight granted him, which pierced through all lets,
even unto the invisible glory of the kingdom of heaven. For admit we
grant that there was some division or parting  <span
id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) made in heaven, yet man’s eye could
never reach so far. Again, Stephen alone did see the glory of God. For
that spectacle was not only hid from the wicked, who stood in the same
place, but they were also so blinded within themselves, that they did
not see the manifest truth.  <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475)
Therefore, he saith that the heavens are opened to him in this respect,
because nothing keepeth him from beholding the glory of God. Whereupon
it followeth that the miracle was not wrought in heaven, but in his
eyes. Wherefore, there is no cause why we should dispute long about any
natural vision; because it is certain that Christ appeared unto him not
after some natural manner, but after a new and singular sort. And I pray
you of what color was the glory of God, that it could be seen naturally
with the eyes of the flesh? Therefore, we must imagine nothing in this
vision but that which is divine. Moreover, this is worth the noting,
that the glory of God appeared not unto Stephen wholly as it was, but
according to man’s capacity. For that infiniteness cannot be
comprehended with the measure of any creature.

<span id="xiv.xii-p17"></span>*The Son of man standing.* He seeth Christ
reigning in that flesh wherein he was abased; so that in very deed the
victory did consist in this one thing. Therefore, it is not superfluous
in that Christ appeareth unto him, and for this cause doth he also call
him the Son of man, as if he should say, I see that man whom ye thought
ye had quite extinguished by death enjoying the government of heaven;
therefore, gnash with your teeth as much as you list: there is no cause
why I should fear to fight for him even unto blood, who shall not only
defend his own cause, but my salvation also. Notwithstanding, here may a
question be moved, why he saw him standing, who is said elsewhere to
sit? Augustine, as he is sometimes more subtle than needs, saith, “that
he sitteth as a judge, that he stood then as an advocate.” For mine own
part, I think that though these speeches be diverse, yet they signify
both one thing. For neither sitting, nor yet standing, noteth out how
the body of Christ was framed; but this is referred unto his power and
kingdom. For where shall we erect him a throne, that he may sit at the
right hand of God the Father, seeing God doth fill all things in such
sort, that we ought to imagine no place for his right hand?

<span id="xiv.xii-p18"></span>Therefore, the whole text is a metaphor,
when Christ is said to sit or stand at the right hand of God the Father,
and the plain meaning is this, that Christ hath all power given him,
that he may reign in his Father’s stead in that flesh wherein he was
humbled, and that he may be next him. And although this power be spread
abroad through heaven and earth, yet some men imagine amiss that Christ
in every where in his human nature. For, though he be contained in a
certain place, yet that hindereth no whit but that he may and doth show
forth his power throughout all the world. Therefore, if we be desirous
to feel him present by the working of his grace, we must seek him in
heaven; as he revealed himself unto Stephen there. Also, some men do
affirm ridiculously out of this place, that he drew near unto Stephen
that he might see him.  <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) For we
have already said, that Stephen’s eyes were so lifted up by the power of
the Spirit,  <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) that no distance of
place could hinder the same. I confess, indeed, that speaking properly,
that is, philosophically, there is no place above the heavens. But this
is sufficient for me, that it is perverse doting to place Christ any
where else save only in heaven, and above the elements of the world.

<span id="xiv.xii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p22"></span>**57.** *Crying with a loud voice.* This
was either a vain show of zeal, as hypocrites are almost always pricked
forward with ambition to break out into immoderate heat; as Caiaphas
when he heard Christ say thus, After this ye shall see the Son of man,
etc., did rent his clothes in token of indignation, as if it were
intolerable blasphemy; or else certainly the preaching of the glory of
Christ was unto them such a torment, that they must needs burst through
madness. And I am rather of this mind; for Luke saith afterward, that
they were carried violently, as those men which have no hold of
themselves use to leap out immoderately.  <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478)

<span id="xiv.xii-p24"></span><span id="xiv.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p25"></span>**58.** *They stoned.* God had appointed
this kind of punishment in the law for false prophets, as it is written
in the 13th chapter of Deuteronomy; but God doth also define there who
ought to be reckoned in that number; to wit, he which doth attempt to
bring the people unto strange gods; therefore the stoning of Stephen was
both unjust and also wicked, because he was unjustly condemned; so that
the martyrs of Christ must suffer like punishment with the wicked. It is
the cause alone which maketh the difference; but this difference is so
highly esteemed before God and his angels, that the rebukes of the
martyrs  <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) do far excel all glory
of the world. Yet here may a question be moved, How it was lawful for
the Jews to stone Stephen, who had not the government in their hands?
For in Christ’s cause they answer, It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death. I answer, that they did this violently and in an uproar.
And whereas the president did not punish this wickedness, it may be that
he winked at many things,  <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480) lest
they should bring that hatred upon his own head which they bare against
the name of Christ. We see that the Roman presidents did chiefly wink at
the civil discords of that nation, even of set purpose; that when one of
them had murdered another,  <span id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481) they
might the sooner be overcome afterward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc36064.htm#fr_471) <span
id="xiv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p6.1"></span>Infestis
clamoribus,” hostile clamor.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[473](cc36064.htm#fr_472) <span
id="xiv.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p8"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p8.1"></span>Qui
impiorum aures deliciis mulceri volunt, non tam respicere profectum,”
who would pour soothing wrods into the ears of the wicked, look not so
much to their profit.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc36064.htm#fr_473) <span
id="xiv.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p12.1"></span>Quorum
perspicacia,” by their perspicacity.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc36064.htm#fr_474) <span
id="xiv.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p15"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xii-p15.1"></span>Scissuram,” rent or opening.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc36064.htm#fr_475) <span
id="xiv.xii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p16.1"></span>Apertam
veritatis lucem,” the open light of truth.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[477](cc36064.htm#fr_476) <span
id="xiv.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p19.1"></span>Ut
videri posset ab eo,” that he might be seen by him.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[478](cc36064.htm#fr_477) <span
id="xiv.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p20.1"></span>Per
fidem,” through faith, omitted.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[479](cc36064.htm#fr_478) <span
id="xiv.xii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p23.1"></span>Subito
et intemperanter prosilire,” break out suddenly and intemperately.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[480](cc36064.htm#fr_479) <span
id="xiv.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p26"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p26.1"></span>Martyrum
probra,” the ignominy.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[481](cc36064.htm#fr_480) <span
id="xiv.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p27.1"></span>In
populo turbulento et prope indomito,” in a turbulent and almost
untameable people, omitted.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[482](cc36064.htm#fr_481) <span
id="xiv.xii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xii-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.xii-p28.1"></span>Ut mutuo
confecti,” that having mutually destroyed each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:58-61](cc36065)
