[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36029)  [Next](cc36031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
3:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022.md)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**22.** Moses truly said unto the fathers, The
Lord your God shall raise up a Prophet unto you of your brethren, \[like
unto me;\] him shall ye hear, according to all things which he shall
speak unto you. **23.** And it shall come to pass, that every soul which
shall not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed of the people. **24.**
And all the prophets from Samuel, and thenceforth, as many as have
spoken, have likewise foretold these days.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span><span id="x.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span>**22.** By this argument he proveth that he
goeth not about to cause them to revolt from Moses, because it is a part
of the law to take heed to and obey this chief teacher. Here might a
doubt arise, why Peter thought it more convenient to cite this testimony
of Moses than others, seeing there were many others in readiness far
more plain; but he did this for this cause, because he intreateth in
this place of the authority of doctrine; and this was the best way to
bring the Jews to be Christ’s disciples. For he should have preached in
vain of all other things, unless they had been persuaded that his
doctrine was reverently to be received. This is therefore the thing
which Peter aimeth at, to bring them to hear Christ willingly, as the
master whom God hath appointed to teach them.

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>But here ariseth a question, which hath in it
great difficulty; to wit, in that Peter applieth that unto the person of
Christ which Moses spoke generally of the prophets. For although he make
mention of a prophet in the singular number, yet the text \[context\]
doth plainly declare, that he speaketh not of one alone; but that this
word is put indefinitely. For after that Moses had forbidden the people
to give themselves unto the superstitions of the Gentiles, by turning
aside unto enchanters and soothsayers, he showeth them therewithal a
remedy, whereby they may avoid all vanity; to wit, if they depend wholly
upon the Word of God alone. By this means he promiseth that God will be
careful at all times to send them prophets, that they may teach them
aright. As if he should say, God will never suffer you to be destitute
of prophets, of whom you may learn whatsoever shall be profitable for
you to know. And Moses saith expressly, *of thy brethren,* to the end
the Jews may know that the oracles of God are to be sought and set no
where else, seeing that God had appointed unto them teachers of the
kindred of Abraham. He addeth further, *like unto me* that they may know
that they were not to hear God only at one time, or by the mouth of one
man; but as God proceedeth to teach us by divers ministers throughout
the continual course of time, so must we hold on in the obedience of the
word. Now, the Jews were wont to reverence Moses; therefore, he will
have them to give like honor to the prophets. I know that many would
fain restrain it unto Christ. They catch at this word, whereas Moses
doth testify that the prophet shall be like unto him, (<span
id="x.iv-p6.1"></span>[De 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md)<span
id="x.iv-p6.1"></span>,) whereas, notwithstanding, it is written, that
there arose none like unto Moses. I confess that there is in both places
the same note of likeness, yet in a diverse sense. For, in the second
place, the likeness or equality is expressed, as it doth plainly appear.
They catch also at another thing, that the prophet shall far excel
Moses, of whom he beareth witness as a crier or herald. But this is
never a whit stronger, because Moses goeth about to bring to pass that
the word of God may be believed by whomsoever it be brought.

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span>Therefore, there is no cause why we should set
ourselves to be laughed to scorn by the Jews, by wresting the words of
Moses violently, as if he spoke of Christ alone in this place. Yet we
must see whether Peter doth cite the testimony fitly, whose authority
ought to serve for a sound reason. I say; that in Peter’s speech there
is nothing which is not most convenient. For he saw that which all men
ought to grant, that this testimony doth so appertain unto the other
prophets, that yet notwithstanding it doth chiefly commend Christ, not
only because that he is the prince and chief of all the prophets, but
because all other former prophecies were directed toward him, and
because God did at length speak absolutely by his mouth, For God spoke
in divers manners, and at sundry times in times past3 unto our fathers
by the prophets, he addeth the conclusion at length, in the last days in
his only begotten Son, (<span id="x.iv-p7.1"></span>[Heb.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="x.iv-p7.1"></span>..md)
Therefore, it came to pass, that they wanted prophets for a certain
years  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) before his coming; which
thing is plainly gathered out of the words of Malachi, who, after he
hath commanded the people to be mindful of the law, he passeth over by
and by unto John Baptist and unto Christ, as if he should say, that the
prophecies are now ended until the last revelation come, (<span
id="x.iv-p8.2"></span>[Mal 4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="x.iv-p8.2"></span>;) according to that,

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>“The law and the prophets prophesied until
John; after that the kingdom of God is preached,”  
(<span id="x.iv-p9.2"></span>[Mt
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)<span id="x.iv-p9.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span>And that was so common amongst the people,
that the woman of Samaria could say, according to the common fame and
opinion,

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span>“We know that the Messias shall come,  
who will teach us all things,”  
(<span id="x.iv-p11.3"></span>[Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)<span id="x.iv-p11.3"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span>Therefore, we know that after the return of
the people all the prophets ceased, to the end they might be made more
attentive to hear Christ, by that silence or intermission of
revelations. Therefore, Peter did not wrest this place, or abuse the
same through ignorance, but he took that doctrine which all men had
received for a principle; that God had promised to teach his people at
the first by his prophets as by means,  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) but at length principally by Christ,
at whose hands they were to hope for the perfect manifestation and
laying open of all things. And to this purpose serveth that excellent
testimony or commendation wherewith his Father setteth him forth, “Hear
him,” (<span id="x.iv-p13.2"></span>[Mt
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="x.iv-p13.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span><span id="x.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p15"></span>**23.** *Every soul.* Here, by a most
grievous punishment against the rebellious, the authority of all the
prophets, but most of all of Christ, is established; and that for good
causes. For seeing there is nothing that God doth account more precious
than his word, it cannot be that he should suffer the same to be freely
contemned. Therefore, if any man despised the law of Moses, he was
adjudged to die the death. And hereunto Moses had respect when he said,
“He shall be put away from among the people.” For God had adopted the
stock and kindred of Abraham unto himself, upon this condition, that
this might be sufficient for them unto the chiefest felicity to be
*reckoned* in that number, as it is said in the Psalm, “Blessed is the
people whose God is the Lord.” And in another place, “Blessed is the
nation whom the Lord hath chosen to be his inheritance.” Wherefore it is
not to be doubted, but that he pronounceth that he shall be blotted out
of the book of life whosoever shall refuse to hear Christ. For he is not
worthy to be accounted one of the Church, whosoever he be that refuseth
to have him to be his Master, by whom alone God doth teach us, and by
whom he will have us to hear himself; and he cutteth himself away from
the body, whosoever he be that refuseth to be under the Head.

<span id="x.iv-p16"></span><span id="x.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p17"></span>**24.** *And all* When as he saith that all
the prophets do with one consent send their scholars unto Christ, that
appeareth more plainly hereby, which I said, that the commendation of
the gospel is contained under that testimony of Moses, and so,
consequently, that the conclusion of prophecies is principally noted.
Again, this maketh much for the certainty of the gospel, that all the
prophets, for a long time, \[series of ages,\] do yet, notwithstanding,
so temper their form of teaching with one consent, that they do testify
altogether that men ought to hope for a certain, better, and more
perfect thing. Therefore, whosoever will believe Moses and the prophets,
he must needs submit himself unto the doctrine of Christ, without which
all that is lame and imperfect which they taught, (<span
id="x.iv-p17.1"></span>[Joh 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#047.md)<span
id="x.iv-p17.1"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc36030.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="x.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span> “<span
id="x.iv-p8.1"></span>Aliquot...saecula,” for some ages.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc36030.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="x.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p13.1"></span>Velut
intermedios.” as intermediate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 3:25-26](cc36031.md)
