[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36108)  [Next](cc36110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.v"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p1"></span><span id="xx.v-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024.md)<span id="xx.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p2"></span>**24.** After that John had preached, before
the face of his entrance, the baptism of repentance to all the people of
Israel. **25.** And when John fulfilled his course, he said, Whom do ye
think me to be? I am not. But, behold, he cometh after me whose shoe
latchets I am not worthy to loose. **26.** Men and brethren, children of
the generation of Abraham, and those who among you fear God, to you is
the word of this salvation sent.

<span id="xx.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.v-p4"></span><span id="xx.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p5"></span>**24.** We know what office John had, to wit,
to prepare the way of the Lord. Therefore Paul bringeth in his
testimony, that he may prove to the Jews that he preached no false
Christ, but the true Christ of God, whom that most famous forerunner had
before commended; not that man’s testimony is sufficient to prove so
weighty a matter; but there was another respect to be had to John whom
all men almost did think to be a prophet of God. Therefore hence cometh
the authority of the testimony, that a crier sent from heaven, and no
private man, speaketh of Christ. And Paul reciteth two things summarily
concerning John, that he taught the baptism of repentance before
Christ’s coming. Secondly, that casting from him of his own accord the
title and honor of the Messiah, he submitted himself to Christ.

<span id="xx.v-p6"></span>*The baptism of repentance.* Baptism brought
in contrary to the rite and custom of the law was a token of great
alteration. For it was unlawful to renew anything before Christ’s
coming. The Jews had indeed in the law their baptisms or washings, which
were also exercises of repentance, but John was the author of new and
strange baptism, or rather the minister, who put them in hope of the
restoring long looked-for and desired. When he calleth it *the baptism
of repentance* he doth not exclude remission of sins, but he speaketh
according to the circumstance of the place, because this baptism was a
preparation unto the faith of Christ. And we must note the phrase, that
he preached baptism. Whereby we are taught that the sacraments are then
rightly administered, when doctrine is joined with the visible figure;
for the mouth of the baptizer must not be dumb, because the sign is vain
without doctrine.

<span id="xx.v-p7"></span><span id="xx.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p8"></span>**25.** *When John fulfilled his course.* The
second member of the testimony, that when John drew near to the end of
his course he sent his disciples to Christ; for he had fashioned them
before with the rudiment of baptism, and then he sent them to Christ (as
they say) from hand to hand. And this interrogation, *Whom do ye think
me to be?* is not a question of one that doubteth. For John reproveth
and chideth the Jews, because they did falsely give to him the honor of
the Messiah. Though it may be read in one text, I am not he whom you
take me to be; yet the other reading is more usual, as it hath also
greater force to refute the error. Furthermore, his testimony doth
deserve greater credit, in that he doth willingly refuse the honor
offered him, (which he might have taken to himself, not without
commendations) and doth submit himself to another. There cannot,
assuredly, be any suspicion of ambition, or of seeking after honor here,
which may discredit his words.

<span id="xx.v-p9"></span>*Behold, he cometh;* that is, he is about to
come, the Hebrew phrase, which is common enough in the New Testament.
Whereas he confesseth that he is unworthy to loose the latchets of
Christ’s shoes, it is a proverbial figure, whereby he abaseth himself so
much as he can, lest his greatness darken Christ’s glory; for he meant
to do that faithfully which was given him in charge, that Christ alone
might have the preeminence. Therefore he saith, that how great soever he
be, yet he is nothing in respect of Christ. For though God’s servants
have their dignity, yet being compared to Christ, they must all be as
nothing, that he alone may excel; as we see all stars vanish away, that
they may give place to the brightness of the sun.

<span id="xx.v-p10"></span><span id="xx.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p11"></span>**26.** *Men and brethren.* Paul doth again
prick forward the Jews to embrace Christ; for this ought to have raised
no small study and attentiveness in their minds, when as they saw
\[heard\] their salvation handled, and that the message of salvation was
appointed properly for them. He calleth them *children of Abraham* not
only for honor’s sake, but that they may know that they be heirs of
eternal life; and he speaketh them so fair that it might not grieve them
to depart from the scribes and priests whom they worshipped, because
they must needs receive Christ. Furthermore, we must remember that which
I said before, though the gate of the kingdom of heaven were set open to
the Gentiles, yet were not the Jews thrown down from their estate; but
were counted the first-begotten in God’s family; therefore is it that he
saith, that salvation was sent to them, because they were first in
order; yet because the carnal kindred was of itself of no great
importance, and the ungodliness of many brake out, Paul speaketh
specially unto the true worshippers of God, signifying that words were
but vain, unless the fear of God reign in their hearts, which may
receive them, and, receiving them, may foster them. We must note this
title of the gospel, that it is called the *word of salvation.*
Wherefore, their hardness must needs be great  <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800.md) whom it doth not allure with the
sweetness that is in it; but though it be such naturally, yet is it made
accidentally “the savor of death unto death” to the reprobate, (<span
id="xx.v-p12.2"></span>[2Co 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016.md)<span
id="xx.v-p12.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_800"></span>[801](cc36109.htm#fr_800.md) <span
id="xx.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p12"></span> “<span id="xx.v-p12.1"></span>Plusquam
ferrea,” more than that of iron.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:27-31](cc36110.md)
