[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36071)  [Next](cc36073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
8:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#032.md)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**32.** Furthermore, the sentence of
Scripture which he read was this, He was led as a sheep to be slain, and
as a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth. **33.**
In his humility his judgment is exalted. Who shall declare his
generation? because his life is taken from the earth. **34.** And the
eunuch answering Philip said, I pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet
this? Of himself, or of some other? **35.** And Philip opening his
mouth, and beginning at this Scripture, preached Jesus to him.

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span><span id="xv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span>**32.** *The sentence of Scripture.* It is
properly a text or *period.* Let us know that he lighted not upon this
place by chance but that it came to pass by the wonderful providence of
God, that Philip should have a proposition or principle from which the
whole sum of Christianity might be set.  <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md) Therefore, first, he hath matter of
full instruction brought to his hand by the secret direction of the
Spirit; secondly, the form is plainly applied to the ministry of man.
This is an excellent prophecy of Christ, and above all others to be
remembered; because Isaiah saith plainly there  <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md) that such should be the manner of
redeeming the Church, that the Son of God do by his death purchase life
for men, that he offereth himself in sacrifice to purge  <span
id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md) men’s sins, that he be punished with
the hand of God, and that he go down even unto the very hell, that he
may exalt us unto heaven, having delivered us from destruction. In sum,
this place teacheth plainly how men are reconciled to God, how they
obtain righteousness, how they come to the kingdom of God, being
delivered from the tyranny of Satan, and loosed from the yoke of sin; to
be brief, whence they must fetch all parts of their salvation.

<span id="xv.vi-p9"></span>Notwithstanding, I will only expound those
things which Luke here citeth, and there be, indeed, two members. In the
former, he teacheth that Christ, to the end he may redeem the Church,
 <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) must needs be so broken, that
he appear like to a man which is cast down and past hope. Secondly, he
affirmeth that his death shall give life, and that there shall a
singular triumph issue out of great despair. Whereas he compareth Christ
to a lamb, which suffereth itself to be led and slain, and to a sheep,
which offereth herself meekly to be shorn; his meaning is, that the
sacrifice of Christ shall be voluntary. And surely this was the way to
appease God’s wrath, in that he showed himself obedient. He spake,
indeed, before Pilate, (<span id="xv.vi-p10.2"></span>[John
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#034.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span id="xv.vi-p10.2"></span>,.md)
but not to save his life, but rather that he might willingly offer
himself to die,  <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) as he was
appointed by the Father, and so might bring that punishment upon himself
which was prepared for us. Therefore the prophet teacheth both things,
that Christ must needs have suffered that he might purchase life for us,
and that he was to suffer death willingly, that he might blot out the
stubbornness of men by his obedience. And hence must we gather an
exhortation unto godliness,  <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md) as
Peter doth; but that doctrine of faith which I have already touched is
former  <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556.md) in order.

<span id="xv.vi-p14"></span><span id="xv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p15"></span>**33.** *In his humility his judgment.* The
eunuch had either the Greek volume, or else Luke did set down the
reading which was then used, as he useth to do. The prophet saith that
Christ was exalted out of sorrow and judgment, by which words he
signifieth a wonderful victory, which immediately ensued his casting
down. For if he had been oppressed with death, there could nothing have
been hoped for at his hands.

<span id="xv.vi-p16"></span>Therefore, to the end the prophet may
establish our faith in Christ, after that he had described him to be
stricken with the hand of God, and to be subject to be slain,  <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) he putteth upon him a new person now;
to wit, that he cometh up out of the depth of death as a conqueror, and
out of the very hell, being the author of eternal Life. I know, indeed,
that this place is diversely expounded. Some there be which understand
by this, that he was carried from the prison to the cross; other some
there be who think that to be taken away doth signify as much as to be
brought to nought. And, indeed, the signification of the Hebrew word,
<span id="xv.vi-p17.2"></span>לחה (*lachah*) is doubtful,  <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558.md) as is also the signification of the
Greek word <span id="xv.vi-p18.2"></span>αιρεσθαι. But he which shall
thoroughly weigh the text, \[context,\] shall agree with me in that
which I have said, that he passeth now from that doleful and unseemly
sight which he had set before our eyes, unto the new beginning of
unlooked-for glory. Therefore the Greek interpretation differeth not
much from the words of the prophet in the sum of the matter. For
Christ’s judgment was exalted in his humility or casting down; because
at such time as he might seem to be cast down and oppressed, the Father
maintained his cause. After this sort *judgment* shall be taken in this
place (as in many other) for *right*. But it signifieth *condemnation*
in the Hebrew text. For the prophet saith, that after that Christ shall
be brought into great straits, and shall be like unto a condemned and
lost man, he shall be lifted up by the hand of the Father. Therefore the
meaning of the words is, that Christ must first have suffered death,
before the Father should exalt him unto the glory of his kingdom; which
doctrine must be translated unto the whole body of the Church; because
all the godly ought wonderfully to be lifted up with the hand of God,
that they be not swallowed up of death. But when God appeareth to be the
revenger of his, he doth not only restore them to life but also, getteth
to them excellent triumphs of many deaths, as Christ did triumph most
gloriously upon the cross; whereof the apostle maketh mention in the
<span id="xv.vi-p18.3"></span>[Colossians
2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#000.md)<span id="xv.vi-p18.3"></span>.

<span id="xv.vi-p19"></span>*His generation.* After that the prophet
hath set forth the victorious death of Christ, he addeth now that his
victory shall not last only for a small time, but shall go beyond all
number of years. For the exclamation of the prophet importeth as much as
if he should deny that the perpetuity of Christ’s kingdom can be
expressed by the tongue of men. But interpreters have wrested this place
miserably. Whereas the old writers have endeavored hereby to prove the
Eternal Generation of the Word of God against Arius, it is too far
dissenting from the prophet’s mind. Chrysostom’s exposition is never a
whit truer, who referreth it unto the human generation. Neither do they
understand the prophet’s meaning, which suppose that he inveigheth
against the men of that age. Other some think better, who take it to be
spoken of the Church, save only that they are deceived in the word
generation, which they think doth signify a posterity or issue. But the
word <span id="xv.vi-p19.1"></span>דר, (*dor*,) which the prophet useth,
signifieth, amongst the Hebrews, *an age*, or the continuance of man’s
life. Therefore, undoubtedly this is the prophet’s meaning, that
Christ’s life shall endure for ever, when as he shall be once delivered
by his Father’s grace from death; although this life, which is without
end, appertaineth unto the whole body of the Church; because Christ
rose, not that he may live for hlmself, but for us. Therefore, he
extolleth now in the members  <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559.md)
the fruit and effect of that victory which he placed in the Head.
Wherefore every one of the faithful may conceive sure hope of eternal
life out of this place; secondly, the perpetuity of the Church is rather
avouched in the person of Christ.

<span id="xv.vi-p21"></span>*Because his life is taken from the earth.*
This is, to look to, (to be) a very absurd reason, that Christ doth
reign with such renown in heaven and earth, because he was cut off. For
who can believe that death is the cause of life? But this was done by
the wonderful counsel of God, that hell should be a ladder, whereby
Christ should ascend into heaven; that reproach should be unto him a
passage into life; that the joyful brightness of salvation should appear
out of the horror and darkness of the cross; that blessed immortality
should flow from the deep pit of death. Because he humbled himself,
therefore the Father exalted him, that every knee may bow before him,
(<span id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>[Php
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>,.md)
etc. Now must we bethink ourselves what fellowship we have with Christ,
that it may not be troublesome to any to go the same way.

<span id="xv.vi-p22"></span><span id="xv.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p23"></span>**34.** *The eunuch said to Philip.* Here it
appeareth what an earnest desire the eunuch had to learn. He wandereth
in divers prophecies of Isaiah as through doubtful boughts,  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md) and yet he is not weary of reading.
And whilst that he arrogateth nothing to himself, he getteth far more,
contrary to his hope, even at a sudden, than he could get during his
whole life by taking great pains, if he had brought all his quickness of
wit. So the Lord will be unto us a Master, though we be but small, if,
acknowledging our ignorance, we be not loth to submit ourselves to
learn. And as the seed, covered with earth, lieth hid for a time, so the
Lord will illuminate us by his Spirit, and will cause that reading
which, being barren and void of fruit, causeth nothing but
wearisomeness, to have plain light of understanding. The Lord doth never
keep the eyes of his so shut, but that so soon as they are once entered,
the way of salvation appeareth unto them in the Scripture; but that they
profit ever now and then a little by reading. Yet doth he suffer them to
stick fast oftentimes, and permitteth their course to be hindered by
some bar which is laid in the way, both that he may try patience of
faith in them, and also that he may teach them humility, by putting them
in mind of their ignorance, that he may make them more attentive after
that they have shaken off drowsiness; that he may make them more fervent
in prayer; that he may prick them forward to love the truth more dearly;
that he may set forth the excellence of his heavenly wisdom, which is
otherwise not so esteemed as it ought. But howsoever the faithful do not
attain unto the mark of perfect knowledge, yet they shall always
perceive that their labor is not in vain, so that they stop not the way
before themselves with proud loathsomeness.  <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) Let this going forward suffice us
until the time of full revelation do come, that even a small taste of
knowledge doth drip  <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md) into us the
fear of God and faith.

<span id="xv.vi-p27"></span><span id="xv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p28"></span>**35.** *Philip, opening his mouth.* To open
the mouth is taken in Scripture for, to begin a long speech concerning
some grave and weighty matter. Therefore Luke’s meaning is, that Philip
began to intreat \[discourse\] of Christ, as it were, with full mouth.
He saith that he began with this prophecy, because there is no one which
depainteth out Christ more lively;  <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md) and it was then brought  <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md) to his hand. Therefore, after that
Philip had showed, by the prophet’s words, after what sort Christ should
come, and what was to be hoped for at his hands, he conferred the thing
itself afterward, that the eunuch might know that that Christ which was
promised was already revealed and given, and that he might understand
his power. Where we translate it, that *he preached Christ,* Luke saith
that he preached the gospel. The sense is, that he taught that of Christ
which he uttered in his gospel himself, and commanded to be taught;
whereby we gather, that when Christ is known, we have the sum of the
gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_550"></span>[551](cc36072.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p6.1"></span>Apte deduci,”
aptly deduced.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[552](cc36072.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p7.1"></span>Sine
involucris,” without circumlocution, unequivocally.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[553](cc36072.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p8.1"></span>Expiandis,” to
expiate.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[554](cc36072.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p10.1"></span>Et restituat
in vitam,” and restore her to life, omitted.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[555](cc36072.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p11.1"></span>In
victimam,” as a victim.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[556](cc36072.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p12"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p12.1"></span>Ad
patientiam,” to patience.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[557](cc36072.htm#fr_556.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p13.1"></span>Praecedit,”
precedes.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[558](cc36072.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p17"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p17.1"></span>Et
mactationi subjectum,” and subjected to slaughter.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[559](cc36072.htm#fr_558.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p18.1"></span>Ambigua,”
ambiguous, equivocal.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[560](cc36072.htm#fr_559.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p20"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p20.1"></span>In membris
omnibus,” in all the members.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[561](cc36072.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p24.1"></span>Per dubias
ambages,” through dubious, winding paths.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](cc36072.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p25.1"></span>Superbo
fastidio,” by proud disdain, fastidiousness.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](cc36072.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p26"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p26.1"></span>Instillat,”
instil.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](cc36072.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p29.1"></span>Clarius,”
more clearly.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](cc36072.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="xv.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p30"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p30.1"></span>Commode,”
conveniently, omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 8:36-40](cc36073.md)
