[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36027)  [Next](cc36029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
3:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012.md)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**12.** And when Peter saw that, he made
answer unto the people, Men of Israel, why marvel ye at this, or why
look ye so steadfastly on us, as if by our own power or godliness we
have made this man walk? **13.** The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
the God of our fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye have
delivered, and whom ye have denied before the face of Pilate, when he
had judged him to be loosed. **14.** But ye have denied the holy, the
just, and have desired to have a murderer given you. **15.** But ye have
murdered the Prince of life: whom God hath raised up from the dead;
whereof we are witnesses: and in the faith of his name, his name hath
strengthened this man, whom ye have seen and known. **16.** And the
faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in presence
of you all.

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span><span id="x.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**12.** *Men of Israel* He beginneth his
sermon with a reproving of the people. And yet doth he not simply
reprove them because they wonder; for that was altogether profitable and
worthy praise; but because they do wickedly ascribe unto men that praise
which is due to the work of God. As if he should say, Ye do amiss, in
that you stay in us, and stand gazing upon us, whereas you ought rather
to look upon God and Christ. Therefore, this is to be amazed evilly,
when as our minds do stay in men. And we must note that he condemneth
the respect of men; as if, saith he, we by our own power and virtue had
done this. Therefore there is an error and corruption in this, if we
attribute that unto the godliness and power of men which is proper to
God and Christ. And, as concerning power, no man will deny that it
cometh of God; yet when they have confessed this in one word, they do
not cease to take from God his right, to the end they may adorn the
creatures with that which they take from him; as we see the Papists
place the power of God in the saints; yea, they include his power in a
stone or stock of wood, so soon as the image is consecrated to Barbara
or Chrysogonus. But, notwithstanding, let us suppose that they do not
offend in that former member; yet do they foolishly think that they have
done their duty toward God, when as they leave him the power, and assign
the miracles unto the godliness of saints. For why do they run unto
them, when they will obtain either rain or fair weather, or be delivered
from diseases, unless they do imagine that they have by their godliness
deserved that God should grant them this right and privilege? This is,
therefore, but a childish starting-hole,  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) when they confess that God is the
author of the power; but they thank the godliness of saints for those
benefits which they have received. Howsoever they color the matter, we
must always know this, that Peter doth generally condemn those which do
so look unto men in miracles, that they think that their holiness is the
cause thereof. This is the first part of the sermon, wherein he
reproveth superstition. And we must note his manner and order of
teaching. For because men are inclined to nothing more than to fall from
God unto the creatures, it is very expedient to prevent this vice in
time. And if the people were forbidden to look unto the apostles, much
more doth the Spirit draw us away from calling upon every petty saint.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span><span id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>**13, 14.** *The God of Abraham.* He addeth a
remedy now in calling them back unto Christ. And the sum is this, That
this is God’s purpose in those miracles which he worketh by the apostles
to set forth the glory of his Christ; whereupon it followeth that all
those do deal disorderly who set up Peter, or any other, whatsoever he
be, forasmuch as all men must decrease, and Christ alone must be
excellent, (<span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>[Joh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>..md)
Here appeareth a manifest difference between Christ and the apostles.
First of all, he is the author, they are only the ministers; secondly,
this is the lawful end, that he alone may have the glory; and as for
them there is no respect to be had of them as concerning glory; for
certainly they which do glorify any in miracles besides Christ, they set
themselves flatly against the counsel of God.

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span>He maketh mention of the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, to the end he may declare unto the people that he
meaneth nothing less than to lead them away from the old and ancient
worship of the true God, which they had received of the fathers.
Furthermore, God hath given himself this title, that he might (dissever
and) distinguish himself by some mark from idols; for we do not
comprehend God in his essence, which cannot be seen, and which is
infinite; therefore, he useth such means as agree best with us, to bring
us to the knowledge of him. The Turks do boast that they do worship God,
which is the creator of heaven and earth; but before they come at heaven
they vanish away. Therefore, to the end God might keep his people from
vain and erroneous inventions, he kept them in his covenant; therefore,
when he calleth himself the God of Abraham, he did briefly teach that
which Moses declareth more at large, (<span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>[De
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>“Say not, Who shall ascend into heaven? Who
shall go down into the depth? Or who shall sail over the seas? The word
is nigh,” etc.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>Furthermore, as amongst the Jews the name of
the holy fathers was in high estimation, so Peter doth closely  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md) tell them, that they were no better
than other men, without the only begotten Son of God. And at this day
God will be known by a more evident mark yet, when as he calleth himself
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>Let us now return unto Peter; he saith that
he bringeth in no new religion, that. he may draw away the people from
the law and the prophets; for if he should attempt this, God had
forbidden them to hear him, (<span id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>..md)
Like as Paul teacheth, that we must retain one foundation in the
spiritual building, (<span id="x.ii-p13.2"></span>[1Co
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="x.ii-p13.2"></span>,.md)
because, so soon as we depart even but a little from Christ, there can
nothing ensue but ruin. And hereby also we may easily discern in what
sense he calleth God the God of the fathers; for neither doth he take
this for a general maxim, that what manner of worship soever the fathers
had, we must continue the same, as the Papists do foolishly vaunt that
they do follow the manner of worshipping which was used amongst the
fathers; for Peter doth expressly reckon up Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
from whom true religion did proceed, and by whom it was divinely
delivered; whereby he doth signify unto us, that we must not follow all
fathers, whereof many did grow out of kind, and became altogether unlike
to the first fathers; that this honor is due to the children of God
alone, and that others are to be refused; which thing the prophets do
also beat in  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) everywhere:

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span>“Walk not in the ways of your fathers,”
etc.,  
(<span id="x.ii-p15.2"></span>[Eze
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)<span id="x.ii-p15.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.ii-p16"></span>*Whom ye have delivered* He mingleth with
doctrine a most sharp chiding, according as the matter did require; for
it was impossible to bring them truly unto God, unless they were first
brought to the knowledge of their sins; neither doth he only lightly
touch them, but he doth very gravely show them the horribleness of that
offense which they had committed. To this end tendeth that comparison,
that they delivered him to be put to death, whom Pilate would have
loosed; and again, that, pardoning a murderer, they put the Prince of
life to death; that they did reject the just and holy. Men must be so
stricken, that being brought to know their guiltiness, they may
earnestly fly unto the remedy of pardon. Such vehemence and earnestness
did Peter also use in his first sermon; he saith afterward that *God
raised him up,* whereby they ought to know that, in putting Christ to
death, they did strive against God; although Peter had respect unto an
higher thing, to wit, that their cruelty did no whit impair the glory of
Christ, because God had nevertheless restored him to life. When as he
saith, that he and his fellows in office were witnesses of the
resurrection, his meaning is, that they saw it with their eyes, (<span
id="x.ii-p16.1"></span>[Lu 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#048.md)<span
id="x.ii-p16.1"></span>.) Therefore, this is referred not only unto the
apostolical function, but because they saw Christ with their eyes after
that he was risen from the dead; although I do also grant that this
second thing is comprehended under these words, because it is likely
that Peter doth make mention of that function which was committed unto
him, to the end he may purchase the greater authority.

<span id="x.ii-p17"></span><span id="x.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p18"></span>**16.** *And in the faith of his name.* When
as he saith *in the faith of his name, and his name;* and again, the
*faith which is by him;* this repetition is a token of a fervent
affection, for because he was wholly given to set forth the glory of
Christ, he beateth in \[inculcateth\] the same thing oftentimes.
Moreover, we see that when Paul is occupied about the showing and
setting forth of the grace of Christ, he thinketh that he hath never
spoken enough touching the same; and surely such is the wicked nature of
men, that Christ cannot be so highly extolled, and so preached, that his
honor can remain sound unto him. Let us, therefore, remember that Peter
did use such variety and plenty of words, to the end he might stay us in
Christ. As touching the phrase, when as he saith, *his name in the faith
of his name hath strengthened,* he showeth both the cause and the
manner; the power of Christ had healed the cripple but by faith. When as
he saith, *the faith which is by him, by* this word he signifieth unto
us that our faith cannot arise up unto God unless it be grounded in
Christ, and se, consequently, that this our faith doth look unto Christ
and stay itself upon him, and so he showeth that there cat be no right
faith in God when we pass over this mean.

<span id="x.ii-p19"></span>Furthermore, as he said before, that he and
the other apostles were witnesses of Christ’s life, so he doth now
declare that this life was manifestly proved unto the Jews by a sign or
effect, because they see the cripple healed, in whom they had an
excellent and evident token of the Divine power of Christ. And when as
in this last member he maketh faith the cause of this soundness, he
layeth unthankfulness to their charge by the way, unless they give faith
her due praise; and although faith may be referred as well unto the man
that was healed as unto the apostles, yet we need not to stand much
about this manner, because the power of the gospel is set forth by
*synecdoche.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc36028.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>Effugium,”
evasion or subterfuge.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc36028.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p12.1"></span>Tacite
admonet,” tacitly reminds them.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc36028.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="x.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>Inculcant,”
inculcate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 3:17-21](cc36029.md)
