[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36052)  [Next](cc36054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the chief priest said, Are these
things so? **2.** He answered, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; The
God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia,
before he dwelt in Charran, **3.** And he said unto him, Come out of thy
country, and from amongst thy kindred, and come into the land which I
will show thee. **4.** Then he came out of the land of the Chaldees, and
dwelt in Charran. After that his father was dead, God brought him thence
into this land, wherein ye now dwell.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**1.** There appeareth as yet some color of
equity in the high priest and in the council; and yet, notwithstanding,
there is a most unjust prejudice in his words; for he asketh him not
what cause he had to teach thus, neither doth he admit him unto the
defense of right, (which was, notwithstanding, the chief;) but he
demanded precisely whether Stephen uttered these words, whatsoever they
were; as the Papists at this day will not demand what doctrine it is,
and whether it can be proved out of the Scriptures; but they inquire
 <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) whether any man durst mutter
against their superstitions, that so soon as he is convict, they may
forthwith burn  <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md) him.
Furthermore, Stephen’s answer may seem at the first blush absurd and
foolish. He beginneth first at the very first beginning; afterwards he
maketh a long narration, wherein there is no mention made, in a manner,
of the matter in hand; and there can be no greater fault than to utter
many words which are nothing appertinent unto the matter;  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md) but whosoever shall thoroughly
consider this long speech, he shall find nothing therein which is
superfluous; and shall full well perceive that Stephen speaketh very
ap-pertinently,  <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) as the matter
requireth. He was accused as an apostate (or revolt,) which did attempt
the overthrow of religion and the worship of God; therefore, he beateth
in  <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md) this diligently, that he
retaineth that God which the fathers have always worshipped, so that he
turneth away the crime of wicked backsliding;  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) and declareth that his enemies were
pricked forward with nothing less than with the zeal of the law, for
they bear a show that they were wholly determined  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369.md) to increase the glory of God;
therefore, he wringeth from them this false boasting, and because they
had the fathers always in their mouths, because they were puffed up with
the glory of their nation, Stephen declareth also that they have no
cause to be proud of this, but rather that the corruptions of the
fathers were so great and so many, that they ought to be ashamed and
humbled.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>As concerning the principal state of the
cause, because the question was concerning the temple and the
ceremonies, he affirmeth plainly that their fathers were elected of God
to be a peculiar people before there was any temple, and before Moses
was born; and to this end tendeth that *exordium* or beginning which is
so far fet, (fetched.) Secondly, he telleth them that all external rites
which God gave by the hand of Moses were fashioned according to the
heavenly pattern.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>Whereupon it followeth, that the ceremonial
law is referred unto another end, and that those deal foolishly and
disorderly who omit the truth, and stay only in the signs. If the
readers shall refer the whole oration of Stephen unto these points, they
shall find nothing therein which agreeth not very well with the cause,
as I shall declare again briefly in the end; nevertheless, that scope of
the whole oration shall not hinder but that we may discuss all things
briefly which are worth the noting.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span><span id="xiv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**2.** *Men, brethren, and fathers.*
Although Stephen saw that those which sat in the council were, for the
most part, the sworn enemies of Christ, yet because the ordinary
government of the people did belong to them, and they had the oversight
of the Church, which God had not as yet cast off, therefore, he is not
afraid, for modesty’s sake, to call them fathers. Neither doth he
flatteringly purchase favor hereby; but he giveth this honor to the
order and government appointed by God, until such time as the authority
should be taken from them, the order being altered. Nevertheless, the
reverence of the place which they had doth not hinder him nor stop his
mouth; but that he doth freely dissent from them, whereby it appeareth
how ridiculous the Papists are who will have us so tied unto bare and
vain invented titles, that they may enforce us to subscribe unto their
decrees, though they be never so wicked.

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>*The God of glory.* By this beginning, he
declareth that he doth not disagree or dissent from the fathers in true
religion which they followed; for all religion, the worship of God, the
doctrine of the law, all prophecies, did depend upon that covenant which
God made with Abraham; therefore, when Stephen confessed that God
appeared to Abraham, he embraceth the law and the prophets, which flow
from that first revelation as from a fountain; moreover, he calleth him
the *God of glory,* that he may distinguish him from the false and
reigned gods, who alone is worthy of glory.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>*When he was in Mesopotamia.* It is well
known that that is called by this name which lieth between the river
Tigris and Euphrates; and he saith before, he dwelt in Charran, because
Abraham, being warned by an oracle, fled  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370.md) from Chaldea to Charran, which is a
city of Mesopotamia, famous by reason of the slaughter of Crassus and
the Roman army; although Pliny saith that it was a city of Arabia; and
it is no marvel that Chaldea is in this place comprehended under the
name of Mesopotamia, because, although that region, which is enclosed
with Tigris and Euphrates, \[Mesopotamia,\] be properly the country
between two rivers, yet those which set down any description of
countries  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371.md) do call both Assyria
and Chaldea by this name.

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>The sum is this, that Abraham being
commanded by God, did forsake his country, and so he was prevented with
the mere goodness of God when as he sought that which was offered him at
home of the \[its\] own accord. Read the last chapter of Joshua; but it
seemeth that Moses’ narration doth somewhat disagree with this, for
after that, about the end of the 11th chapter of Genesis, he had
declared, that Abraham doth \[did\] go into another country to dwell,
having left his house, he addeth, in the beginning of the 12th, that
*God spake unto Abraham.* This is easily answered, for Moses reciteth
not in this latter place what happened after the departure of Abraham;
but lest any man should think that Abraham wandered into other
countries, having unadvisedly forsaken his own house, (as light and
indiscreet men  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372.md) used to do
sometimes,) he showeth the cause of his departure, to wit, because he
was commanded by God to flit into another place. And thus much do the
words of the oracle import. For, if he had been a stranger in another
country, God could not have commanded him to depart out of his native
soil, forsaking his kinsmen and father’s house. Therefore, we see that
this place agreeth wondrous well with the words of Moses. For after that
Moses hath said that Abraham went to Charran, to the end he may show
that this journey was taken in hand, not through any lightness of man,
but at the commandment of God, he addeth that afterwards which he had
before omitted, which manner of speaking is much used of the Hebrews.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span><span id="xiv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span>**3.** *Come out of thy country.* God useth
many words, to the end he may the more wound the mind of Abraham, as if
it were not a thing sharp enough of itself to be banished out of his own
country. And that served to try his faith; even as that other thing
also, that God assigneth him no land wherein he may dwell, but maketh
him stand in doubt, and wait for a time. Wherefore the obedience of
Abraham was so much the more to be commended, because the sweetness of
his native soil keepeth him not back from going willingly, as it were,
into exile; and in that he doubteth not to follow God, although there
appear no certain resting-place, but is commanded to wander to and fro
for a time. Whereas, the showing of the land is deferred, it differeth
not much from deceiving of him.  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>Furthermore, we learn continually by our own
experience how profitable it was for Abraham thus to be exercised, and,
as it were, trained by little and little. Many men are carried with a
godly affection to attempt great things, but by and by, so soon as their
heat is waxen cold, it repenteth them of their purpose, and they would
gladly slip their necks out of the collar.  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md) Therefore, lest Abraham should faint
when he was in the midst of his course, through the remembrance of those
things which he had left behind him, God sifteth and trieth his mind
thoroughly, immediately after he had begun, lest he take anything in
hand lightly and unadvisedly. To this purpose serveth the parable which
Christ setteth before us concerning the building of the tower, (<span
id="xiv.i-p27.2"></span>[Lu 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#028.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p27.2"></span>.) For he teacheth that we must first cast the
charges, lest with shame we be enforced to leave off building after we
have begun. And though this were a particular thing in Abraham in that
he was commanded to go out of his own country, and to go into a far
country, in that God carried him from place to place, yet,
notwithstanding, there is in these words some figure of the calling of
us all. We are not all simply commanded to forsake our country, but we
are commanded to deny ourselves; we are not commanded to come out of our
father’s house, but to bid adieu to our own will, and to the desires of
our own flesh. Again, if father and mother, wife and children, hinder us
from following God, we must forsake them all. The commandment is given
simply to Abraham to flit; but we are commanded to do the stone upon
condition. For if in any place we cannot serve God, we must rather make
choice of exile than to stay in our nest, being slothful and sluggish.
Therefore, let us have the example of Abraham always before our eyes. He
is the father of the faithful, he was tried all manner of ways. Doth he
forget his country, his friends, and himself, that he may give over
himself unto God? (<span id="xiv.i-p27.3"></span>[Rom.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="xiv.i-p27.3"></span>..md) If
we will be counted the children of God, we must not degenerate from him.

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>*Which I shall show thee.* We must note that
which I touched a little before, that Abraham is kept in doubt, to the
end his patience may be tried. And this must we also apply to our own
use, that we may learn to depend wholly upon God. And surely this is a
principal exercise of our faith to put our trust in God, even when we
see nothing. God, indeed, will oftentimes show us a land wherein he
granteth us an abiding-place; yet, notwithstanding, because we are
strangers in the world, we have no certain and continual place of abode
anywhere. Again, our life, as Paul saith, is hid, (<span
id="xiv.i-p28.1"></span>[Col 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p28.1"></span>;) and being like unto dead men, we hope for
salvation, which is hid in heaven. Therefore, as touching our perpetual
habitation, God doth cause us to depend upon his providence alone, when
he commandeth us, as it were, to wander in a strange country. Lest such
deferring discourage us, we must hold this general rule of faith, that
we must go whither God calleth us, howsoever he do not show that which
he promiseth.

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span><span id="xiv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span>**4.** *Then going out.* The readiness and
willingness of faith is commended in these words. For when he is called
he maketh no delay, but maketh haste  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) and subdueth all his affections, that
they may obey the holy commandment of God. It is uncertain for what
cause he stayed at Charran; yet it may be that the weakness of his
father caused him to tarry there, who, as we read, died there shortly
after; or else, because he durst go no further, until such time as the
Lord had told him whither he should go. It is more like to be true in
mine opinion, that he was stayed there a while with the wearisomeness
and sickness of his father, because Stephen saith plainly that he was
brought thence after the death of his father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc36053.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>Sed tanum hoc
quaerint,” but the only thing they ask is.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc36053.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>Vulcano
devoveant,” devote him to Vulcan, (to the flames.)

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc36053.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>Et extra rem
vagari,” and wander from the subject.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc36053.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>Apposito,”
appositely.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc36053.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>Sedulo
igitur inculcat,” he therefore strenuously maintains.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc36053.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>Ita impiae
defectiones cremen avertit,” he thus repels the charge of impious
defection or revolt.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc36053.htm#fr_369.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>Simulabant
enim nihil sibi esse propositum quam,” for they pretended that their
only object was.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc36053.htm#fr_370.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p19.1"></span>Migravit,”
migrated.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc36053.htm#fr_371.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p20.1"></span>Geographi,”
geographers.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc36053.htm#fr_372.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p22.1"></span>Leves et
inconsiderati homines,” fickle and inconsiderate.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc36053.htm#fr_373.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p25.1"></span>A
frustratione,” from a frustrating of him, from rendering his journey
vain.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc36053.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p27.1"></span>Ac libentor
cursum reflecterent,” and they would willingly retrace their steps.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc36053.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p31.1"></span>Non
procrastinat, sed moras omnes rampit,” he does not procrastinate, but
breaks off all delay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7: 5-8](cc36054.md)
