[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36100)  [Next](cc36102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
12:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006)<span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**6.** And when Herod was about to bring him
forth, the same night slept Peter between two soldiers, bound with two
chains; and the keepers kept the prison before the door. **7.** And,
behold, the angel of the Lord stood, and a light shined in the
habitation: and he smote Peter’s side, saying, Arise straightway; and
his chains felt from his hands, **8.** And the angel said to him, Gird
thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And he did so. Then he saith to him,
Put thy garment about thee, and follow me. **9.** And going out, he
followed him, neither understood he that that was true which was done by
the angel; but he thought that he saw a vision. **10.** And when they
were past the first watch, and the second, they came to the iron gate,
which leadeth into the city, which opened to them of its own accord; and
when they were come out, they passed through one street, and by and by
the angel departed from him. **11.** Then Peter returning to himself,
said, Now of a truth I know that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath
delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the waiting of the
people of the Jews.

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span><span id="xix.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span>**6.** *When he was about to bring him
forth.* It seemeth at the first blush that the Church prayeth to small
purpose, for the day was now appointed wherein Peter should be put to
death, and he is within one night of death, and yet the faithful cease
not to pray, because they know that when the Lord doth purpose to
deliver his, he taketh his time oftentimes in the last and farthest
point of necessity, and that he hath in his hand diverse ways to
deliver. Secondly, we may think that they did not so much pray for
Peter’s life, as that the Lord would arm him with invincible fortitude,
for the glory of the gospel, and that God would \[not\] set the gospel
of his Son open to the reproaches and slanders of the wicked.

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>*That night he slept.* All these
circumstances do more set forth the wonderful power of God, for who
would not have thought that Peter was already swallowed up of death? for
though he drew breath as yet, yet he had no chinch \[chink\] to creep
out at, for as much as he was beset with many deaths. Therefore, whereas
he escapeth from amidst deaths, whereas he goeth safely among the hands
of his hangmen, whereas the chains are molten and are loosed, whereas
the iron gate openeth itself to him; hereby it appeareth that it was a
mere divine kind of deliverance, and it was profitable for Peter to be
thus taught by these signs, that he might with more assurance forthwith
declare unto men the grace of God thus known. Again, it appeareth by
this strait keeping that Herod meant nothing less  <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756) than to let Peter go away alive.

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span><span id="xix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span>**7.** *A light shined,* It is to be thought
that Peter alone saw this light, and that the soldiers did either sleep
so soundly, or else were so amazed, that they neither felt nor perceived
any thing, And there might be two causes why God would have the light to
shine; either that Peter might have the use thereof, and that the
darkness might be no hindrance to him, or that it might be to him a sign
and token of the heavenly glory. For we read oftentimes that the angels
appeared with glistering brightness, even when the sun did shine,
Assuredly, Peter might have gathered by the strange light that God was
present, and also he ought to have made his profit thereof. When as the
angel smiteth Peter’s side, it appeareth hereby what a care God hath for
his, who watcheth over them when they sleep, and raiseth them when they
are drowsy. And surely there were nothing more miserable than we, if the
continuance of our prayers alone did keep God in his watching over us;
for such is the infirmity of our flesh that we faint and quail, and we
stand most of all in need of his help when our minds, being drawn away,
do not seek him. Sleep is a certain image of death, and doth choke and
drown all the senses, what should become of us if God should then cease
to have respect to us? But forasmuch as when the faithful go to sleep,
they commit their safety to God, it cometh to pass by this means, that
even their sleep doth call upon God.

<span id="xix.ii-p10"></span>Whereas he saith, that immediately after
the angel had said the word the chains were loosed, we gather by this,
that there is power enough in the commandment of God alone to remove all
manner \[of\] lets, when all ways seem to be stopt on all sides, so that
if he intend to appease the motions and tumults of war, although the
whole world were appointed in armor, their spears and swords shall
forthwith fall out of their hands; on the other side, if he be
determined to punish us and our sins with war, in a moment, (in the
twinkling of an eye,) their minds, which were before given to peace,
shall wax hot, and they shall lay hand on their swords. Whereas Luke
setteth down severally both the words of the angel, and also the course
of the matter, it serveth for the more certainty of the history, that it
may in every respect appear that Peter was delivered by God.

<span id="xix.ii-p11"></span><span id="xix.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p12"></span>**9.** *He knew not that it was true.* He
did not think that it was a vain or false visor, as Satan doth
oftentimes delude men with jugglings; but *true* is taken in this place
for that which is done naturally and after the manner of men. For we
must note the contrariety \[antithesis\] that is between the thing
itself and the vision. Furthermore, though he think that it is a vision,
yet doth he willingly obey; whereby his obedience is proved, whilst that
being content with the commandment of the angel alone, he doth not
inquire nor reason what he must de, but doth that which he is commanded
to do.

<span id="xix.ii-p13"></span><span id="xix.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p14"></span>**10.** *When they were past.* God was able
to have carried Peter away in the turning of an hand;  <span
id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757) but he overcometh diverse straits one
after another, that the glory of the miracle might be the greater. So he
created the world in six days, (<span id="xix.ii-p15.2"></span>[Genesis
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#000)<span id="xix.ii-p15.2"></span>.) not
because he had any need of space of thee, but that he might the better
stay us in the meditating upon his works, (<span
id="xix.ii-p15.3"></span>[Ex
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#011)<span id="xix.ii-p15.3"></span>,)
for he applieth the manner of doing unto our capacity, and unto the
increase of faith. If Peter had at a sudden been carried unto the house
where the brethren were assembled, then should one only deliverance have
been acknowledged, but now we see, as it were with our eyes, that he was
delivered more than ten times.

<span id="xix.ii-p16"></span><span id="xix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p17"></span>**11.** *Then Peter returning to himself.*
It is word for word, being made in himself, because, being before
astonied with a strange and incredible thing, he was, as it were,
without himself. But now at length, as it were after a trance, he
knoweth that he is delivered from death. His words set down by Luke
contain a thanksgiving; for he extolleth with himself the benefit of God
which he had tried, \[experienced,\] and whereof he had tasted, and he
doth highly commend it with himself, until he find some other witnesses.
He saith that the angel was sent of God, according to the common meaning
of the godly, who hold that the angels are appointed to be ministers, to
be careful for, and to take charge of their safety; for unless he had
been thus persuaded, he would not have spoken of the angel. And yet he
doth not commend the angel as the author of the grace, but he ascribeth
all the whole praise of the work to God alone, neither do the angels
help us to this end, that they may derive unto themselves even the least
jot of God’s glory. Whereas he saith that he was delivered out of the
hand of Herod, he amplifieth the goodness and benefit of God, by the
power of his enemy. To the same end tendeth that which he addeth of the
Jews; for the greater the number of the enemies was, the more excellent
was the grace of God toward his servant; for it is a great matter that
God alone being favorable, the deadly hatred of all the whole world
should come to nought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_756"></span>[757](cc36101.htm#fr_756) <span
id="xix.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p7.1"></span>Nihil
Herocli fuisse minus in animo,” that there was nothing Herod less
intended.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[758](cc36101.htm#fr_757) <span
id="xix.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p15.1"></span>Momento
uno,” in one moment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 12:12-19](cc36102)
