[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36062)  [Next](cc36064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#000.md)<span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>: 51-53

<span id="xiv.xi-p2"></span>**51.** You stiff-necked, and of an
uncircumcised heart and ears, ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost; as
your fathers did, so do ye. **52.** Which of the prophets have not your
fathers persecuted? and they have slain those which foretold of the
coming of the Just; of whom you are now made the betrayers and
murderers: **53.** Who have received the law in the dispositions of
angels, and have not kept it.

<span id="xiv.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xi-p4"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p5"></span>**51.** Forasmuch as Stephen doth not
expressly answer the points of the accusation, I am of their mind who
think that he would have said more, if his oration had not been broken
off with some uproar. For we know what a session of judges he had;
therefore, no marvel if they enforced him to hold his peace with noise
and outcries. And we see, also, that he did use long insinuation of set
purpose, that he might tame and appease them who were like brute beasts
most cruel; but it is likely that their madness was then incensed, when
he proved that they had most wickedly corrupted the law, that the temple
was polluted with their superstitions, and that there is nothing sincere
amongst them; because, whilst they did stick in bare figures, they did
not worship God spiritually, because they did not refer the ceremonies
unto the heavenly figure; but though Stephen did not enter the cause
straightway, but essayed to make their fierce minds somewhat more gentle
by little and little, yet did he reason very fitly, to purge himself of
the crime laid to his charge.

<span id="xiv.xi-p6"></span>These two things, as we have said, were the
principal points of the question, that Stephen had blasphemed God and
his temple; that he went about to disannul the law. That Stephen might
clear himself of both these false slanders, he began at the calling of
Abraham, and declareth that the Jews excelled the Gentiles, not of their
own nature, not by any right of their own, not by any merits of works,
but by a free privilege, because God had adopted them in the person of
Abraham. This is also very pertinent to the cause, that the covenant of
salvation was made with Abraham before any temple or ceremonies were,
yea, before circumcision was appointed. Of which things the Jews did so
boast, that they said there was no worship of God without them, neither
any holiness. After that he set down how wonderful and manifold the
goodness of God was towards Abraham’s stock, and again how wickedly and
frowardly they had refused, so much as in them lay, the grace of God;
whereby it appeareth that it cannot be ascribed to their own merits that
they are counted God’s people, but because God did choose them of his
own accord, being unworthy, and did not cease to do them good, though
they were most unthankful. Their lofty and proud spirits might by this
means have been subdued, tamed, and humbled, that being emptied of that
wind of foolish glory they might come unto the Mediator. Thirdly, he
declared that the Angel was the governor and chief, in giving the law
and delivering the people, and that Moses did so serve in his function,
that he taught that there should come other prophets hereafter, who
should, notwithstanding, have one which should be the chief of them,
that he might make an end of all prophecies, and that he might bring the
perfect accomplishment of them all. Whereby it is gathered that those
are nothing less than Moses’ disciples, who reject that kind of doctrine
which was promised and commended in the law, together with the author
thereof.

<span id="xiv.xi-p7"></span>Last of all, he showeth that all the old
worship which was prescribed by Moses is not to be esteemed of itself,
but that it ought rather to be referred to another end, because it was
made according to the heavenly pattern; and that the Jews have always
been wicked interpreters of the law, because they conceived nothing but
that which was earthly. Hereby is it proved that there is no injury done
to the temple and the law when Christ is made, as it were, the end and
truth of both, But because the state of the cause did consist chiefly in
this, that the worship of God doth not properly consist in sacrifices
and other things, and that all ceremonies did nothing else but shadow
Christ, Stephen was purposed to stand upon this point if the Jews would
have permitted him; but because, when he was come to the pith of the
matter, they cannot abide to hear any more, (they were so incensed with
fury,) the application of those things which he had said, unto this
cause which he had in hand, is wanting. And he is enforced to use a
sharp reprehension for a conclusion, *Ye of an hard neck,* saith he,
(<span id="xiv.xi-p7.1"></span>[Exod.
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009.md), [Exod.
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#005)<span id="xiv.xi-p7.1"></span>..md) We
see how soon he is offended with them with an holy zeal, but because he
saw that he spake many things to small end, especially before deaf men,
he breaketh off his doctrine. This is a metaphor taken from horses or
oxen, which Moses useth often, when he will say that his people is a
rebellious people, and disobedient to God, and also unruly.

<span id="xiv.xi-p8"></span>The upbraiding which followeth was of
greater force with them. Circumcision was unto them a vail and covering
to cover all vices. Therefore, when he calleth them uncircumcised in
heart, he doth not only mean that they are rebellious against God and
stubborn, but that they were found treacherous and covenant-breakers,
even in that sign whereof they did so greatly boast; and so he turneth
that back most fitly to their shame, whereof they made boast to their
glory. For this is all one, as if he should have said that they had
broken the covenant of the Lord, so that their circumcision was void and
profane. This speech is taken out of the law and the prophets. For as
God hath appointed the sign, so he would have the Jews know to what end
they were circumcised; to wit, that they might circumcise their hearts
and all their corrupt affections to the Lord, as we read, “And now
circumcise your hearts to the Lord,” Wherefore, the letter of
circumcision, as Paul calleth it, is a vain visor with God, (<span
id="xiv.xi-p8.1"></span>[Ro 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028.md)<span
id="xiv.xi-p8.1"></span>.) So, forasmuch as at this day the spiritual
washing is the truth of our baptism, it is to be feared, lest that may
well be objected to us, that we are not partakers of baptism, because
our souls and flesh are polluted with filthiness.

<span id="xiv.xi-p9"></span>*Ye have always resisted.* At the first
Stephen vouchsafed to call these men fathers and brethren, against whom
he inveigheth thus sharply, Therefore, so long as there remained any
hope that they might be made more gentle, he dealt not only friendly
with them, but he spake honorably unto them. Now, so soon as he espieth
their desperate stubbornness, he doth not only take from them all honor,
but lest he should have any fellowship with them, he speaketh unto them
as unto men of another kindred. You, saith he, are like to your fathers,
who have always rebelled against the Spirit of God. But he himself came
of the same fathers; and yet that he may couple himself to Christ, he
forgetteth his kindred, inasmuch as it was wicked. And yet for all this,
he bindeth them not all in one bundle, as they say, but he speaketh unto
the multitude.

<span id="xiv.xi-p10"></span>And those are said to resist the Spirit who
reject  <span id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465.md) him when he speaketh in
the prophets. Neither doth he speak in this place of secret revelations,
wherewith God inspireth every one, but of the external ministry; which
we must note diligently. He purposeth to take from the Jews all color of
excuse; and, therefore, he upbraideth unto them, that they had
purposely, and not of ignorance, resisted God. Whereby it appeareth what
great account the Lord maketh of his word, and how reverently he will
have us to receive the same. Therefore, lest, like giants, we make war
against God, let us learn to hearken to the ministers by whose mouth he
teacheth us.

<span id="xiv.xi-p12"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p13"></span>**52.** *Which of the prophets?* Forasmuch
as they ought not to bear their fathers’ fault, Stephen seemeth to deal
unjustly, in that he reckoneth this amongst their faults unto whom he
speaketh; but he had just causes so to do. First, because they did vaunt
that they were Abraham’s holy progeny, it was worth the labor to show
unto them how great vanity that was, as if Stephen should say, that
there is no cause why they should vaunt of their stock, forasmuch as
they come of those who were wicked murderers of the prophets. So that he
toucheth that glancingly which is more plainly set down by the prophets,
that they are not the children of prophets, but a degenerate and
bastardly issue, the seed of Canaan, etc. Which thing we may at this day
object to the Papists, when as they so highly extol their fathers.
Furthermore, this serveth to amplify withal, whereas he saith that it is
no new thing for them to resist the truth, but that they have this
wickedness, as it were, by inheritance from their fathers. Furthermore,
it was requisite for Stephen by this means to pluck from their faces the
visor of the Church, wherewith they burdened him.  <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466.md) This was an unmeet prejudice against
the doctrine of the gospel, in that they boasted that they are the
Church of God, and did challenge this title  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467.md) by long succession. Therefore, Stephen
preventeth them on the contrary, and proveth that their fathers did, no
less than they, rage against the prophets, through wicked contempt and
hatred of sound doctrine. Lastly, this is the continual custom of the
Scripture to gather the fathers and children together  <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468.md) under the same guiltiness, seeing they
pollute themselves with the same offenses, and that famous sentence of
Christ answereth thereto, “Fulfill the measure of your fathers, until
the just blood come upon you, from Abel unto Zacharias.”

<span id="xiv.xi-p17"></span>*Who have foretold.* Hereby we gather that
this was the drift of all the prophets, to direct their nation unto
Christ, as he is the end of the law, (<span id="xiv.xi-p17.1"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="xiv.xi-p17.1"></span>..md)
It were too long to gather all the prophecies wherein the coming of
Christ was foretold. Let it suffice to know this generally, that it was
the common office of all the prophets to promise salvation by the grace
of Christ. Christ is called in this place the *Just,* not only to note
his innocency, but of the effect, because it is proper to him to appoint
justice in the world. And even in this place doth Stephen prove that the
Jews were altogether unworthy of the benefit of redemption, because the
fathers did not only refuse that in times past, which was witnessed unto
them by the prophets, but they did also cruelly murder the messengers of
grace, and their children endeavored to extinguish the author of
righteousness and salvation which was offered unto them. By which
comparison Christ teacheth that the wicked conspiracy of his enemies was
an heap of all iniquities.

<span id="xiv.xi-p18"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p19"></span>**53.** *Who have received the law.* They
called that fury wherewith they raged against Stephen zeal of the law,
as if he had been a forsaker of the law, and a revolt  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469.md) and had enforced others to fall away
in like sort. Although he was determined to clear himself of this false
accusation, yet he did not go through with his answer. For he could not
be heard, and it was to no end to speak to deaf men. Therefore, he is
content, at a word, to take from them their false color and pretense. It
is evident, saith he, that you lie, when you pretend the zeal of the
law, which you transgress and break without ceasing; and as he objected
unto them in the words next going before, the treacherous murder of the
Just, so now he upbraideth unto them their revolting from the law. Some
man will say that Stephen’s cause is no whit bettered hereby, because
the Jews break the law. But as we have already said, Stephen doth not so
chide them, as if his defense did principally consist in this issue, but
that they may not flatter themselves in their false boasting. For
hypocrites must be handled thus, who will, notwithstanding, seem to be
most earnest defenders of God’s glory, though indeed they condemn him
carelessly. And here is also a fit antistrophe, because they made
semblance that they received the law which was committed to them, which
was, notwithstanding, reproachfully despised by them.

<span id="xiv.xi-p21"></span>*In the dispositions of angels* It is word
for word, *into the dispositions,* but it is all one. Furthermore, we
need not seek any other interpreter of this saying than Paul, who saith
that the law was disposed or ordained by angels, (<span
id="xiv.xi-p21.1"></span>[Ga 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiv.xi-p21.1"></span>;) for he useth the participle there whereof
this noun is derived. And his meaning is, that the angels were the
messengers of God, and his witnesses in publishing the law, that the
authority thereof might be firm and stable.

<span id="xiv.xi-p22"></span>Therefore, forasmuch as God did call the
angels to be, as it were, solemn witnesses when he gave the Jews his
law, the same angels shall be witnesses of their unfaithfulness.  <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470.md) And to this end doth Stephen make
mention of the angels, that he may accuse the Jews in presence of them,
and prove them guilty, because they have transgressed the law. Hereby we
may gather what shall become of the despisers of the gospel, which doth
so far excel the law, that it doth, after a sort, darken the glory
thereof, as Paul teacheth, (<span id="xiv.xi-p23.2"></span>[2
Corinthians 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiv.xi-p23.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc36063.htm#fr_465.md) <span
id="xiv.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p11"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xi-p11.1"></span>Contumaciter rejicient,” contumaciously reject.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc36063.htm#fr_466.md) <span
id="xiv.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p14"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xi-p14.1"></span>Gravabant,” burdened, brought a charge against
him, or threw obloquy on him.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc36063.htm#fr_467.md) <span
id="xiv.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.xi-p15.1"></span>Hunc qui
titulum sibi... arrogabant,” and arrogated this title to themselves.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc36063.htm#fr_468.md) <span
id="xiv.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p16"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xi-p16.1"></span>Aggregare,” to sum up, include.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[470](cc36063.htm#fr_469.md) <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.xi-p20.1"></span>Apostata,”
an apostate.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[471](cc36063.htm#fr_470.md) <span
id="xiv.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p23"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xi-p23.1"></span>Perfidiae,” perfidy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:54-58](cc36064.md)
