[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36061)  [Next](cc36063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.x"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p1"></span><span id="xiv.x-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:44-50](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044.md)<span id="xiv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p2"></span>**44.** Our fathers had the testimony of
witness in the wilderness, like as he had appointed, speaking to Moses,
that he should make it according to the form which he had seen: **45.**
Which tabernacle our fathers which succeeded brought with Jesus into the
possession of the Gentiles, which God drove out before the face of our
fathers, until the days of David; **46.** Who found favor before God,
and desired that he might find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.
**47.** But Solomon built him an house. **48.** But the Most High
dwelleth not in temples made with hands; as the prophet saith, **49.**
Heaven is My seat, and the earth is my footstool. What house will ye
build for me? saith the Lord; or what place is it that ye should rest
in? **50.** Hath not my hand made all these things?

<span id="xiv.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.x-p4"></span><span id="xiv.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p5"></span>**44.** *The tabernacle of witness.* Stephen
showeth here that the blame cannot be laid upon God, because the Jews
polluted themselves with divers superstitions, as if God had suffered
them to wander freely.  <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) For he
saith that God had commanded how he would be worshipped by them.
Whereupon it followeth that they were entangled in so many errors,
because they would not follow that form which God had appointed.
Although he girdeth \[reprehendeth\] them for two causes: Because, being
not content with that rule alone which God had prescribed, they invented
to themselves strange worships; secondly, because they had no respect
unto the right end of the temple, and of the ceremonies which God had
appointed. For whereas they ought to have been unto them exercises of
the spiritual worship, they apprehended nothing but that which was
carnal, according to their carnal nature;  <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457.md) that is, they took the shadow for the
body.

<span id="xiv.x-p8"></span>Therefore we see that the Jews were first
reprehended for their boldness, for because that being not content with
the plain word of God, they were carried away after their own
inventions. Secondly, they are reproved for the preposterous abuse of
the true and sincere worship; because they followed the flesh instead of
the Spirit. They had, saith he, *the tabernacle of witness.* Therefore
it was their own wantonness and rashness only which caused them to sin.
For seeing they were well taught what was the right way and order of
worshipping God, all cloak and color of ignorance was taken away.

<span id="xiv.x-p9"></span>Which thing is worth the noting. For seeing
God doth after a sort bridle us, when he maketh his will known unto us,
if after we have received his commandment we turn aside, either unto the
right hand or to the left, we be twice guilty; because the servant which
knoweth his master’s will, and doth it not, shall suffer more stripes:
This is the first mark whereby the Holy Spirit doth distinguish all
bastardly and corrupt worshippings from the true and sincere worship.
Yea, (to speak more briefly,) the first difference between true worship
and idolatry is this: when the godly take in hand nothing but that which
is agreeable to the Word of God, but the other think all that lawful
which pleaseth themselves, and so they count their own will a law;
whereas God alloweth nothing but that which he himself hath appointed.
To this end serveth the word *witness.*

<span id="xiv.x-p10"></span>The Hebrew word \[<span
id="xiv.x-p10.1"></span>מד\] (*moed*) signifieth, indeed, an appointed
place and time, or an assembly of men; but the reason expressed in Moses
showeth that there is another cause why it is so named. For in Moses
this is oftentimes repeated, “I will meet with you there.” Therefore the
tabernacle was consecrated by the covenant and the word of the Lord, and
his voice was heard there continually, that it might be distinguished
from all profane places.

<span id="xiv.x-p11"></span>*According to the form which he had seen.*
This is referred unto the second point which I have touched; for it may
be that he which shall use the ceremonies only which God appointed,
shall notwithstanding worship God amiss. For God careth not for external
rites, save only inasmuch as they are of the heavenly truth; therefore
God would have the tabernacle to be made like unto the heavenly figure,
 <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458.md) that the Jews might know that
they were not to stay still in the external figures. Furthermore, let
him which is disposed read my Commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and he shall see what that figure, whereof mention is made
<span id="xiv.x-p12.2"></span>[Exodus
25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#000.md)<span id="xiv.x-p12.2"></span>,
(<span id="xiv.x-p12.3"></span>[Ex
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040.md)<span id="xiv.x-p12.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.x-p12.4"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)<span id="xiv.x-p12.4"></span>,.md)
did signify. Stephen doth only briefly tell them in this place that the
worship which God commanded the Jews is spiritual, and that they,
according to their carnal blockishness, were evil and false
interpreters; therefore, as we have said, that God alloweth no worship
but that which is grounded in his commandment, so we are taught here
that it is requisite in the right use of the commandment, that the
spiritual truth be present; which thing being granted, it was the like
question which we said did consist principally in this issue, whether
the shadows ought to yield to the body or not. Whereas Moses is said to
have seen a form or figure, the Spirit of God signifieth thereby that it
is unlawful for us to invent forms at our pleasure; but that all our
senses must be set upon that form which God showeth, that all our
religion may be formed according to it. The word *figure* signifieth
here, in this place, the principal pattern,  <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459.md) which is nothing else but the
spiritual truth.

<span id="xiv.x-p14"></span><span id="xiv.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p15"></span>**45.** *Which they brought in.* This
serveth to increase the *frowardness*  <span
id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460.md) of the nation, that whereas the
tabernacle did continue with them, and they carried the same
whithersoever they went, yet could they not be kept within the bounds of
God’s covenant, but they would have strange and profane rites; to wit,
declaring that God dwelt amidst them, from whom they were so far
distant, and whom *they* did drive out of that inheritance which *he*
had given them. To this purpose serveth that also, that God did beautify
the tabernacle with divers miracles; for the worthiness thereof  <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461.md) was established by those victories
which the Jews had gotten, as it appeareth by divers places of the holy
history; therefore, it must needs be that they were very disobedient,
which did not cease oftentimes to start aside from that worship which
was so many ways approved.

<span id="xiv.x-p18"></span>*Until the days of David.* Although the ark
of the Lord continued long in Shiloh, yet it had no certain place until
the reign of David, (<span id="xiv.x-p18.1"></span>[1Sa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003)<span id="xiv.x-p18.1"></span>;.md)
for it was unlawful for men to erect a place for the same, but it was to
be placed in that place which the Lord had showed, as Moses saith
oftentimes. Neither durst David himself, after he had taken it from the
enemies, bring it into the thrashing-floor of Araunah until the Lord had
declared, by an angel from heaven, that that was the place which he had
chosen, (<span id="xiv.x-p18.2"></span>[2Sa
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016)<span id="xiv.x-p18.2"></span>..md)
And Stephen counteth this a singular benefit of God, not without great
cause, that the place was showed to David wherein the Israelites should
hereafter worship God; as in the Psalm he rejoiceth as over some notable
thing: “I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the house of
the Lord; our feet shall be stable in thy courts, O Jerusalem,” (<span
id="xiv.x-p18.3"></span>[Ps 132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiv.x-p18.3"></span>) The priesthood was coupled with the kingdom;
therefore, the stability of the kingdom is showed in the resting of the
ark; therefore it is said that he desired this so earnestly that he
bound himself with a solemn vow, that he would not come within his
house, that his eyes should enjoy no sleep, nor his temples any rest,
until he should know a place for the Lord, and a tabernacle for the God
of Jacob. Furthermore, the place was showed to David, but it was granted
to Solomon to build the temple, (<span id="xiv.x-p18.4"></span>[1Ki
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#007)<span id="xiv.x-p18.4"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.x-p19"></span><span id="xiv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p20"></span>**47.** *Solomon built.* Stephen seemeth to
gird Solomon glancingly  <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462.md) in this
place, as if he did not regard the nature of God in building the temple;
yet did he attempt that work not without the commandment of God. There
was also a promise added, wherein God did testify that he would be
present with his people there. I answer, that when Stephen denieth that
God dwelleth in temples made with hands, that is not referred unto
Solomon, who knew full well that God was to be sought in heaven, and
that men’s minds must be lifted up thither by faith; which thing he
uttered also in that solemn prayer which he made:

<span id="xiv.x-p22"></span>“The heaven of heavens do not contain
thee,  
and how much less this house?”  
(<span id="xiv.x-p22.3"></span>[1Ki
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#023)<span id="xiv.x-p22.3"></span>;.md)

<span id="xiv.x-p23"></span>but he reproveth the blockishness of the
people, which abused the temple, as if it had had God tied to it; which
appeareth more plainly by the testimony of Isaiah, (<span
id="xiv.x-p23.1"></span>[Isa 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006.md)<span
id="xiv.x-p23.1"></span>,) which he citeth also; God, saith he, would
have Solomon to build him a temple; but they were greatly deceived who
thought that he was, as it were, included in such a building; as he
complaineth by his prophet that the people do him injury, when as they
imagine that he is tied to a place; but the prophet doth not for that
cause only inveigh against the Jews, because they worshipped God
superstitiously, thinking that his power was tied to the temple, but
because they did esteem him according to their own affection, and,
therefore, after that they had ended  <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463.md) their sacrifices and external pomp,
they imagined that he was pleased, and that they had brought him
indebted to them. This was almost a common error in all ages; because
men thought that cold ceremonies were sufficient enough for the worship
of God. The reason is, because forasmuch as they are carnal, and wholly
set upon the world, they imagine that God is like to them; therefore, to
the end God may take from them this blockishness, he saith that he
*filleth all things.*

<span id="xiv.x-p25"></span><span id="xiv.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p26"></span>**49.** For whereas he saith, that *heaven
is his seat, and the earth his footstool*, it must not be so understood
as if he had a body, or could be divided into parts, after the manner of
men; but because he is infinity, therefore he saith that he cannot be
comprehended within any spaces of place; therefore, those men are
deceived who esteem God or his worship according to their own nature;
and because the prophet had to deal with hypocrites, he doth not only
dispute about the essence of God, but also teacheth generally, that he
is far unlike to men, and that he is not moved with the vain pomp of
this world as they are. Here ariseth that question also, why the prophet
saith that the Lord hath no place of rest in the world, whereas,
notwithstanding, the Spirit affirmeth the contrary elsewhere, “This is
my rest for ever,” (<span id="xiv.x-p26.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="xiv.x-p26.1"></span>..md)
Moreover, Isaiah doth adorn the Church with this self-same title, that
it is the glorious rest of God, alluding unto the temple, I answer, that
when God appointed signs of his presence ill the temple, and sacrifices
in times past, he did not this to the end he might settle and fasten
himself and his power there; therefore, the Israelites did wickedly,
who, setting their minds wholly upon the signs, did forge to themselves
an earthly God. They dealt also ungodly, who under this color took to
themselves liberty to sin, as if they could readily and easily pacify
God with bare ceremonies. Thus doth the world use to mock God.

<span id="xiv.x-p27"></span>When God doth declare, by the external
rites, that he will be present with his, that he may dwell in the midst
of them, he commandeth them to lift up their minds, that they may seek
him spiritually. Hypocrites, which are entangled in the world, will
rather pluck God out of heaven; and whereas they have nothing but vain
and bare figures, they are puffed up with such foolish confidence, that
they pamper themselves in their sins carelessly, so, at this day, the
Papists include Christ in the bread and wine in their imagination; that
done, so soon as they have worshipped their idol with foolish worship,
they vaunt and crack as if they were as holy as angels. We must
diligently note these two vices, that men do superstitiously forge to
themselves a carnal and worldly God which doth so come down unto them,
that they remain still having their minds set upon the earth, and that
they rise not up in mind to heaven. Again, they dream that God is
pacified with frivolous obedience; hereby it cometh to pass, that they
are besotted in the visible signs; and, secondly, that  <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464.md) they go about to bring God indebted to
them after a childish manner, and with things which be nothing worth.

<span id="xiv.x-p29"></span>Now we understand in what sense the prophet
saith that God hath no place of rest in the world. He would, indeed,
that the temple should have been a sign and pledge of his presence, yet
only to the godly, which did ascend into heaven in heart, which did
worship him spiritually with pure faith; but he hath no place of rest
with the superstitious, who, through their foolish inventions, tie him
unto the elements of the world, or do erect unto him an earthly worship;
neither yet with hypocrites, who are puffed up with drunken confidence,
as if they had done their duty towards God well, after that they have
played in their toys. In sum, the promise received by faith doth cause
God to hear us in his temple, as if he were present to show forth his
power in the sacraments; but unless we rise up unto him by faith, we
shall have no presence of his. Hereby we may easily gather, that when he
dwelleth amidst those that be his, he is neither tied to the earth,
neither comprehended in any place, because they seek him spiritually in
heaven.

<span id="xiv.x-p30"></span><span id="xiv.x-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p31"></span>**50.** *Hath not mine hand?* The prophet
telleth the people in these words, that God hath no need either of gold,
either of precious furniture of the temple, either of the sacrifices;
whereupon it followeth that his true worship is not contained in
ceremonies. For he desireth none of all these things which we offer unto
him, for his own sake, but only that he may exercise us in the study of
godliness; which argument is handled more at large, <span
id="xiv.x-p31.1"></span>[Psalm 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiv.x-p31.1"></span>. For although this be a shameful foolishness to
go about to feed God with sacrifices, yet unless hypocrites were drowned
in the same, they would make no such account of toys, because all that
is unsavory before God which dissenteth from the spiritual worship;
therefore, let us know that God seeketh us and not ours, which we have
only at pleasure; and hereby it appeareth also what great difference
there is between true religion and the carnal inventions of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc36062.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p6.1"></span>Sine freno,”
without a curb.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc36062.htm#fr_457.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p7.1"></span>Pro crasso suo
ingenio nihil nisi terrenum et carnale apprehenderent,” in accordance
with their gross disposition, they apprehend nothing but what was
earthly and carnal.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc36062.htm#fr_458.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p12.1"></span>Archetypum,”
archetype, model.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc36062.htm#fr_459.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p12.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p13.1"></span>Primarium
exemplar,” the primary pattern, the original model.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc36062.htm#fr_460.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p16"></span> “<span
id="xiv.x-p16.1"></span>Pervicaciam,” perverseness.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[462](cc36062.htm#fr_461.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p17.1"></span>Illius
dignitas,” its dignity.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[463](cc36062.htm#fr_462.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p21.1"></span>Videtur hic
oblique Stephanus Solomonem perstringere,” Stephen here seemeth
indirectly to rebuke Solomon.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc36062.htm#fr_463.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p24.1"></span>Defuncti
sunt,” performed.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc36062.htm#fr_464.md) <span
id="xiv.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p28.1"></span>Neglecta
pietate,” neglecting a piety, omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7: 51-53](cc36063.md)
