[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36042)  [Next](cc36044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
5:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**17.** And the high priest rose, and all
that were with him, that is to say, the sect of the Sadducees, and were.
filled with zeal, \[or indignation.\] **18.** And they laid hands on the
apostles, and put them in the common prison. **19.** And the angel of
the Lord opened the door of the prison in the night season, and bringing
them out, said, **20.** Go, and standing, speak in the temple unto the
people all the word, of this life. **21.** When they heard this early in
the morning, they entered into the temple and taught. But when the high
priest came, and those which were with him, they called a council, and
all the whole senate of the children of Israel, and sent into the common
prison to fetch them. **22.** But when the ministers came, they found
them not. Therefore they returned and told, saying, **23.** The prison
truly found we shut with all diligence, and the keepers standing at the
door; but when the prison was opened, we found none within**. 24.** When
the chief priest, and the captain of the temple, and the priests, heard
these sayings, they doubted of these things, what this would be. **25.**
Furthermore, a certain man coming told them, saying, Behold, the men
whom ye had put in prison stand in the temple, teaching the people.
**26.** Then the captain going with the ministers, brought them without
violence. For they feared the people, lest they should be stoned.

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Luke hath hitherto declared that the
Church was wonderfully increased, that it was furnished  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) with divers gifts, that it excelled in
miracles; finally, that the kingdom of Christ did flourish there by all
means. Now he beginneth to show that the fury of the wicked was kindled
with these things, so that they raged sorer afresh.  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) Whence we may gather with what blind
fury and rage Satan driveth them forward, when as they are so little
terrified with such evident power of God, that they run headlong more
boldly, and with greater force, and bend all their force, as it were, to
overthrow the very heaven. As this so great blindness is a horrible
punishment of Almighty God, so ought it to teach all men to submit
themselves betimes to God, lest that they themselves, being taken with
the spirit of giddiness, (whilst they run against the hand of God,) be
broken in pieces with the same. Nevertheless, let us know that God will
so increase his Church with spiritual good things, that yet,
notwithstanding, he suffereth the same to be vexed of the wicked.
Therefore we must alway be ready for the combat; for our estate at this
day is not unlike to theirs. Especially the knowledge of the gifts of
God, whereby he testifieth that he is present with us, ought to
encourage us, lest the fury and boldness of the wicked do terrify and
dismay us. For this is no small comfort, when we know that God is
present with us.

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span>*Which were with him.* He meaneth those
which were most familiar, and the highest linked in friendship with the
chief priest, whose counsel he was wont to use, and whom he had, being,
as it were, gathered and culled out of the whole order, not for
judgment, or discretion, but for the love of his faction; as they did
then contend among themselves shamelessly, like mortal enemies.
Furthermore, Luke saith again, that the Sadducees did bear the greatest
swing at that day; to the end we may know that the government was then
confused with horrible wasteness;  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) when as such a sect could bear rule.
But God suffered the synagogue to be drowned in such extreme reproach,
after that he had separated his Church from it, to the end they might
have the less excuse, who despising the gospel, did continue in such a
sink of filthiness. In the mean season, what did enforce and drive
forward those swine, who were touched with no care of the life to come,
save only mere ambition, and desire to keep that lordship and
pre-eminence which they had gotten?

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span>*They were filled with zeal.* I had liefer
keep the Greek word still (especially seeing it is common enough
otherwise) than to translate it *emulation* (or *indignation;)* for he
speaketh generally of the perverse and violent force wherewith
hypocrites are carried and inflamed to maintain their superstitions;
whereby it appeareth what account God maketh of zeal, and what praise it
deserveth, when as it is not governed by reason and wisdom, that is,
when it is not led and guided by the Spirit of God. We see at this day
those men moved and stirred with devilish fury, who will be counted the
most devout of all men, who rage horribly to shed innocent blood.
Nevertheless, let us note that he speaketh not in this place of an
unadvised or blind zeal, which was in many of the Jews, as Paul
affirmeth, but we understand rather a hot and unbridled violence; for
although the wicked be accused of their own consciences, because they
wittingly resist godliness, yet do they deceive themselves with a false
show of zeal, because it is lawful to prevent new things.  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) So at this day almost in all Popery
they boast only of zeal, whereas notwithstanding they are zealous for
their belly. But admit we grant that that is true which they pretend,
how can this excuse the heat of their cruelty whereunto they are
enforced by their blindness? as if this were a chief virtue to grant
liberty to their wrath,  <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) to be
avenged of that which displeaseth them; but this was former in order, to
make a difference between good and evil, lest any thing be dissolved
 <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) unadvisedly.

<span id="xii.iv-p14"></span><span id="xii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p15"></span>**19.** *The angel of the Lord.* The Lord
brought the apostles out of prison, not because he would rid them quite
out of the hands of their enemies, for he suffered them afterwards to be
brought back again, and to be beaten with rods; but he meant to declare,
by this miracle, that they were in his hand and tuition, to the end he
might maintain the credit of the gospel; partly that the Church might
have another confirmation thereby, partly that the wicked might be left
without excuse wherefore we must not hope always, nay, we must not
always desire that God will deliver us from death; but we must be
content with this one thing, that our life is defended by his hand, so
far as is expedient. In that he useth the ministry of an angel, in this
he doth according to his common custom; for he testifieth every where in
the Scriptures, that the angels are ministers of his goodness towards
us. Neither is that a vain speculation, for this is a profitable help
for our infirmity, that we know that not only God doth care for us, but
also that the heavenly spirits do watch for our safety. Again, this was
no small pledge of God’s love towards us, that the creatures of all
other most noble are appointed to have regard of our safety. The angel
openeth the prison in the night, because he would not work the miracle
when the wicked might see him, although he would have the same being
wrought known by the event itself.

<span id="xii.iv-p16"></span><span id="xii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p17"></span>**20.** *Speak in the temple.* This is the
end of their deliverance, that they employ themselves stoutly in
preaching the gospel, and provoke their enemies courageously, until they
die valiantly. For they were put to death at length when the hand of God
ceased, after that they had finished their course; but now the Lord
openeth the prison for them, that they may be at liberty to fulfill
their function. That is worth the marking, because we see many men, who,
after they have escaped out of persecution, do afterwards keep silence,
as if they had done their duty towards God, (and were no more to be
troubled;) other some, also, do escape away by denying Christ; but the
Lord doth deliver his children, not to the end they may cease off from
the course which they have begun, but rather that they may be the more
zealous afterward. The apostles might have objected, It is better to
keep silence for a time, forasmuch as we cannot speak one word without
danger; we are now apprehended for one only sermon, how much more shall
the fury of our enemies be inflamed hereafter, if they shall see us make
no end of speaking? But because they knew that they were to live and to
die to the Lord, they do not refuse to do that which the Lord commanded;
so we must always mark what function the Lord enjoineth us. There will
many things meet us oftentimes, which may discourage us, unless being
content with the commandment of God alone, we do our duty, committing
the success to him.

<span id="xii.iv-p18"></span>*The words of this life.* A singular
commendation of the gospel, that it is a lively doctrine, bringing
salvation unto men; for the righteousness of God is revealed unto us in
it, (<span id="xii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="xii.iv-p18.1"></span>;)
and in it Christ offereth himself unto us with the sacrifice of his
death, with the Spirit of regeneration, with the earnest of our
adoption. And this is spoken expressly to the apostles, to the end they
may the more courageously enter all manner of combats for the gospel,
forasmuch as they hear that they are ministers of eternal salvation. The
demonstrative is added for the more certainty, as if the angel did point
out life with his finger, as assuredly we need not to seek the same far,
when we have the word in our mouth and in our heart; unless peradventure
some man had rather take it by *hypallage, the words of this life,* for
these words, which I do not reject, yet that former sense me thinks is
better, for it was a new revelation of Christ wherein they had life
present.

<span id="xii.iv-p19"></span><span id="xii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p20"></span>**21.** *And when the chief priest came.*
The chief priest calleth all the council together now, lest, if giving
the honor to his own sect, he omit others, and be not able to bear the
burden; therefore, he is enforced by fear to call the multitude
together, notwithstanding they observe diligently and straitly the form
of law. The elders are called who did govern, that nothing may be done
but according to the sentence and authority of the council. Who would
not have hoped for a moderate end, seeing they began thus? and surely
they pretend what color they can, lest they seem to oppress the truth
violently and tyrannously; but when they hear that the apostles teach in
the temple, howsoever they know that they came not out by deceit of man,
but miraculously, yet they hold on still in their purpose; where
appeareth, together with the ungodliness of behavior and contempt of
God, horrible fury and want of reason. Therefore, the beautiful colors
of right and equity  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) do never so
cover hypocrites, but that they do at length betray their wickedness.
They must need certainly gather by all circumstances, that it is the
work of God that the prison was opened, yet they do not doubt openly to
rage against God.

<span id="xii.iv-p22"></span>These things are also meet for our time. We
know how proudly the Papists boast of that maxim of theirs, that lawful
councils must be obeyed, because they represent the Church. Moreover,
they call those lawful councils, and they will have them so accounted,
wherein nothing is wanting touching the external form, and such a
council was this whereof Luke speaketh in this place; and yet,
notwithstanding, we know that it was gathered to put out  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) the name of Christ; for although the
priests did then creep in unto honor by subtlety, or by inordinate suit,
 <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) to win the favor of men, or by
other wicked policies, or whether they burst in unto the same by
bribery, or murder,  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) yet the
dignity of the priesthood did continue as yet until Christ was revealed.
There was in the assembly of the elders a representing of the Church;
but where the truth of God is not sought, all outward appearance is
nothing else but a mere visor. Therefore, it is in vain for the Papists
to cover their abominations with the shadow of this buckler, because it
is not sufficient for those to be gathered together who are rulers of
the Church, unless they do this in the name of Christ, otherwise
forasmuch as it is an usual policy of Satan to transform himself into an
angel of light, (<span id="xii.iv-p25.2"></span>[2Co
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="xii.iv-p25.2"></span>,)
we will grant him as fit a covert under the title of the Church as he
can wish.

<span id="xii.iv-p26"></span>*He brought them without violence.* We have
spoken somewhat before of the captain of the temple. For I do not think
 <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) that it was lawful for the Jews
to set and appoint whom they would to rule the temple, but that the
president of the province did appoint one to have the government of the
temple. And he saith, that they were brought without violence, that is,
that they were not drawn violently, lest any tumult should arise, so
that, whereas they neither fear nor *reverence* God, they are afraid of
men. The apostles also do show their modesty in that, that whereas they
are guided with a great number of men, yet do they suffer themselves to
be led away by the officers, lest they should be authors of any tumult.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc36043.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p6.1"></span>Magnifice
ornatum,” magnificently furnished.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc36043.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p7.1"></span>Ut de
integro violentius saevirent,” so that they anew become more violently
enraged.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc36043.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p9.1"></span>Totem
Ecclesiae gubernationem horrenda vastitate tunc fuisse confusam,” that
the whole government of the Church was then confused and lying waste.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc36043.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p11.1"></span>Novis
rebus,” a revolution.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc36043.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p12"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p12.1"></span>Frena
iracundiae suae laxare,” to give loose reins to their wrath.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc36043.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p13.1"></span>Atqui hoc
ordine prius erat, habere boni et mali discrimen, ne temere quicquam
improbetur,” but the first thing in order was to observe the distinction
between good and evil, that nothing might be rashly disapproved.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc36043.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p21.1"></span>Speciosi
juris praetextus,” the specious pretexts of law.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc36043.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p23"></span> “<span
id="xii.iv-p23.1"></span>Extinguendam,” to extinguish.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc36043.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p24.1"></span>Ambitu,”
by intrigue.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc36043.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p25.1"></span>Mutuis
caedibus,” mutual slaughter.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc36043.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p27.1"></span>Neque enim
mihi probabile est,” for it does not seem to me probable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 5:27-28](cc36044)
