[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36057)  [Next](cc36059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030.md)<span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p2"></span>**30.** And when forty years were expired,
there appeared unto him in the desert of Mount Sinai the angel of the
Lord, in a flame of fire in a bush. **31.** And so soon as Moses saw it,
he wondered at the vision. Furthermore, when he drew near to consider,
the voice of the Lord came unto him, **32.** I am the God of thy
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob; and
Moses was afraid, and durst not draw near. **33.** And the Lord said
unto him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet; for the place whereon thou
standest is holy ground. **34.** In seeing, I have heard \[seen\] the
affliction of my people in Egypt, and have heard their mourning, and I
am come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt.

<span id="xiv.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vi-p4"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p5"></span>**30.** *And when forty years were expired.*
As Moses was no blockish man,  <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md)
every one of us may easily gather how many things might have come into
his mind which might have caused him to mistrust his calling. The shifts
and sleights of Satan are captious. We are more than bent naturally to
distrustfulness;  <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md) what doubts
soever arise in our minds concerning the word of God we do easily admit
the same. It was a hard exchange to be thrust from earthly delights and
a sumptuous life unto the painful and base office of feeding sheep; and
especially forasmuch as Moses saw so much time spent, and being in the
mean season sent into the wilderness, what other thing could he imagine
with himself but that that was vain and a plain mock which the Lord had
promised? Forasmuch as being now fourscore years of age, he was occupied
about the feeding of his father-in-law’s sheep, when could he have hoped
that there should have been any use of him in delivering the people? It
is good for us oftentimes to call to mind these combats of the godly
until they be thoroughly imprinted in our memory, lest our minds faint,
and our hearts fail us, if the Lord make us stay longer than we could
wish. Again, Moses giveth a notable example of modesty, seeing that in
all that time he attempteth nothing; he raiseth no tumults, neither
intrudeth himself any way to bear rule, as troublesome men use to do;
but employeth himself in his shepherd’s function as diligently as if he
should never have been called unto any greater charge. But whilst he
tarrieth the Lord’s leisure so patiently, he \[the Lord\] appeareth unto
him at length.

<span id="xiv.vi-p8"></span>*The angel of the Lord appeared unto him.*
It is first demanded who this angel was? and, secondly, why he appeared
in such a form? For after that Luke had called him an angel, he bringeth
him in immediately speaking thus: *I am the God of Abraham, etc.* Some
answer, As God doth sometimes attribute and impart unto his ministers
those things which are most proper to himself, so it is no absurd or
inconvenient thing, if they have his name given them; but seeing this
angel affirmeth manifestly that he is the eternal God, who alone is, and
in whom all things have their being, we must needs restrain this title
unto the essence of God; for it can by no means agree to the angels. It
might be said more fitly, that because the angel speaketh in the name of
the Lord, he taketh upon him his person, as if he declared his
commandments word for word, as out of the mouth of God, which manner of
speaking is usual in the prophets; but when Luke shall say afterwards,
that this was the same angel through whose assistance and guiding Moses
delivered the people: and Paul, in the 10th chapter of the First to the
Corinthians, (<span id="xiv.vi-p8.1"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="xiv.vi-p8.1"></span>.md)
doth affirm that Christ was that guide, there is no cause why we should
now wonder that the angel taketh to himself that which is proper to God
alone.

<span id="xiv.vi-p9"></span>Therefore, let us, first of all, set down
this for a surety, that there was never since the beginning any
communication between God and men, save only by Christ; for we have
nothing to do with God, unless the Mediator be present to purchase his
favor for us. Therefore, this place doth plentifully prove the divinity
of Christ, and teacheth that he is of the same essence with the Father.
Furthermore, he is called an angel, not only because he had the angels
always to bear him company, and to be, as it were, his apparitors:
 <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425.md) but because that deliverance of
the people did shadow the redemption of us all, for whose sake Christ
was to be sent of his Father, that he might take upon him the shape of a
servant together with our flesh. It is certain, indeed, that God did
never appear unto men as he is, but under some shape agreeable to their
capacity; notwithstanding, there is another reason why Christ is called
by this name, because he being appointed by the eternal counsel of God
to be unto men the minister of salvation, doth appear unto Moses to this
end. Neither is that contrary to this doctrine, which is written in the
2nd chapter to the Hebrews, (<span id="xiv.vi-p10.2"></span>[Heb
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016)<span id="xiv.vi-p10.2"></span>.md)
that Christ never took the angels, but the seed of Abraham; for although
he took upon him the shape of an angel for a time, yet did he never take
the nature of angels, as we know that he was made very man.

<span id="xiv.vi-p11"></span>It resteth that we speak somewhat of the
burning bush. That is common, that God doth apply the signs unto the
things by a certain likelihood, and this is almost the common order and
way of the sacraments. Furthermore, this was the fittest thing that
could have been shown to Moses, to confirm his faith in the present
business. He knew in what state he had left his nation. Although there
were a greater  <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426.md) number of men,
yet were they not unlike to a bush. For the thicker the bush is, and the
more store of shrubs it hath,  <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md)
the more subject is it to take fire, that it may burn on every side; so
the people of Israel were but a weak band, and such as was laid open to
all injuries; and this unwarlike multitude being pressed down even with
their own weight, had incensed the cruelty of Pharaoh only with the
prosperous success of increasing. Therefore, the people being oppressed
with cruel tyranny, is, as it were, a pile of wood set on fire at every
corner, neither is there any thing which keepeth it from being consumed
to ashes, save this, because the Lord sitteth in the midst thereof; and
although the \[an\] undoubted  <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md)
fire of persecution did then burn, yet because the Church of God is
never free from afflictions in the world, the continual estate thereof
is after a sort painted out in this place. For what other thing are we
but fuel for fire? And there fly abroad innumerable fire-brands of Satan
continually, which set on fire both our bodies and also our minds; but
the Lord delivereth and defendeth us, by his wonderful and singular
goodness, from being consumed. Therefore, the fire must needs burn, that
it may burn us in this life; but because the Lord dwelleth in the midst
of us, he shall so preserve us that afflictions shall do us no harm, as
it is also said in the 46th Psalm, (<span id="xiv.vi-p14.2"></span>[Ps
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span id="xiv.vi-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.vi-p15"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p16"></span>**31.** *He wondered at the vision.* Let us
know that God did use thus to deal with our fathers, that they might
assuredly know his majesty; for he meant to make a manifest distinction
between the visions which he showed, and the juggling casts of Satan.
And this certainty is more necessary, for what credit should the oracles
of God otherwise carry, wherein the covenant of eternal life is
contained? Therefore, forasmuch as this alone is the true stay of faith,
to have God to be the author thereof, that he may \[he must needs\]
undoubtedly declare that it is he that speaketh. Again, forasmuch as
Satan walketh about continually, and doth by many and strange shifts
insinuate himself, and hath so many ways to deceive, and especially
seeing he doth pretend the name of God craftily, we must take great heed
of his mocks. We see how in times past he deluded all nations, and \[how
he deludes\] the Papists also. For all the monsters of superstitions,
all the dotings of errors which were in times past, and do as yet reign
in Popery, did proceed from dreams, visions, and false revelations; yea,
furthermore, even the Anabaptists have their illusions thence.
Therefore, this is the only remedy that God do distinguish by certain
marks those visions which he showeth; for then are we without danger of
erring, when he hath revealed his majesty unto us. For this cause was
the mind of Moses stricken with admiration, and then afterwards he
draweth near to consider; after that he is come nearer, the Lord
toucheth him with a more lively feeling of \[I confess indeed\] his
presence, so that he is afraid. For I confess that there are none of all
these things which Satan cannot imitate, yet falsely like an ape. And
the Lord doth not only show himself by such signs, but helping our
dullness, he doth also open our eyes that we may not be deceived. Again,
the Holy Ghost doth imprint in our minds certain marks and tokens of
God’s presence, that there may no doubt remain.

<span id="xiv.vi-p17"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p18"></span>**32.** *I am the God of thy fathers.* Now,
we see to what end the vision was offered to Moses; to wit, that the
word of God might have his \[its\] authority. For bare visions should do
but little good, unless doctrine were joined therewithal; and it is
joined with them not as an inferior part, but as the cause of all
visions and the end. And whereas he calleth himself the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, there is a double reason why he calleth himself so. As
the majesty of God is infinite, if we will comprehend it, it doth rather
swallow up our senses; if we endeavor to ascend unto it we vanish away;
therefore, he adorneth himself with titles under which we may comprehend
him. But we must mark that God maketh choice of such titles, as that he
may by them call us back unto his word. For he is called the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for this cause, because he committed unto
them the doctrine of salvation, that he might thereby be known to the
world. But God had respect properly unto the present circumstance when
he spake to Moses on this wise; for both this vision, and the hope of
the delivery of the people, and the commandment which he was about to
give to Moses, did depend upon the covenant which he had made in times
past with the fathers. So that the suspicion of novelty is taken away,
and the mind of Moses is lifted up to hope for redemption, which was
grounded in the whole  <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) promise.

<span id="xiv.vi-p20"></span>Therefore, this title is as much as if God
had said, I, which have promised in times past to your fathers, that I
have a care of your safety, which have taken the kindred of Abraham to
my tuition by a free covenant, yea, which have appointed this time for
an end of your bondage, I appear now unto thee, that I may perform that
which I promised, like as at this day all the promises of God must lean
and be stayed upon this foundation, that they may be sure and certain to
us, that God hath adopted us in Christ, and hath promised that he will
be our God and our Father. And Christ gathereth out of this place by
good reason that the godly live after they be dead, (<span
id="xiv.vi-p20.1"></span>[Mt
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span id="xiv.vi-p20.1"></span>;.md)
for if the whole man perish in death, this were an unfitting speech,
 <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md) *I am the God of Abraham.* Let
us suppose that there is no Rome, shall not he be laughed at which shall
call himself consul of Rome? For this is requisite in relation, that the
members be answerable between themselves.  <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431.md) There is also another reason to be
considered, that forasmuch as God hath in his hand both life and death,
without all doubt he preserveth those alive whose father he will be, and
whom he counteth his children; therefore, though Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob died, concerning the flesh, yet do they live in spirit with God.

<span id="xiv.vi-p23"></span>*And Moses being afraid.* This might seem
to be an absurd thing, that a voice full of consolation doth rather
terrify Moses than make him glad; but it was good for Moses to be thus
terrified with the presence of God, that he might frame himself unto the
greater reverence; neither doth the voice of God alone strike his mind,
but his majesty, whereof he saw a sign in the burning bush. And what
marvel is it, if man be afraid when he seeth God? and especially let us
remember that men’s minds are by this means prepared unto fear and
reverence as in <span id="xiv.vi-p23.1"></span>[Ex
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#022.md)<span id="xiv.vi-p23.1"></span>,

<span id="xiv.vi-p24"></span>“Thou hast seen signs, thou hast heard the
sound of the trumpet, that thou mayest learn to fear the Lord.”

<span id="xiv.vi-p25"></span>But some will say, Why dare not Moses now
for fear consider, who was not afraid to draw near before? I answer,
that the nearer we draw unto God, the more his glory doth appear, so are
we the more afraid, and that by right. And God maketh Moses afraid for
none other cause, save only that he may make him obedient unto him. This
fear was a preparation not unfit for greater boldness; and to this end
tendeth that which followeth, *Put off thy shoes from thy feet;* for he
is admonished by this sign with reverence to receive the commandments of
God, and to give him due glory by all means.

<span id="xiv.vi-p26"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p27"></span>**33.** *Because the place wherein.* The
Lord meant by this commendation which he giveth to the place, to lift up
the mind of Moses into heaven, that he might not think upon any earthly
thing. And if so be that Moses was to be pricked forward with so many
pricks, that having forgotten the earth, he might hearken to God, must
not we have our sides even, as it were, digged through,  <span
id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432.md) seeing we are an hundred times more
slow than he? Notwithstanding, here may a question be asked, how this
place became so holy? for it was no more holy than other places before
that day. I answer, that this honor is given to the presence of God, and
not to the place, and that the holiness of the place is spoken of for
man’s sake. For if the presence of God do make the earth holy, how much
more force thereof ought men to have?  <span
id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433.md) Notwithstanding, we must also note,
that the place was thus beautified only for a time, so that God did not
fix his glory there, as Jacob erected an altar to God in Bethel, after
that God had showed some token of his presence there, (<span
id="xiv.vi-p29.2"></span>[Ge 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007.md)<span
id="xiv.vi-p29.2"></span>.) When as his posterity did imitate the same
afterward, it was such worship as was reproved.  <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md) Finally, the place is called holy for
Moses’ sake only, that he may the better address himself to fear God and
to obey him. Forasmuch as God doth now show himself unto us everywhere
in Christ, and that in no obscure figures, but in the full light and
perfect truth, we must not only put off our shoes from our feet, but
strip ourselves stark-naked of ourselves.  <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md)

<span id="xiv.vi-p32"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p33"></span>**34.** *In seeing I have seen.* God
promiseth now that he will deliver his people, that he may appoint Moses
to be his minister afresh, because the former objection was taken away
by so long space of time. For God is said to see our miseries when he
hath respect to us, and is careful for our safety; as he is said again
to shut his eyes, and turn his back, when as he seemeth to set light by
our cause. In like sort is he said to come down. He needeth not to move
out of his place to help us, for his hand reacheth throughout the heaven
and earth; but this is referred unto our understanding. For, seeing that
he did not deliver his people from their affliction, he might seem that
he was afar off, and was busied about some other thing in heaven. Now he
saith that the Israelites shall perceive that he is nigh unto them. The
sum tendeth to this end, that Moses knowing the will of God, may not
doubt to follow him as a guide, and the more boldly to employ himself
about the delivery of the people, which he knew was the work of God. For
we must note that he saith that he heard the mourning of the people. For
although he hath respect unto those which are in misery and unjustly
oppressed, yet when we lay our mournings and complaints in his lap, he
is especially moved to have mercy; although this word may be taken for
those blind and confused complaints which are not directed unto God, as
it is taken oftentimes elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc36058.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p6.1"></span>Homo...
stupidus,” a stupid man.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc36058.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p7.1"></span>Nos ad
diffidentiam natura plusquam propensi,” we are by nature too prone to
distrust.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc36058.htm#fr_425.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p10.1"></span>Quasi
apparitores,” as it were his officers.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](cc36058.htm#fr_426.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p12.1"></span>Ingens
numerus,” a vast number.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](cc36058.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p13.1"></span>Et
compactis arbustis magis abundat,” and the more numerous and compact its
twigs are.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](cc36058.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p14.1"></span>Insoltus,”
unwonted.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[430](cc36058.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p19.1"></span>In
veteri,” on the old.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[431](cc36058.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p21.1"></span>Inepta
esset loquutio,” the expression were inept.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[432](cc36058.htm#fr_431.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p22.1"></span>Hoc enim
exigit relatio ut membra inter se respondeant,” for relation requires
that the members (related) correspond to each other.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[433](cc36058.htm#fr_432.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p28.1"></span>Annon
quasi fodiendi sumus,” must not we be, as it were, stabbed.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[434](cc36058.htm#fr_433.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p29"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p29.1"></span>Quanto
majorem vim ab hominibus percipi aequium est,” how much more forcibly
ought man to feel it?

<span id="fn_434"></span>[435](cc36058.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p29.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p30"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p30.1"></span>Perversus
cultus fuit,” it was perverted worship.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[436](cc36058.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p31"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p31.1"></span>Sed nos
totos exuere,” but divest ourselves entirely.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:35-37](cc36059.md)
