[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36081)  [Next](cc36083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.viii"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
9:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032.md)<span
id="xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p2"></span>**32.** And it happened, that whilst Peter
walked through all, he came also unto the saints which dwelt at Lydda.
**33.** And he found there a man named. AEneas, who had laid in his bed
eight years, who had the palsy. **34.** And Peter saith unto him,
Aeneas, Jesus Christ make thee whole: arise, and make thy bed. And
forthwith he arose. **35.** And all those which dwelt at Lydda and
Assaron saw him, and were turned unto the Lord.

<span id="xvi.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.viii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p5"></span>**32.** Luke setteth down how the Church
was increased by miracles. And he reciteth two miracles: That a man who
had been bedrid eight years, having the palsy, was suddenly healed; and
that a certain woman was raised from death. First, he saith, that as
Peter walked throughout all, he came to Lydda. And by all understand not
Churches, but the faithful, because it is in Greek of the masculine
gender, though that skilleth not much for the sense. And it was meet
that the apostles, who had no certain place of abode, should wander
hither and thither as occasion was offered. Wherefore, whilst they are
all occupied in divers parts, Peter took upon him this charge, whereby
the foolishness of the Papists is refuted, who gather Peter’s primacy by
the authority which he had to visit; as if the rest of the apostles did
live idly at Jerusalem like private men, when Peter did visit the
Churches. Again, admit we grant that Peter was the chief apostle, which
thing the Scripture showeth oftentimes, doth it thereupon follow that he
was the head of the world? But would to God the bishop of Rome, who will
be counted Peter’s successor, would travel as he did to animate the
brethren, and would every where prove indeed that he is the apostle of
Christ. Now, he which out of his throne doth with more than tyrannous
lordship oppress all the Churches, pretendeth that Peter did visit the
Churches with great pains.

<span id="xvi.viii-p6"></span>*Which dwelt at Lydda.* Lydda, which was
afterward called Diospolis, was situated not far from the Mediterranean
Sea, being a renowned city as well for antiquity as also for many gifts.
Joppa was nigh to this city, which had a famous haven, though very full
of rocks. The city itself stood upon a high cliff, whence they might see
to Jerusalem. At this day there is nothing to be seen there but the
ruinous walls of the old city, save only that the haven remaineth, which
they call most commonly Japhet. It should seem that Luke nameth Assaron
as some town or city. Jerome mentioneth Saron, and thinketh that thereby
is meant the whole plain lying between Cesarea and Joppa. But because
Jerome showeth no reason why he should change the reading which is
commonly used, I admit that willingly which Luke’s text showeth me, to
wit, that it was a city hard by. But I do not contend about this matter;
as I do not ambitiously gather those things which may serve for a vain
brag, because it shall be sufficient for the godly readers to know those
things which make to Luke’s meaning.

<span id="xvi.viii-p7"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p8"></span>**34.** *Jesus Christ maketh thee whole.*
It is certain that the apostles would never have attempted the doing of
miracles, unless they had been first certified of the will of God,
whereupon the effect did depend. For they had no such power of the
Spirit given them that they could heal whatsoever sick persons they
would; but as Christ himself used a measure in his miracles, so he would
have his apostles to work no more than he knew were profitable.
Therefore Peter did not rashly break out into these words; because he
might have set himself to be laughed at, unless he had already known the
will of God. It may be that he prayed apart. The Spirit who was the
author of all miracles, and which wrought by the hand of Peter, did even
then direct his tongue, and did move his heart by a secret inspiration.
And in these words Peter showeth plainly that he is only the minister of
the miracle, and that it proceedeth from the power of Christ; that he
may by this means extol the name of Christ alone.

<span id="xvi.viii-p9"></span>*Make thy bed.* These circumstances do
amplify the glory of the miracle, in that he doth not only recover
strength to rise, but is also able to make his own bed, who could move
no member before. To the same end tendeth the continuance of the
disease; for a palsy of eight years’ continuance is not easily cured. In
like sort is he said to have laid in his bed, that we may know that all
his members were lame; for it was a little bed wherein they were wont to
rest at noon. Whereas AEneas was so ready to make trial of his members,
he thereby declared the obedience of his faith. For although he
perceived the strength which was given him,  <span
id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631.md) yet he was most of all moved with the
efficacy of the words, *to rise.*

<span id="xvi.viii-p11"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p12"></span>**35.** *And all those.* His meaning is,
that the miracle was published abroad, and was known throughout the
whole city. For when the Scripture saith *all*, it doth not comprehend
every one how many so ever it noteth; but it putteth all for the more
part, or for many, or for the common sort of men. Therefore, the sense
is, that whereas there was but a small number of godly men there, a
great part of the people became members of the Church. And in this
clause is expressed the fruit of the miracle, because they embraced
Christ and his gospel. Wherefore those men corrupt miracles, whosoever
they be, which look only upon men, and do not turn their eyes toward
this end, that being instructed concerning the power and grace of
Christ, they may stick only to him. Therefore that token of Christ’s
divine power which he showed was the beginning of turning to him.  <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_631"></span>[632](cc36082.htm#fr_631.md) <span
id="xvi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xvi.viii-p10.1"></span>Redditum sibi vigorem,” that his vigor was
restored.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[633](cc36082.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="xvi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xvi.viii-p13.1"></span>Initium et praeparatio conversionis ad
ipsum,” was a preparation and commencement of conversion to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 9:36-38](cc36083.md)
