[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36091)  [Next](cc36093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.vii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
10:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039)<span
id="xvii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p2"></span>**39.** And we are witnesses of all things
which he did in the country of the Jews, and at Jerusalem, whom they
slew, hanging him on a tree. **40.** Him God raised the third day, and
showed him openly, **41.** Not unto all the people, but to the witnesses
appointed before of God for this purpose; namely, to us who did eat and
drink with him after that he was risen from the dead: **42.** And he
commanded us that we should preach to the people, and should testify
that he is appointed judge of the quick and dead. **43.** To this man do
all the prophets bear witness, that whosoever believeth in him may,
through his name, receive remission of sins.

<span id="xvii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.vii-p4"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p5"></span>**39.** *And we be witnesses.* That he may
make his words to be believed, he saith, that he and his fellows in
office saw with their eyes all those things which they spake concerning
Christ.  <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706) Shortly after, he
taketh the word witness in another sense, when he saith that they were
appointed witnesses  <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707) by God,
 <span id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708) and that they are brought
forth, as it were, by God, that they might by their preaching bring men
unto the faith of Christ. So Paul, in the fifteenth of the First to the
Corinthians, (<span id="xvii.vii-p8.2"></span>[1Co
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#015)<span
id="xvii.vii-p8.2"></span>,) saith,

<span id="xvii.vii-p9"></span>“We (saith he) should be found false
witnesses \[of Gods\] unless Christ were risen from the dead.”

<span id="xvii.vii-p10"></span>And we have already heard by the mouth of
Christ, “Ye shall be my witnesses in Judea, Samaria, and at Jerusalem.”
And now Peter calleth himself only an historical witness, because he
beheld the things which were done. And here he toucheth his death
briefly, because it was openly known; he standeth longer upon his
resurrection, which was more doubtful, and the knowledge whereof was
more available unto faith.

<span id="xvii.vii-p11"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p12"></span>**41.** If any man demand here, Why God
did not show his Son openly to all men after his resurrection? I answer,
Although there could no reason be showed, yet ought the counsel of God
alone to suffice sober and modest men, that they may assure themselves
without all doubt that that is best which God hath thought meet. And
yet, assuredly God used this moderation to a good end. For the certainty
of the resurrection was proved by many and firm testimonies, and this
was profitable to exercise the faith of the godly, to believe the gospel
rather than their eyes. As touching the wicked and professed enemies of
Christ seeing that being so often convict they would never yield to God,
they were unworthy to have Christ to admit them to behold the glow of
his resurrection. Though even they were sufficiently convict with the
report of the soldiers, whom they had hired to keep the sepulcher; that
I may omit other reasons which we may fet out of the Harmony.  <span
id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) Therefore, let us assure ourselves of
this, that the holy apostles were chosen by the holy decree of God, that
by their testimony the truth of Christ’s resurrection might stand.
Whosoever is not content with this approbation, let him take away and
overthrow if he can that inviolable decree of God, which Peter
commendeth to us in this place. And as for us, if we covet to have God
the sure author of our faith let us learn to be content with the
witnesses whom in due time he hath brought forth, as it were, by his
hand, being ordained by him before the world was made.

<span id="xvii.vii-p14"></span>*Who did eat.* And here it appeareth what
great regard Christ had of our rudeness and ignorance, who did abase
himself so far for our sake, that when he was now endued with heavenly
glory, he did yet, notwithstanding, eat and drink as a mortal man.
Wherefore, there is no cause why we should complain that the
resurrection of Christ is obscure and doubtful; for he suffered his
disciples to be slow and hard of belief for this cause, that being
better confirmed, they might take from us all occasion of doubting. Yea,
rather, we must endeavor ourselves that our unworthiness and
unthankfulness do not darken so great kindness of the Son of God toward
us. But when as the Scripture saith, that Christ did eat, curious men
move a question, what became of that meat? But the answer is easy; that
like as it was created out of nothing, so was it easily brought to
nothing by the divine power of Christ. That meat which is taken for the
sustenance of the body is concocted and afterward digested; but we know
that Christ took this meat to feed our faith, and in this use was it
spent. And those men are deceived who think that Christ did only seem to
eat, For what good could such a visor or vain show have done?  <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710) For when, as we say that Christ was
not enforced with any necessity of his own to eat, but that he meant
only to provide for those that were his, all occasion is cut off  <span
id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711) from the frivolous inventions of men.

<span id="xvii.vii-p17"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p18"></span>**42.** *And he commanded us.* He
beginneth in this place to intreat of the kingdom of Christ, when he
saith that Christ did rise again for this cause, that he may once judge
the world. For by the same right are the government of heaven and earth,
and the perpetual government of the Church, due to him. He saith that he
shall be judge *of quick and dead;* because, when as the dead shall rise
again, others also, who shall then remain alive, shall be changed in a
moment, as Paul teacheth in the fifteenth chapter of the First Epistle
to the Corinthians, (<span id="xvii.vii-p18.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="xvii.vii-p18.1"></span>,)
and in the First to the Thessalonians, and the fourth chapter, (<span
id="xvii.vii-p18.2"></span>[1Th
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017)<span
id="xvii.vii-p18.2"></span>.) In the word *testify* there is great
weight; because, as men are naturally inclined unto unbelief, the simple
preaching of the gospel should not be so effectual, unless the Lord
should establish it with strong protestations. And chiefly, every one of
us doth feel in himself too much what a hard matter it is both to lift
up our minds to hope for the coming of Christ, which are entangled in
earthly snares, and also continually to keep them fixed in this
meditation, seeing they cease not with their lightness to be carried
hither and thither continually.

<span id="xvii.vii-p19"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p20"></span>**43.** *To him bear all the prophets.*
Luke toucheth and gathereth the sum of the sermon briefly, as we have
said; therefore is he so short  <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712)
in noting the fruit of the history. Let us know that the words uttered
by Peter are not recited in this place; but that it, is only declared of
what things he intreated. And we must consider three things, That it is
the proper office of Christ to reconcile men to God when their sins are
done away; that we have remission of sins by faith; that this doctrine
is not new or of late invented, but that it had all the prophets of God
since the beginning of the world to bear witness of it.

<span id="xvii.vii-p22"></span>As touching the first, if God be pleased
and pacified by not imputing our sins, it appeareth hereby that he
hateth and is displeased with all mankind,  <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) until such time as they begin to
please him by free pardon. Therefore we are all condemned of sin, which
maketh us subject to the wrath of God, and bindeth us with the
guiltiness of eternal death; and because we are destitute of
righteousness in ourselves, we are taught to flee unto the mercy of God,
as unto our only fortress. When as he saith that the faithful receive
remission of sins, there is understood a hidden contrariety between them
and God; for God must needs offer it of his own accord that the faithful
may receive it. When as he saith that it is given by the name of Christ,
his meaning is, that we return into God’s favor by the benefit of Christ
alone, because he hath once reconciled him to us by his death; or, as
they say commonly, that we obtain forgiveness of sins by Christ’s
mediation, (and coming between,) and by none other means.

<span id="xvii.vii-p24"></span>Satan could never blot out of the minds
of men the feeling of their guiltiness, but that they were always
careful to crave pardon at God’s hands; but forasmuch as there was but
one way and means to obtain pardon, miserable men, being deluded with
the jugglings \[impostures\] of Satan, did invent to themselves
wonderful labyrinths, in whose crooks and turns they wearied themselves
in vain. This first error did first lead them away from the right way,
because they essayed to deserve pardon, which is offered freely, and is
received by faith alone. Afterward there were innumerable kinds of
satisfactions \[expiations\] invented whereby they appeased God. The
beginning thereof flowed indeed from the Word of God; but forasmuch as
when God gave unto the fathers the sacrifices and rites of oblations, he
shadowed Christ, blind and profane men, setting Christ aside, and
following a vain shadow, did corrupt all that which was God’s in
sacrifices and satisfactions.  <span id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714)
Wherefore, what sacrifices soever the Gentiles did use since the
beginning of the world, and those which the Turks and Jews use at this
day, may be set against Christ as things altogether contrary. The
Papists are never a whit better, save only that they sprinkle their
satisfactions with the blood of Christ; but they deal too disorderly
therein,  <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) because, being not
content with Christ alone, they gather to themselves, on every side, a
thousand manner of sacrifices or satisfactions. Therefore, whosoever
desireth to have remission of sins, let him not turn aside from Christ,
even the least nail’s breadth.

<span id="xvii.vii-p27"></span>When as we hear, that we have remission
of sins by believing, we must understand and know the force and nature
of faith, as undoubtedly Peter intreated abundantly of this, \[viz.\]
after what sort we must believe in Christ. And this is nothing else, but
with the sincere affection of the mind to embrace him as he is set
before us in the gospel; so that faith dependeth upon the promises. Yet
Peter seemeth to deal amiss, because whereas we have two principal
things by our Savior Christ, he doth only make mention of the one of
them; for he speaketh nothing of repentance and newness of 1ife, which
ought not to be omitted in the sum of the gospel.  <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716) But we may easily answer, That the
regeneration of the Spirit is comprehended under faith, as it is an
effect thereof. For we believe in Christ for this cause, partly that he
may restore us unto the Father’s favor by the free imputation of
righteousness; partly that he may sanctify us by his Spirit, And we know
that we are adopted by God to be his children upon this condition, that
he may govern us by his Spirit. Therefore, it was sufficient for Peter
to show how men, who were by nature estranged from God, do return into
favor with him.

<span id="xvii.vii-p29"></span>As touching the third member, we need not
reckon up all places of the prophets, where they set before us Christ to
be the mediator, who by obtaining pardon for our sins, doth reconcile
God to us; but this is their common order of teaching, and, as it were,
their rule, to call back all the godly unto that covenant which God made
with Abraham putting the mediator between.  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) Furthermore, this point is very
needful to be known, that the grace which was offered at length by
Christ is the same which the law and the prophets, in times past,
delivered unto the fathers to be hoped for. And surely it was of great
force with Cornelius and such like, who did greatly reverence the law
and prophets, that they might know that that was performed and
accomplished in very deed in Christ which was testified in the oracles
of the prophets. Therefore, to the end the ministers of the Church may
agree with the prophets in their form of teaching, let them study by
preaching to set forth Christ; let them continually testify that we must
seek righteousness at his hands alone, which consisteth upon \[of\] free
remission of sins. This is another manner of antiquity than that which
is showed with great boasting of the Papists, whilst that they thrust in
the rotten inventions  <span id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) of their
satisfactions into the place of Christ’s blood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_706"></span>[707](cc36092.htm#fr_706) <span
id="xvii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p6.1"></span>Ita
loqui de rebus probe compertis,” and so spake of things well
ascertained, omitted.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[708](cc36092.htm#fr_707) <span
id="xvii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p7"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p7.1"></span>Certos
testes,” sure witnesses.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[709](cc36092.htm#fr_708) <span
id="xvii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p8.1"></span>Quo
significat publicam apostolis impositam esse personam, utque ad hoc
peculiariter delectos esse,” by which he intimates that a public
character was assigned to the apostles, and that for this they were
specially chosen, omitted.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[710](cc36092.htm#fr_709) <span
id="xvii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p13"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p13.1"></span>Quas
petere licebit ex Harmonia,” which may be seen in my Harmony.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[711](cc36092.htm#fr_710) <span
id="xvii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p15"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p15.1"></span>Nec
video quorsum attineat ejusmodi subterfugia quaerere,” nor do I see the
use of having recourse to subterfuges (futile explanations) of this
kind.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[712](cc36092.htm#fr_711) <span
id="xvii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p16"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p16.1"></span>Ansa
praecisa est,” no handle is left for.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[713](cc36092.htm#fr_712) <span
id="xvii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p21.1"></span>Vel
potius concisus,” or rather concise, (abrupt,) omitted.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[714](cc36092.htm#fr_713) <span
id="xvii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p23"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p23.1"></span>Totum
humanum genus exosum illi esse et infensum,” that the whole human race
is hostile and hateful to him.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[715](cc36092.htm#fr_714) <span
id="xvii.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p25"></span> “<span
id="xvii.vii-p25.1"></span>Quicquid Dei erat in piaculis,” every thing
of an expiatory nature appointed by God.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[716](cc36092.htm#fr_715) <span
id="xvii.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p26"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p26.1"></span>Sed in
eo nimio sunt praeposteri,” but in this they are exceedingly
preposterous.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[717](cc36092.htm#fr_716) <span
id="xvii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p28"></span> “<span id="xvii.vii-p28.1"></span>Quae
in evangelii summa praetermitti minime debuerat,” which ought by no
means to have been omitted in a summary of the gospel.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[718](cc36092.htm#fr_717) <span
id="xvii.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p30"></span> “<span
id="xvii.vii-p30.1"></span>Mediatore interposito,” by the imposition of
a Mediator.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[719](cc36092.htm#fr_718) <span
id="xvii.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p31"></span> “<span
id="xvii.vii-p31.1"></span>Putida... figmenta,” the foul figments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 10:44-48](cc36093)
