[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36015)  [Next](cc36017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Acts
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And when the day of Pentecost was
fulfilled, they were all with one accord gathered together: **2.** And
there was made from heaven suddenly a sound, as it were when a violent
wind breaketh in, and it filled all the house where they sat: **3.** And
they saw cloven tongues, as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one
of them. **4.** And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they
began to speak with strange tongues, even as the Spirit gave them to
speak.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span><span id="ix.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**1.** *And when. To be fulfilled* is taken in
this place for *to come.* For Luke beareth record again of their
perseverance, when he saith that they stood all in one place until the
time which was set them. Hereunto serveth the adverb, *with one accord*
Furthermore, we have before declared why the Lord did defer the sending
of his Spirit a whole month and a half. But the question is, why he sent
him upon that day chiefly. I will not refute that high and subtle
interpretation of Augustine, that like as the law was given to the old
people fifty days after Easter, being written in tables of stone by the
hand of God, so the Spirit, whose office it is to write the same in our
hearts, did fulfill that which was figured in the giving of the law as
many days after the resurrection of Christ, who is the true Passover.
Notwithstanding, whereas he urgeth this his subtle interpretation as
necessary, in his book of Questions upon Exodus, and in his Second
Epistle unto Januarius, I would wish him to be more sober and modest
therein. Notwithstanding, let him keep his own interpretation to
himself. In the mean season, I will embrace that which is more sound.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>Upon the feast day, wherein a great multitude
was wont to resort to Jerusalem, was this miracle wrought, that it might
be more famous. And truly by means hereof was it spread abroad, even
unto the uttermost parts and borders of the earth.  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) For the same purpose did Christ
oftentimes go up to Jerusalem upon the holy days,  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) (<span id="ix.i-p8.2"></span>[John
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#000.md), [John
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#000.md), [John
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#000.md), [John
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#000.md), [John
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#000)<span id="ix.i-p8.2"></span>,.md) to
the end those miracles which he wrought might be known to many, and that
in the greater assembly of people there might be the greater fruit of
his doctrine. For so will Luke afterward declare, that Paul made haste
that he might come to Jerusalem before the day of Pentecost, not for any
religion’s sake, but because of the greater assembly, that he might
profit the more, (<span id="ix.i-p8.3"></span>[Ac
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#016)<span id="ix.i-p8.3"></span>..md)
Therefore, in making choice of the day, the profit of the miracle was
respected: First, that it might be the more extolled at Jerusalem,
because the Jews were then more bent to consider the works of God; and,
secondly, that it might be bruited abroad, even in far countries. They
called it the fiftieth day, beginning to reckon at the first-fruits.

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span><span id="ix.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**2.** *And there was made* It was requisite
that the gift should be visible, that the bodily sense might the more
stir up the disciples. For such is our slothfulness to consider the
gifts of God, that unless he awake all our senses, his power shall pass
away unknown. This was, therefore, a preparation that they might the
better know that the Spirit was now come which Christ had promised.
Although it was not so much for their sake as for ours, even as in that
the cloven and fiery tongues appeared, there was rather respect had of
us, and of all the whole Church in that, than of them. For God was able
to have furnished them with necessary ability to preach the gospel,
although he should use no sign. They themselves might have known that it
came to pass neither by chance, neither yet through their own industry,
that they were so suddenly changed; but those signs which are here set
down were about to be profitable for all ages; as we perceive at this
day that they profit us. And we must briefly note the proportion of the
signs. The violence of the wind did serve to make them afraid; for we
are never rightly prepared to receive the grace of God, unless the
confidence (and boldness) of the flesh be tamed. For as we have access
unto him by faith, so humility and fear setteth open the gate, that he
may come in unto us. He hath nothing to do with proud and careless men.
It is a common thing for the Spirit to be signified by wind, (or a
blast,) (<span id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>[Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>..md)
For both Christ himself, when he was about to give the Spirit to his
apostles, did breathe upon them; and in Ezekiel’s vision there was a
whirlwind and wind, (<span id="ix.i-p10.2"></span>[Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p10.2"></span>..md)
Yea, the word Spirit itself is a translated word; for, because that
*hypostasis,* or person of the Divine essence, which is called the
Spirit, is of itself incomprehensible, the Scripture doth borrow the
word of the wind or blast, because it is the power of God which God doth
pour into all creatures as it were by breathing. The shape of tongues is
restrained unto the present circumstance. For as the figure and shape of
a dove which came down upon Christ, (<span id="ix.i-p10.3"></span>[Joh
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="ix.i-p10.3"></span>,.md)
had a signification agreeable to the office and nature of Christ, so God
did now make choice of a sign which might be agreeable to the thing
signified, namely, that it might show such effect and working of the
Holy Ghost in the apostles as followed afterward.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>The diversity of tongues did hinder the
gospel from being spread abroad any farther; so that, if the preachers
of the gospel had spoken one language only, all men would have thought
that Christ had been shut up in the small corner of Jewry. But God
invented a way whereby it might break out, when he divided and clove the
tongues of the apostles, that they might spread that abroad amongst all
people which was delivered to them. Wherein appeareth the manifold
goodness of God, because a plague and punishment of man’s pride was
turned into matter of blessing. For whence came the diversity of
tongues, save only that the wicked and ungodly counsels of men might be
brought to naught? (<span id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>[Ge
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007)<span id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>..md)
But God doth furnish the apostles with the diversity of tongues now,
that he may bring and call home, into a blessed unity, men which wander
here and there. These cloven tongues made all men to speak the language
of Canaan, as Isaiah foretold, (<span id="ix.i-p11.2"></span>[Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)<span id="ix.i-p11.2"></span>..md)
For what language soever they speak, yet do they call upon one Father,
which is in heaven, with one mouth and one spirit, (<span
id="ix.i-p11.3"></span>[Ro 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.i-p11.3"></span>.) I said that that was done for our sake, not
only because the fruit came unto us, but because we know that the gospel
came unto us not by chance, but by the appointment of God, who to this
end gave the apostles cloven tongues, lest any nation should want that
doctrine which was committed unto them; whereby is proved the calling of
the Gentiles; and, secondly, hereby their doctrine doth purchase credit,
which we know was not forged by man, seeing that we hear that the Spirit
did dwell in their tongues.

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>Now, it remaineth that we declare what the
*fire* meaneth. Without all doubt, it was a token of the (force and)
efficacy which should be exercised in the voice of the apostles.
Otherwise, although their sound had gone out into the uttermost parts of
the world, they should only have beat the air, without doing any good at
all. Therefore, the Lord doth show that their voice shall be fiery, that
it may inflame the hearts of men; that the vanity of the world being
burnt and consumed, it may purge and renew all things. Otherwise they
durst never have taken upon them so hard a function, unless the Lord had
assured them of the power of their preaching. Hereby it came to pass
that the doctrine of the gospel did not only sound in the air, but
pierce into the minds of men, and did fill them with an heavenly heat
(and burning.) Neither was this force showed only in the mouth of the
apostles, but it appeareth daily. And, therefore, we must beware lest,
when the fire burneth, we be as stubble. Furthermore, the Lord did once
give the Holy Ghost under a visible shape, that we may assure ourselves
that his invisible and hidden grace shall never be wanting to the
Church.

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>*And it sat.* Because the number is suddenly
changed, it is to be doubted whether he speaketh of the fire. He said
that there appeared tongues as it had been of fire. It followeth by and
by, *and it sat upon them.* Notwithstanding, I refer it unto the Spirit.
For the Hebrews use commonly to express the substantive of the verb in
the second member, which they did omit in the former. Wherefore we have
an example in this place: *It sat* upon them, and they were all filled
with the Holy Ghost. And we know that although Luke did write in Greek,
yet is he full of those phrases which the Hebrews use.  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) Now, whereas he calleth the tongues the
Holy Ghost, it is according to the custom of the Scripture. For John
calleth the dove by the same name, (<span id="ix.i-p14.2"></span>[Joh
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="ix.i-p14.2"></span>,.md)
because the Lord would testify and declare the presence of his Spirit by
some such sign. If it were a vain sign, it should be an absurd naming
(to call the sign by the name of the thing signified;) but where the
thing is annexed, the name of the thing is fitly given to the sign which
offereth the same unto our senses to be perceived. The fullness of the
Spirit, wherewith he saith every one was replenished, doth not express
the \[an\] equal measure of gifts in every one, but that excellence
which should be meet for such a calling.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md)

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span><span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span>**4.** *They began to speak* He showeth that
the effect did appear presently, and also to what use their tongues were
to be framed and applied, But because Luke setteth down shortly after,
that strangers out of divers countries did marvel, because that every
one of them did hear the apostles speaking in their own tongue, some
think that they spoke not in divers tongues, but that they did all
understand that which was spoken in one tongue, as well as if they
should hear their natural tongue.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md)
Therefore, they think that one and the same sound of the voice was
diversely distributed amongst the hearers. Another conjecture they have,
because Peter made one sermon in the audience of many gathered together
out of divers countries, who could not understand his speech (and
language,) unless another voice should come unto their ears than that
which proceeded out of his mouth. But we must first note that the
disciples spoke indeed with strange tongues; otherwise the miracle had
not been wrought in them, but in the hearers. So that the similitude
should have been false whereof he made mention before; neither should
the Spirit have been given so much to them as to others. Again, we hear
how Paul giveth thanks to God, that he speaketh with divers tongues,
(<span id="ix.i-p18.2"></span>[1Co
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#018)<span id="ix.i-p18.2"></span>..md)
Truly he challengeth to himself both the understanding, and also the use
thereof. Neither did he attain to this skill by his own study and
industry, but he had it by the gift of the Spirit. In the same place he
affirmeth that it is an especial gift, wherewith all men are not endued.
I suppose that it doth manifestly appear hereby that the apostles had
the variety and understanding of tongues given them, that they might
speak unto the Greeks in Greek, unto the Italians in the Italian tongue,
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) and that they might have true
communication (and conference) with their hearers. Notwithstanding, I
leave it indifference whether there was any second miracle wrought or
no, so that the Egyptians and Elamites did understand Peter speaking in
the Chaldean tongue, as if he did utter divers voices. For there be some
conjectures which persuade me thus to think, and yet not so firm but
that they may be refuted. For it may be that they spoke with divers
tongues, as they light upon this man or that, and as occasion was
offered, and as their languages were diverse. Therefore, it was a
manifest miracle, when they saw them ready to speak divers languages. As
touching Peter’s sermon, it might be understood of the greater part of
men wheresoever they were born; for it is to be thought that many of
those which came to Jerusalem were skillful in the Chaldean tongue.
Again, it shall be nothing inconvenient if we say that he spoke also in
other tongues. Although I will not much stand about this matter; so that
this be out of doubt, that the apostles changed their speech.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc36016.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>Ut more
videbimus,” as we shall by and by see, omitted.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc36016.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="ix.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>Festis diebus,”
on feast days, or festivals.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc36016.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="ix.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p14.1"></span>Hebraismis,”
Hebraisms.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc36016.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="ix.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p15.1"></span>Excellentiam
quae obeundo muneri par futura esset.” but that excellence which might
be sufficient to enable each to execute his office.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc36016.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p18.1"></span>Nativum,”
native.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc36016.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="ix.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p19.1"></span>Latine,” in
Latin.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc36016.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="ix.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p20.1"></span>Vere mutasse,”
truly changed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 2: 5-12](cc36017.md)
