[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36022)  [Next](cc36024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
2:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040.md)<span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>**40.** And with many other words did he
testify and exhort, saying, Be ye saved from this froward generation.
**41.** Those, therefore, which willingly embraced his words were
baptized: and there were added that day about three thousand souls.
**42.** And they continued in the apostles’ doctrine, and in fellowship,
and breaking of bread, and prayers.

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span><span id="ix.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span>**40.** *And with many* Although in these
things which we have had hitherto, Luke did not recite the words of St
Peter, but did only briefly touch the chief points; notwithstanding he
telleth us again in this place, that Peter did not use doctrine only,
but did add the pricks of exhortations. And he expresseth plainly that
tie stood much  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) hereupon.
Whereas he saith, that he did exhort and beseech, he noteth therein his
earnestness. For it was not so easy a matter for them by and by  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) to take their leave of those errors
wherewith they were of late infected, and to shake off the government of
the priests whereunto they were accustomed. Therefore it stood him upon
to pull them violently out of this mire. The sum was this, that they
should beware of that froward generation. For they could not be Christ’s
unless they would depart from his professed enemies. The priests and
scribes were then in great authority, and forasmuch as they did cover
themselves under the visor \[mask\] of the Church, they did deceive the
simple, this did hinder and keep back a great many from coming to
Christ. Also some might waver, and other some might fall away from the
right faith. Therefore Peter plainly declareth that they are a froward
generation, howsoever they may boast of the title of the Church. For
which cause he commandeth his hearers to separate themselves from them,
lest they entangle themselves in their wicked and pestiferous
fellowship. Whereas he saith, Be ye saved, he signifieth unto them that
they shall surely perish if they couple themselves with such a plague.
And surely experience doth teach us, how miserably those men are tossed
to and fro who cannot discern the voice of their pastor from the voice
of other men;  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) and again, what
an hindrance softness and sluggishness is to a great many, whilst they
desire to stand in a doubt.  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md)
Therefore he commandeth them to depart from the wicked if they will be
saved. And this point of doctrine is not to be neglected. For it were
not sufficient to have Christ set before us, unless we were also taught
to flee those things which do lead us away from him. And it is the duty
of a good shepherd to defend his sheep from the wolves. So at this day,
to the end we may keep the people in the sincere doctrine of the gospel,
we are ever now and then enforced to show and testify how much Papistry
differeth from Christianity, and what a hurtful plague it is to be yoked
with the unfaithful enemies of Christ. Neither ought Peter to be accused
of railing, because he calleth the reverend 6tthers, who had the
government of the Church  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) in
their hands at that day, a *froward generation* For those dangers which
may draw the soul unto destruction are to be showed by their names. For
men will not beware of poison, unless they know that it is poison.

<span id="ix.viii-p11"></span><span id="ix.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p12"></span>**41.** *They, therefore, which
willingly.* Luke showeth more plainly how fruitful this one sermon which
Peter made was: to wit, that it gained unto Christ about three thousand
men. And therewithal he declareth the nature and force of faith when he
saith, that with a prompt and ready  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) mind they embraced his word.
Therefore, faith must begin with this readiness and willing desire to
obey. And because many do show themselves at the first very willing, who
afterward have in themselves no constancy or continuance, lest we should
think that it was some sudden pang  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) which by and by fell away, Luke doth
also afterward commend their constancy, who (as he said) did willingly
embrace this word of the apostles, showing that they were joined unto
the disciples, or that they were engrafted into the same body, and that
they continued in their doctrine. Therefore we must neither be slow to
obey, nor yet swift to leap back; but we must stick fast, and stand
stoutly to that doctrine which we did forthwith (without any tarriance
\[delay\]) embrace. Furthermore, this example ought to make us not a
little ashamed. For whereas there was a great multitude converted unto
Christ with one sermon, an hundred sermons can scarce move a few of us;
and whereas Luke saith that they continued, there is scarce one amongst
ten that doth show even a mean desire to profit and go forward, yea,
rather, the more part doth soon loathe our doctrine. Woe be, therefore,
to the sluggishness and lightness of the world!

<span id="ix.viii-p15"></span><span id="ix.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p16"></span>**42.** *In their doctrine* Luke doth not
only commend in them the constancy of faith or of godliness, but he
saith, also, that they did constantly give themselves to those exercises
which serve to the confirmation of faith; to wit, that they studied
continually to profit by hearing the apostles; that they gave themselves
much to prayer; that they did use fellowship and breaking of bread very
much.

<span id="ix.viii-p17"></span>As touching prayer and doctrine the sense
is plain. Communication or fellowship, and breaking of bread, may be
taken diversely. Some think that breaking of bread doth signify the
Lord’s Supper; other some do think that it signifieth alms; other some
that the faithful did banquet together  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) among themselves. Some do think that
<span id="ix.viii-p18.2"></span>κοινωνια, doth signify the celebrating
of the Holy Supper; but I do rather agree to those others who think that
the same is meant by the breaking of bread. For <span
id="ix.viii-p18.3"></span>κοινωνια, unless it have somewhat added unto
it, is never found in this sense; therefore, I do rather refer it unto
mutual society and fellowship, unto alms, and unto other duties of
brotherly fellowship. And my reason why I would rather have breaking of
bread to be understood of the Lord’s Supper in this place is this,
because Luke doth reckon up those things wherein the public estate of
the Church is contained. Yea, he expresseth in this place four marks
whereby the true and natural face of the Church may be judged. Do we
then seek the true Church of Christ? The image thereof is lively
depainted and set forth  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) unto us
in this place. And he beginneth with doctrine which is, as it were, the
soul of the Church. Neither doth he name all manner of doctrine, but the
doctrine of the apostles, that is, that which the Son of God had
delivered by their hands. Therefore, wheresoever the pure voice of the
gospel doth sound, where men continue in the profession thereof, where
they exercise themselves in hearing the same ordinarily that they may
profit, without all doubt there is the Church.

<span id="ix.viii-p20"></span>Hereby we may easily gather how frivolous
the boasting of the Papists is, whilst that they carelessly  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) thunder out with fall mouth the name
of the Church; whereas, notwithstanding, they have most filthily
corrupted the doctrine of the apostles. For if it be duly examined, we
shall find no sound part at all; and in most points they do as much
dissent from the same, and have as little agreement therewith as light
with darkness. The rule of worshipping God, which ought to be fetched
out of the pure Word of God alone, is only made and patched together
 <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) amongst the Papists, of the
superstitious inventions of men. They have translated unto the merits of
works the hope of salvation, which ought to have rested in Christ alone.
The invocation of God is altogether polluted with innumerable profane
dotings of men. Finally, whatsoever is heard amongst them, it is either
a deforming of the apostles’ doctrine, or else a clear overthrowing (and
destroying) of the same. Therefore, we may as easily refute the foolish
arrogancy of the Papists, as they can cloak their dealings with the
title of the Church. For this shall be the state,  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) whether they have retained the purity
of doctrine, from which they are as far as hell is from heaven. But they
are wise enough in that point, because they will have no controversy
moved about doctrine. But we, as I have said, may freely contemn that
vain visor, \[mask,\] forasmuch as the Spirit of God doth pronounce that
the Church is principally to be (esteemed and) discerned by this mark,
if the simplicity or purity of the doctrine delivered by the apostles do
flourish (and be of force) in the same.

<span id="ix.viii-p24"></span>*In fellowship.* This member and the last
do flow from the first, as fruits or effects. For doctrine is the bond
of brotherly fellowship amongst us, and doth also set open unto us the
gate unto God, that we may call upon him. And the Supper is added unto
doctrine instead of a confirmation. Wherefore, Luke doth not in vain
reckon up these four things, when as he will describe unto us the
well-ordered state of the Church. And we must endeavor to keep and
observe this order, if we will be truly judged to be the Church before
God and the angels, and not only to make boast of the name  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) thereof amongst men. It is certain
that he speaketh of public prayer. And for this cause it is not
sufficient for men to make their prayers at home by themselves, unless
they meet altogether to pray; wherein consisteth also the profession of
faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc36023.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p6.1"></span>Multum
institisse.” insisted much.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc36023.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p7.1"></span>Protinus,”
forthwith.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc36023.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p8.1"></span>Alienorum,” of strangers or aliens.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc36023.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p9.1"></span>Medii
stare,” to hold a middle course, remain undecided.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc36023.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p10"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p10.1"></span>Ordinarium Ecclesiae regimen,” the ordinary
government of the Church.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc36023.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p13"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p13.1"></span>Ililari,” cheerful.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc36023.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p14"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p14.1"></span>Impetum,” impulse.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc36023.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p18"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p18.1"></span>Communiter,” in common.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc36023.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p19.1"></span>Ad vivum
depicta,” painted to the life.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc36023.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p21.1"></span>Secure,”
confidently.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc36023.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p22.1"></span>Conflata
est,” compounded.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc36023.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.viii-p23.1"></span>Hic enim
erit status,” for the state (of the question) shall be.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc36023.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p25"></span> “<span
id="ix.viii-p25.1"></span>Inane...nomen,” the empty name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 2:43-45](cc36024.md)
