[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36064)  [Next](cc36066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:58-61](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058)<span
id="xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p2"></span>And the witnesses laid down their clothes
at a young man’s feet, named Saul. **59.** And they stoned Stephen,
calling on, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. **60.** And he
kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to
their charge. And when he had said thus, he fell on sleep. **61.** And
Saul consented \[was consenting\] to his death.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xiii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p5"></span>And the witnesses. Luke signifieth, that
even in that tumult they observed some show of judgment. This was not
commanded in vain that the witnesses should throw the first stone;
because, seeing they must commit the murder with their own hands, many
are holden with a certain dread, who otherwise are less afraid to cut
the throats of the innocent with perjury of the tongue. But in the mean
season, we gather how blind and mad the ungodliness of these witnesses
was, who are not afraid to imbrue their bloody hands with the blood of
an innocent, who had already committed murder with their tongues.
Whereas he saith, that their clothes were laid down at the feet of Saul,
he showeth that there was no let in him, but that being cast into a
reprobate sense he might have perished with the rest.  <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) For who would not think that he was a
desperate, \[desperado,\] who had infected his youth with such cruelty?
 <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) Neither is his age expressed to
lessen his fault, as some unskillful men go about to prove; for he was
of those years, that want of knowledge could no whit excuse him. And
Luke will shortly after declare, that he was sent by the high priest to
persecute the faithful. Therefore he was no child, he might well be
counted a man. Why, then, is his youth mentioned? That every man may
consider with himself what great hurt he might have done in God’s
Church, unless Christ had bridled him betimes. And therein appeareth a
most notable token both of God’s power and also of his grace, in that he
tamed a fierce and wild beast in his chief fury, even in a moment, and
in that he extolled a miserable murderer so highly who through his
wickedness was drowned almost in the deep pit of hell.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p8"></span>**59.** *Calling on.* Because he had
uttered words enough before men, though in vain, he turneth himself now
unto God for good causes, and armeth himself with prayer to suffer all
things. For although we have need to run unto God’s help every minute of
an hour during our whole warfare, yet we have greatest need to call upon
God in the last conflict, which is the hardest.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p9"></span>And Luke expresseth again how furious mad
they were, because their cruelty was not assuaged even when they saw the
servant of Christ praying humbly. Furthermore, here is set down a prayer
of Stephen having two members. In the former member, where he commendeth
his spirit to Christ, he showeth the constancy of his faith. In the
other, where he prayeth for his enemies, he testifieth his love towards
men. Forasmuch as the whole perfection of godliness consisteth upon
\[of\] these two parts, we have in the death of Stephen a rare example
of a godly and holy death. It is to be thought that he used many more
words, but the sum tendeth to this end.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p10"></span>*Lord Jesus.* I have already said, that
this prayer was a witness of confidence; and surely the courageousness
and violentness  <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484) of Stephen was
great, that when as he saw the stones fly about his ears, wherewith he
should be stoned by and by; when as he heareth cruel curses and
reproaches against his head, he yet stayeth himself meekly  <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) upon the grace of Christ. In like
sort, the Lord will have his servants to be brought to nought as it were
sometimes, to the end their salvation may be the more wonderful, And let
us define this salvation not by the understanding of our flesh,  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) but by faith. We see how Stephen
leaneth not unto the judgment of the flesh, but rather assuring himself,
even in very destruction, that he shall be saved, he suffereth death
with a quiet mind. For undoubtedly he was assured of this, that our life
is hid with Christ in God, (<span id="xiv.xiii-p13.2"></span>[Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="xiv.xiii-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.xiii-p14"></span>Therefore, casting off all care of the
body, he is content to commit his soul into the hands of Christ. For he
could not pray thus from his heart, unless, having forgotten this life,
he had cast off all care of the same.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p15"></span>It behoveth us with David (<span
id="xiv.xiii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006)<span id="xiv.xiii-p15.1"></span>)
to commit our souls into the hands of God daily so long as we are in the
world, because we are environed with a thousand deaths, that God may
deliver our life from all dangers; but when we must die indeed, and we
are called thereunto, we must fly unto this prayer, that Christ will
receive our spirit. For he commended his own spirit into the hands of
his Father, to this end, that he may keep ours for ever. This is an
inestimable comfort, in that we know our souls do not wander up and down
 <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) when they flit out of our
bodies, but that Christ receiveth them, that he may keep them
faithfully, if we commend them into his hands. This hope ought to
encourage us to suffer death patiently. Yea, whosoever commendeth his
soul to Christ with an earnest affection of faith, he must needs resign
himself wholly to his pleasure and will. And this place doth plainly
testify that the soul of man is no vain blast which vanisheth away, as
some frantic fellows imagine dotingly,  <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) but that it is an essential spirit
which liveth after this life. Furthermore, we are taught hereby that we
call upon Christ rightly and lawfully, because all power is given him of
the Father, for this cause, that all men may commit themselves to his
tuition.  <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489)

<span id="xiv.xiii-p19"></span><span id="xiv.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p20"></span>**60.** *Kneeling down, he cried.* This
is the other part of his prayer, wherein he joineth the love of men with
faith in Christ; and surely if we desire to be gathered to Christ for
our salvation, we must put on this affection. Whereas Stephen prayeth
for his enemies, and those most deadly, and even in the very instant
when their cruelty might provoke him unto desire of revenge, he
declareth sufficiently what affection he beareth toward all other men.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p21"></span>And we know that we are all commanded
 <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) to do the same which Stephen
did;  <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491) but because there is
nothing more hard than so to forgive injuries, that we will wish well to
those who would have us undone, (<span id="xiv.xiii-p23.2"></span>[Matt.
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="xiv.xiii-p23.2"></span>;)
therefore we must always set Stephen before our eyes for an example. He
crieth indeed with a loud voice, but he maketh show of nothing before
men which was not spoken sincerely and from the heart, as God himself
doth witness. Yet he crieth aloud, that he may omit nothing which might
serve to assuage the cruelty of the enemies. The fruit appeared not
forthwith, yet undoubtedly he prayed not in vain; and Paul is unto us a
sufficient testimony  <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) that this
sin was not laid to all their charges. I will not say as Augustine, that
unless Stephen had prayed the Church should not have had Paul; for this
is somewhat hard; only I say this, that whereas God pardoned Paul, it
appeareth thereby that Stephen’s prayer was not in vain. Here ariseth a
question, how Stephen prayeth for those which he said of late did resist
the Holy Ghost; but this seemeth to be the sin against the Spirit which
shall never be forgiven? We may easily answer, that that is pronounced
generally of all which belongeth to many everywhere; therefore, he
called not the body of the people rebellious in such sort that he
exempted none. Again, I have declared before what manner of resisting he
condemned in that place; for it followeth not by and by, that they sin
against the Holy Ghost who resist him for a time. When he prayeth that
God will not lay the sin to their charge, his meaning is, that the
guiltiness may not remain in them.

<span id="xiv.xiii-p25"></span>*And when he had said thus, he fell on
sleep.* This was added, that we may know that these words were uttered
even when he was ready to yield up the ghost, which is a token of
wonderful constancy; also this word sleep noteth a meek kind of death.
Now, because he made this prayer when he was at the point of death, he
was not moved with any hope of obtaining pardon, to be so careful to
appease his enemies, but only that they might repent. When this word
sleep is taken in the Scripture for to die, it must be referred unto the
body, lest any man imagine foolishly with unlearned men, that the souls
do also sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_482"></span>[483](cc36065.htm#fr_482) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p6.1"></span>Per eum
non stetisse quominus in sensum reprobum conjectus, cum aliis periret,”
that it was not owing to himself that he did not fall into a reprobate
mind, and perish with the rest (of the Jews.)

<span id="fn_483"></span>[484](cc36065.htm#fr_483) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p7"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xiii-p7.1"></span>Tirocenio,” training.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[485](cc36065.htm#fr_484) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p11.1"></span>Animi
magnitudo,” magnanimity.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[486](cc36065.htm#fr_485) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p12"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xiii-p12.1"></span>Secure,” securely.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[487](cc36065.htm#fr_486) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p13.1"></span>Non
carnis nostrae sensu,” not by our carnal senses.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[488](cc36065.htm#fr_487) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p16"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xiii-p16.1"></span>Fortuito,” fortuitously.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[489](cc36065.htm#fr_488) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p17.1"></span>Ut
quidam phrenetici delirant,” as some phrenzied persons rave.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[490](cc36065.htm#fr_489) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p18.1"></span>Un
ejus fidem,” to his faith.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[491](cc36065.htm#fr_490) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p22.1"></span>A
Christo,” by Christ, omitted.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[492](cc36065.htm#fr_491) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.xiii-p23.1"></span>Quod
autem Stephanum fecisse narrat Lucas,” which Luke relates that Stephen
did.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[493](cc36065.htm#fr_492) <span
id="xiv.xiii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.xiii-p24"></span> “<span
id="xiv.xiii-p24.1"></span>Illustre documentum,” an illustrious proof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc36066)
