[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36105)  [Next](cc36107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Therefore, when they were sent forth
by the Holy Ghost, they went to Seleucia, and thence they sailed into
Cyprus. **5.** And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of
God in the synagogues of the Jews; and they had John, also for their
minister. **6.** And when they had passed over the island unto Paphos,
they found a certain false prophet, a Jew, named Bar-jesus, **7.** Who
was with Sergius Paulus, the proconsul, a wise wan; who, when he had
called Barnabas and Paul, sought to hear the word of God. **8.** And
Elymas, the sorcerer, (for so is his name expounded,) resisted them,
seeking to turn away the proconsul from the faith. **9.** And Saul,
which was also called Paul, being full of the \[Holy\] Ghost, and
looking steadfastly on him, **10.** Said, O thou that art full of all
deceit and wickedness, thou son of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, dost thou not cease to pervert the straight ways of the
Lord? **11.** And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and
thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a time. And forthwith there
fell upon him mist and darkness, and, going about, he sought some to
lead him by the hand. **12.** Then the proconsul, seeing what had
happened, he believed, wondering at the doctrine of the Lord,

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span><span id="xx.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**4.** *Being sent out by the Holy Ghost.*
There is no mention made here of the election made by the Church,
because it was altogether a divine calling; the Church did only receive
those who were offered them by the hand of God. He saith, that they came
first to Seleucia, which was a city of Syria. There was, indeed, a
country of the same name; but it is more likely that Luke speaketh of
the city, which was not far from Cyprus by sea.

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span><span id="xx.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**5.** He saith that they began to preach the
gospel first in Salamis, a famous city of Cyprus. Notwithstanding, they
seem to begin amiss; for whereas they were sent specially to the
Gentiles, they preach the word of God, nevertheless, to the Jews, I
answer, that they were not so addicted to the Gentiles, that, setting
aside the Jews, it stood them upon to go straight to the Gentiles, for
when God did make them teachers of the Gentiles, he did not depose them
from the office which they had heretofore exercised; so that there was
no reason to let them, but that they might take pains, both with Jews
and Gentiles;  <span id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) yea, farther, it
was meet that they should begin with the Jews, as we shall see in the
end of the chapter. Moreover, Luke addeth by the way, that they were
helped by John; for his meaning is not that he was their minister for
any private use, or for the uses of body; but rather in that he was
their helper to preach the gospel, he commandeth his godly study
\[zeal\] and industry; not that the degree of honor was equal, but
because the labor was common to all; for which cause he had the less
excuse afterward, seeing that he forsook the holy calling.

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span><span id="xx.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>**6.** *When they had passed over.* It is to
be thought that this their passage was not altogether without fruit;
and, assuredly, Luke would never have passed over with silence a general
repulse; but it was sufficient for him to say that they were not idle in
the office of teaching in their journey, seeing that he maketh haste
unto a famous history, which he will set down immediately. And forasmuch
as Salamis, situated upon the east coast, did look toward Syria, it was
requisite that Paul and Barnabas should pass through the midst of the
island unto the other side, that they might come to Paphos; for Paphos
was a city situated upon the sea-coast toward the south. Furthermore
though all the island was dedicated to Venus, yet Paphos was the
principal seat of the idol. For which cause the goodness of God is more
wonderful, in that he would have the light of his gospel to pierce into
such a filthy and cruel \[dire\] den. For we may thereby gather what
manner of integrity and chastity, and honesty and temperance, was in
that city, in that religion did grant liberty to the inhabitants to
commit all manner of shameful and heinous offenses.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>*They found a certain fake prophet.* Seeing
that religion was quite corrupt among the Jews, it is no marvel if they
fell away unto many wicked superstitions. And forasmuch as they had
hitherto professed that they worshipped a certain peculiar god, this was
a fair color to deceive withal, seeing that they might pretend the name
of the unknown God at their pleasure; but this is a wonder how it was
possible for Elymas, with his juggling, to cozen a grave and wise man.
For we know that the Jews were at that time hated of all the world, and
especially of the Romans, and with hatred was coupled extreme contempt
of them.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span>Now Luke doth not without cause expressly
commend Sergius’s wisdom, lest any man should think that his foolishness
and lightness was subject to the seducings of the sorcerer. His meaning
was, indeed, to show in a clear mirror how frivolous and vain man’s
wisdom is, which cannot beware of such gross subtlety of Satan.

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>And assuredly where the truth of God doth
not appear, the more men seem to be wise, the more filthily foolish are
they. We see what filthy monsters of superstition did reign amongst the
most witty Gentiles, and such as were furnished with all manner of
learning. Therefore, there is neither judgment nor wisdom, save only
from the Spirit of God. And this is the just vengeance of God upon all
idolaters, that being delivered up to a reprobate sense they can discern
nothing, (<span id="xx.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="xx.ii-p13.1"></span>.)
Though it may be that Sergius Paulus, being weary of superstitions, did
then begin to desire a more pure worship of God, at such time as he
\[did\] light upon that sorcerer. Which if we receive, it was surely a
wonderful judgment of God, that he suffered a man godly-affected to
throw himself headlong into the \[deadly\] snares of Satan. But God doth
sometimes so exercise his elect, that he causeth them to wander many
ways, before they be directed into the right way.

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span><span id="xx.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p15"></span>**7.** And whereas Sergius Paulus, desiring
some better thing than that which he had learned from his childhood, was
unaptly drawn aside unto diverse superstitions, I gather hereby that he
sendeth for Paul and Barnabas of his own accord, to teach him.
Therefore, he had conceived a certain reverence and fear of God, though
he knew him not as yet; and forasmuch as he was persuaded that that was
the true God which was worshipped in Judea, he desired to know out of
his word a pure and certain rule of godliness. So soon as he hath tasted
of the dotings of the false prophet he standeth in doubt. And it is not
to be doubted, but that God doth solicit his mind, that he may not be
altogether stayed in vanity, though he suffered himself to be deceived
for a time by a wicked man.

<span id="xx.ii-p16"></span><span id="xx.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *To turn away the deputy from the
faith.* No marvel if the seducer seek to put away the light, whereby he
saw his own darkness driven away.  <span
id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781) The same stour \[contest\] have we at
this day with a number of babblers, who use to sell their smokes, and to
shut, by all shifts possible, the eyes of the simple, that they may not
behold the Sun of righteousness, being now risen. We must wrestle with
such lets; for as there be \[not\] always and everywhere magicians
present, which procure us some business,  <span
id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) Satan thrusteth in lets  <span
id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) enough, which possess our minds to
drive away Christ, which the flesh is too ready to receive. Finally,
both the enticements of the world and the wicked affections of our flesh
are as many charms, whereby Satan ceaseth not to overthrow the faith.

<span id="xx.ii-p21"></span><span id="xx.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p22"></span>**9.** *And Saul, who was also called Paul.*
Luke showeth now how God brake the bond wherein the deputy was bound.
For seeing that he was too much addicted to the magician, he could not
embrace true doctrine as one that was free and at liberty; for the devil
keepeth those minds (which he hath entangled) in his slavery after a
wonderful and incredible manner, that they cannot see even the most
plain truth; but so soon as he was once vanquished, Paul could easily
enter in unto the deputy. And mark what Luke saith, that *the faith* is
overthrown when the word of God is resisted. Whence we may gather that
faith is so grounded in the word, that without this shore  <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) it fainteth at every assault; yea,
that it is nothing else but the spiritual building of the word of God.

<span id="xx.ii-p24"></span><span id="xx.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p25"></span>**10.** *O thou full of deceit.* It was not
without a cause that Paul was thus hot and angry; for he had no hope to
do any good if he should deal after some moderate and mild sort. We must
always begin with doctrine, and those are also to be admonished,
exhorted, and pricked forward, who do not as yet appear to be altogether
obstinate. Neither doth Paul so vehemently inveigh against the sorcerer
at the first dash; but when he seeth him maliciously and manifestly
fight against the doctrine of godliness, he handleth him like a
bond-slave of Satan. Thus must we deal with the desperate enemies of the
gospel, in whom appeareth open contumacy and wicked contempt of God,
especially when they stop the way before others, And lest any man should
think that Paul was out of measure angry, Luke saith plainly that the
inspiration of the Spirit was his guide. Wherefore this heat of zeal is
not only not to be reprehended, but it ought to make the profane
condemners of God sore afraid, who fear not to rebel against his word;
forasmuch as this judgment is given upon them all not by mortal man, but
by the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of Paul.

<span id="xx.ii-p26"></span>As touching the words, this place refuteth
their error who think that Paul took his name of the deputy, as if he
had set up some token of victory. There may many reasons be brought, and
those strong enough, on the contrary; but this one place is sufficient,
where Luke showeth that at such time as the deputy was not brought to
the faith he had two names. And it is not to be doubted but that he
retained his own name  <span id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) amongst
the Jews; and we know that this was a usual thing, that those who were
citizens of Rome should borrow some Italian name. Luke joineth
*subtlety* with *deceit,* which is contrary to sincerity; to wit, whilst
crafty men transform their wit hither and thither, so that they have in
them no simplicity; though the Greek word which Luke useth signifieth
ready boldness to do hurt; but the former signification agreeth better.
By the *son of the devil* is meant a reprobate and desperate man. Such
are all those which resist maliciously, and as it were of set purpose,
that which is just and right; therefore Paul addeth, that he is a great
*enemy of all righteousness.*

<span id="xx.ii-p28"></span>*Dost thou not cease to pervert?* He calleth
all that means whereby the Lord bringeth us unto himself the ways of the
Lord. He testifieth that this is plain and straight; and he accuseth the
sorcerer for making the same crooked, full of turnings, and doubtful,
with his boughts and turns. Whence may be gathered a profitable
doctrine, that it cometh to pass through the subtlety of Satan that we
do not readily, with straight course, go unto the Lord. For he showeth
us in his word a plain way, and such as is not thorny. Wherefore we must
take good heed of seducers, which trouble the way with their ditches or
thorns, or else make the same hard and unpleasant.

<span id="xx.ii-p29"></span>And it shall be convenient to repeat here
that which I touched before, that the servants of Christ must not be
blamed if they do sore inveigh against the professed enemies of sound
doctrine, unless we will accuse the Holy Ghost of intemperance. Neither
am I ignorant how easily men may fall in this point; for which cause
godly teachers must take so much the more heed, first, that they favor
not the affections of the flesh too much under the color of zeal;
secondly, that they break not out with headlong and unseasonable heat
where there is yet place for moderation; thirdly, that they give not
themselves over to foolish and uncomely railing, but only that they
express the unseemliness of the thing by gravity and weight of words.
Such was the vehemency of holy zeal and of the Spirit in the prophets,
which if dainty and soft men judge troublesome and raging, they consider
not how dear and precious God’s truth is to him.

<span id="xx.ii-p30"></span>Now there riseth not one Elymas to subvert
the faith but many, and those which are far more wicked. For we see with
what sacrilegious boldness they despoil God of all honor; with what
filthy corruptions they profane all religion; how cruelly they throw
miserable souls headlong into eternal destruction; how unseemly they
mock Christ; how filthily they disfigure all the whole worship of God;
with what cruel reproaches they rend the holy truth of God; with what
barbarous tyranny they lay waste the Church of God; so that you would
say that they tread God under foot. And yet there be many crabbed
philosophers who would have these furious giants flattered and clawed by
the back.  <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) But forasmuch as it
doth evidently appear that such did never taste what that meaneth, “The
zeal of thine house hath eaten me up,” (<span
id="xx.ii-p31.2"></span>[Ps 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span
id="xx.ii-p31.2"></span>,) let us, bidding adieu to their coldness, or
rather sluggishness, be most hot,  <span
id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) as becometh us, in maintaining the
glory of God.

<span id="xx.ii-p33"></span><span id="xx.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p34"></span>**11.** *Behold the hand.* The hand is put
here to punish;  <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) a whereby he
doth signify that God is the author of this punishment, and that he is
only the minister. Furthermore, I think that this hability is that which
Paul calleth <span id="xx.ii-p35.2"></span>δυναμις, or *power,* (<span
id="xx.ii-p35.3"></span>[1Co
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="xx.ii-p35.3"></span>.)
For as they did excel in power of the Spirit to help the faithful with
miracles, so had they the whip in their hand to tame the rebellious and
obstinate withal. Such vengeance of God did Peter show upon Ananias and
Sapphira, (<span id="xx.ii-p35.4"></span>[Ac
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005)<span id="xx.ii-p35.4"></span>.)
But because miracles ought, for the most part, to resemble the nature of
Christ, who is all gentle, sweet, bountiful, and merciful; therefore he
would seldom have the apostles to show examples of the contrary power.
Neither must we think that they were endued with this power to punish
any man so often as it seemeth good in their own eyes, but the same
Spirit of God, which did thus arm them, did direct them unto the lawful
and right use. Therefore we must remember that which we had before, that
Paul spake by inspiration of the Spirit. Furthermore, it was a very fit
kind of punishment. For seeing that the sorcerer essayed to darken the
sun, and to take from others the benefit of the light, he was, by good
right, cast into horrible darkness.

<span id="xx.ii-p36"></span>But now, forasmuch as many of the Papists do
far exceed this sorcerer at this day in ungodliness, it is a wonder why
they be suffered to be so bold without being punished. Is the hand of
God weakened? Is he less careful for his glory? Hath he no care to
revenge the gospel? I answer, that this visible punishment which was
once laid  <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) upon the sorcerer,
and such as this, are perpetual examples of God’s wrath against all
those who are not afraid either to corrupt and deprave, or openly with
slanders to resist the pure doctrine of the gospel. For we do know that
miracles were wrought for a time to this end, that they may continually
be in force, and be fresh before our eyes, and that they may give us
light to behold the judgments of God, which we cannot see so plainly;
but it is not for us to prescribe God this or that way to punish his
enemies. Sergius Paulus, who, before he came to man’s estate, had no
taste of true religion, who, from his childhood, was infected with
diverse superstitions, and had very hard lets, which kept him back from
embracing the faith; lastly, who was bewitched with the dotings of the
sorcerer, that he could scarce come to the faith, had need of no small
helps. Hereby it came to pass that God did, as it were, reach his hand
out of heaven manifestly, though he helped us all in his person; for the
same gospel, the authority whereof was then established, is at this day
preached to us, and yet, notwithstanding, God doth not so linger, but
that he showeth his fearful power diverse ways against the enemies of
the gospel, unless our eyes were so dull when he showeth his judgments
that we cannot see.

<span id="xx.ii-p38"></span><span id="xx.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p39"></span>**12.** *Then when the deputy saw* This is
that which I said, that the snares were broken wherein Elymas kept him
entangled, for he was brought by the miracle unto faith, because the
reverence of doctrine is the beginning of faith, and the preparation.
Therefore, forasmuch as he saw an evident token of the power of God, he
knew that Paul was sent of God, and so he began to reverence his
doctrine, whereof he did doubt before. If God do now miraculously
strengthen in the minds of many the faith of the gospel, which is shaken
with so many and such strong engines; if he bring to pass, after an
incredible manner, that the course of faith doth pass through a thousand
lets, being content with this his grace, let us not murmur against him,
or reason the matter with him, as if our condition were worse, if he do
not daily show such miracles as we would desire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_780"></span>[781](cc36106.htm#fr_780) <span
id="xx.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p8.1"></span>Ita nulla
ratio prohibuit quin Judaeis promiscue et Gentibus operam suam
conferrent,” so nothing prevented them from bestowing their labor
promiscuously on Jews and Gentiles.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[782](cc36106.htm#fr_781) <span
id="xx.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p18.1"></span>Discuti,”
dispelled.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[783](cc36106.htm#fr_782) <span
id="xx.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p19.1"></span>Nam ut non
semper et ubique praesto sint magi qui negotium nobis facessant,” for
though magicians are not always and everywhere present to give us
trouble.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[784](cc36106.htm#fr_783) <span
id="xx.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p20.1"></span>Avocamenta,”
enticements.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[785](cc36106.htm#fr_784) <span
id="xx.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p23.1"></span>Fultura,”
prop or support.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[786](cc36106.htm#fr_785) <span
id="xx.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p27.1"></span>Gentile...
nomen,” his family name.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[787](cc36106.htm#fr_786) <span
id="xx.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p31"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p31.1"></span>Blanditiis
mulceri,” soothed by flattery.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[788](cc36106.htm#fr_787) <span
id="xx.ii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p32"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p32.1"></span>Usque ad
summum fervorem efferamur, “let us be carried even to the highest pitch
of fervour.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[789](cc36106.htm#fr_788) <span
id="xx.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p35.1"></span>Ad plagam
infligendam,” for inflicting a blow.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[790](cc36106.htm#fr_789) <span
id="xx.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p37.1"></span>Inflicta,”
inflicted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:13-15](cc36107)
