[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36097)  [Next](cc36099.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
11:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027.md)<span
id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**27.** In those days came prophets from
Jerusalem to Antioch. **28.** And one of them, named Agabus, arose, and
signified by the Spirit, that there should be a great famine throughout
the whole world, which happened under Claudius Caesar. **29.** And as
every one of the disciples was able, they decreed every man to send
succor to the brethren which dwelt in Judea. **30.** Which thing they
did, sending it unto the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span>**27.** Luke commendeth in this place the
faith of the men of Antioch by the fruit, because they endeavored to
relieve the poverty of that church, from whence they received the
gospel, with their abundance; and that did they unrequested. Such
earnest care for the brethren doth sufficiently declare how seriously
they worshipped Christ, the head of all. Luke doth signify that the fame
of that church was spread abroad, when he saith that there came
excellent men thither from Jerusalem. But forasmuch as the word
*prophet* is taken divers ways in the New Testament as we may learn by
the former Epistle to the Corinthians, those are called prophets in this
place who were endued with the gift of prophesying, as the four
daughters of Philip shall have the same title given them hereafter. And
forasmuch as the foretelling of the famine is attributed to Agabus
alone, we may hereby gather that this was granted to every one by a
certain measure to know things to come.

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>**28.** *He signified by the Spirit.* Luke
doth plainly express that the Spirit of God was the author of this
prophecy, that we may know that it was not a conjecture taken by the
stars, or some other natural causes; again, that Agabus did not play the
philosopher after the manner of men, but he uttered that which God had
appointed by the secret inspiration of the Spirit. Barrenness may indeed
be sometimes foretold by the disposition of the stars, but there is no
certainty in such foretellings, both because of the opposite concourses,
and also, especially, because God doth govern earthly things at his
pleasure, far otherwise than can be gathered by the stars, that he may
lead men away from the perverse beholding of stars. And although these
foretellings have their degree, yet the prophecies of the Spirit do far
exceed them. But it seemeth that the foretelling of the famine was
unlucky, \[of evil omen,\] and not to be wished for; for to what end was
it for men to be made miserable before their time, by having the unhappy
event foretold? I answer, that there be many causes for which it is
expedient that men should be warned before in time when the judgments of
God hang over their heads, and punishments \[are\] due to their sins. I
omit others which are usual  <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743.md) in
the prophets, because \[viz. that\] they have a space granted wherein to
repent, that they may prevent God’s judgment, who have provoked his
wrath against themselves; because \[that\] the faithful are instructed
in time to arm themselves with patience; because \[that\] the obstinate
wickedness of wicked men is convict; because \[that\] both good and evil
learn that miseries do not come by chance, but that they are punishments
wherewith God doth punish the sins of the world; because \[that\] those
are awakened out of their sleep and sluggishness by this means, who took
great delight in their vices. The profit of this present prophecy
appeareth by the text, because the men of Antioch were thereby pricked
forward to relieve their brethren which were in misery.

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span>*Which happened under Claudius*. Suetonius
also maketh mention of this famine, who saith that there were crusts or
shards thrown at Claudius’ head in the midst of the market and that he
was so sore afraid of stoning, that he had a singular care afterward,
during his whole life, to make provision for victual. And Josephus, in
his Fifteenth Book of Antiquity, saith, that Judea was sore oppressed
with scarcity, by reason of continual drought.

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>**29.** But here ariseth a question,
seeing that the misery was common to all, why ought they rather to have
succored one people than all the rest? I answer, that forasmuch as Judea
was impoverished with great destructions of wars and other miseries, the
men of Antioch were not without cause more moved with the miseries of
the brethren which were there; secondly, the greater the rage of the
enemies was, the more wretched was the estate of the brethren. Finally,
Paul doth sufficiently declare, in the Epistle to the Galatians, that
Judea had certain especial necessities, whereof all other had regard,
not without cause, (<span id="xviii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Ga
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#000)<span id="xviii.iv-p11.1"></span>.md)
And this thankfulness deserved no small commendations, in that the men
of Antioch thought that they ought to help the needy brethren, from whom
they had received the gospel. For there is nothing more just than that
those should reap earthly things who have sown spiritual things. As
every man is too much bent to provide for himself, every man might
readily have excepted and objected: Why shall not I rather provide for
myself? But when they call to mind how greatly they are indebted to the
brethren, omitting that carefulness,  <span
id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744.md) they turn themselves to help them. In
sum, this alms had a double end; for the men of Antioch did the duty of
charity toward their needy brethren and they did also testify by this
sign, what great account they made of the gospel, whilst that they
honored the place whence it came.

<span id="xviii.iv-p13"></span>*As every man was able.* We see the men
of Antioch observe in this place that mean which Paul prescribeth to the
Corinthians, (<span id="xviii.iv-p13.1"></span>[2Co
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006)<span id="xviii.iv-p13.1"></span>,.md)
whether they did this of themselves, or being instructed by him; and it
is not to be doubted, but that he continued like to himself  <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745.md) in both places. Therefore we must
follow this rule, that every one, considering how much is granted him,
impart the same courteously with his brethren, as one that must give an
account; so shall it come to pass, that he which is but poor shall have
a liberal mind, and that a small reward  <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746.md) shall be counted a fat and gorgeous
sacrifice. By this word *determined,* Luke giveth us to understand that
their oblation was voluntary. Which thing ought so to be, as Paul
teacheth, that we reach out our hand unto the needy not as constrained,
but cheerfully, (<span id="xviii.iv-p15.2"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="xviii.iv-p15.2"></span>..md)
When as he nameth every one, it is all one as if he should say, that one
did not prescribe another a law, neither did they burthen one another
with their prejudice, but that every man did bestow his liberality as
seemed good to himself; and we must note the word <span
id="xviii.iv-p15.3"></span>διακονιας, whereby we are taught that rich
men have greater abundance given them upon that condition, that they may
be the ministers of the poor in the dispensation committed to them by
God. Lastly, Luke teacheth that the blessing was sent not to all the
whole nation, but only to those that were of the household of faith, not
because we ought never to use any bountifulness, or courtesy towards the
unbelievers, seeing love ought to extend itself unto all mankind, but
because those ought to be preferred whom God hath joined and linked to
us move near, and with a more holy band.

<span id="xviii.iv-p16"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p17"></span>**30.** *Sending it unto the elders,*
\[presbyters.\] We must note two things in this place, that the men of
Antioch did choose faithful men, and of known honesty, to carry their
blessing; secondly, that they sent it unto the elders, that they might
wisely bestow the same. For if alms be thrown into the midst of the
common people, or be set in the midst where every one may take what he
will, every man will by and by take it to himself as if it were some
common prey; and so he that is most bold will defraud the needy; yea,
through his greediness he will cut the throats of the hungry. Therefore,
let us mark these places, which teach that we must not only deal
uprightly and faithfully, but that there is also an order and wisdom
required as well in making choice as in all our administration. Those
are called elders in whose hands the government of the Church was, among
whom the apostles were chief; the men of Antioch refer the holy money
(which they had appointed for the poor) to their discretion. If any man
object that this was the office of the deacons, forasmuch as the
apostles did deny that they could both serve tables and attend upon
doctrine, answer is easy, that the deacons were appointed over tables,
in such sort, that yet, notwithstanding, they were under the elders,
\[presbyters,\] neither did they any thing but at their appointment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_743"></span>[744](cc36098.htm#fr_743.md) <span
id="xviii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p8.1"></span>Passim
occurrunt,” everywhere occur, are everywhere mentioned.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[745](cc36098.htm#fr_744.md) <span
id="xviii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p12"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iv-p12.1"></span>Immodica illa anxietate,” that excessive
anxiety.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[746](cc36098.htm#fr_745.md) <span
id="xviii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p14.1"></span>Sibi
constiterit,” is consistent with himself.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[747](cc36098.htm#fr_746.md) <span
id="xviii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p15"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iv-p15.1"></span>Munus,” gift.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc36099.md)
