[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36012)  [Next](cc36014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Acts
1:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015.md)<span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>**15.** In those days, Peter standing up in
the midst of the disciples, said, (and the company of names together was
almost an hundred and twenty,) **16.** Men and brethren, it was
expedient that this Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost
foretold by the mouth of David concerning Judas, which was guide unto
them which took Jesus: **17.** Which was adopted into the number of us,
and had obtained part \[lot\] of this ministry. **18.** And he truly
hath \[had\] possessed \[or gotten\] a field with the reward of
iniquity, and being hanged, he burst in sunder in the middle, and all
his bowels gushed out. **19.** And this was known unto all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, that that field is called, in their tongue,
Aceldama, that is, The field of blood. **20.** For it is written in the
book of the Psalms, Let his habitation be void, and let there be none to
dwell therein, and let another man take his bishopric. **21.** Of all
those, therefore, which were gathered together with us all that time
wherein the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, **22.** Beginning
from the baptism of John, until that day wherein he was taken up from
us, must one be made a witness together with us of his resurrection.

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span><span id="viii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span>**15.** It was meet that Matthias should be
chosen into the place of Judas, lest, through the treachery of one man,
all that might seem to have been made of none effect which Christ had
once appointed. He did not unadvisedly choose the twelve in the
beginning, as principal preachers of his gospel. For when he said that
they should be judges of twelve tribes of Israel, <span
id="viii.vi-p5.1"></span>[Lu 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.vi-p5.1"></span>, <span id="viii.vi-p5.2"></span>[Joh
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070.md)<span id="viii.vi-p5.2"></span>;
he showeth here that it was done of set purpose, that they might gather
together the tribes of Israel unto one faith. But after that the Jews
had refused the grace offered unto them, it was behoveful that the
Israel of God should be gathered together out of all countries.

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span>This, therefore, was, as it were, a holy
number, which, if it should have been diminished through the wickedness
of Judas, then should the preaching of the gospel both have had, and
also have, less credit at this day, if the beginning thereof had been
imperfect.  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) Although, therefore,
Judas would (as much as in him lay) have disappointed the purpose of
Christ, yet nevertheless it stood firm and stable. He perished as he was
worthy, yet did the order of the apostles remain whole and sound.

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span>*The company of names* It is uncertain
whether he meaneth the men who only have the name properly, seeing the
women are comprehended under the name of the men; or whether he taketh
names simply for all the heads, as the Hebrews call them souls. This may
also be called in question, whether they were wont daily to frequent
that parlor in which the apostles did dwell, or they did continually
dwell there with them. For the place was scarce able to contain so great
a multitude, to serve them for all necessary uses. Surely it seemeth to
me a thing more like to be true, that Luke doth in this place express
the number of them, that we may know that they were all gathered
together when Peter made this sermon. Whereby we may guess that they
were not always present there. Although I dare not affirm any certain
thing concerning this matter, yet being moved with a probable
conjecture, I do rather lean unto this part, that the church was
gathered together them because they had to intreat of a serious matter,
and to this end also tendeth this word *rising*, \[standing up.\]

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span><span id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span>**16.** *It was meet that the Scripture
should be fulfilled.* Because Peter doth speak in this their assembly,
therefore the Papists will have him to be the head of the church.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) As though no man might speak in any
assembly of the godly but he should straightway be Pope. We do grant,
that as in every assembly there must be some which must be chief, so in
this assembly the apostles did ascribe this honor unto Peter. But what
maketh this unto (the proving of) their Papacy? Wherefore, bidding them
adieu,  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) let us consider what the
Spirit doth speak by the month of Peter. He saith That the Scripture
must needs have been fulfilled, lest any man’s mind should be troubled
with that horrible fall of Judas. For it seemed a strange thing that he
which was chosen by Christ unto so excellent a function, should so
filthily fall in the beginning of his course. Peter removeth this stone
of stumbling, when he saith that it was foretold by the Scripture.
Whence we may gather an admonition very necessary for daily practice;
namely, that we ought to attribute this honor unto the prophecies of the
Scriptures, that they are able to appease all such fear as we conceive
of the sudden event of things. For there is nothing which doth more
trouble us than when we stay still in our own sense and understanding,
and procure unto ourselves lets and doubts,  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) which the Lord would be ready to cure, if
so be that we would hold fast this one thing, that nothing is absurd
which he hath foreseen, appointed, and foretold, that he might make us
more strong. Neither was Judas therefore excusable, because that which
befell him was foretold, seeing that he fell away, not being compelled
by the prophecy, but only by the malice of his own heart. The oration of
Peter hath two parts. For, in the first place, he putteth away the
offense which godly minds might have conceived by reason of the fall of
Judas; whence also he gathereth an exhortation that the rest may learn
to fear God. Secondly, he telleth them that it remaineth that they
choose another into his place, both which he proveth by testimony of
Scripture.

<span id="viii.vi-p14"></span>*Which the Holy Ghost foretold* Such
manner of speeches bring greater reverence to the Scriptures, whilst we
are taught by them that David and all the rest of the prophets did speak
only as they were directed by the Holy Ghost; so that they themselves
were not the authors of their prophecies, but the Spirit which used
their tongues as an instrument. Wherefore, seeing that our dullness is
so great, that we ascribe less authority unto the Scriptures than we
ought, we must diligently note such manner of speeches, and acquaint
ourselves with them, that we may oftentimes remember the authority of
God to confirm our faith withal.

<span id="viii.vi-p15"></span><span id="viii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p16"></span>**17.** *Adopted.* It is word for word
*reckoned.* And he saith that he was one of the number, that he might
signify unto them that it was needful that the empty place should be
filled, to the end that the number might continue whole. And to this
propose serveth that which followeth, that he had obtained a part in the
ministry. For thereupon it doth follow that the body should be, as it
were, lame, if that part should be wanting. Surely it was a thing which
might make them greatly amazed, that he whom Christ had extolled unto so
high dignity should fall headlong into such destruction. Which
circumstance doth increase the cruelty of the fact,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) and teacheth the rest to take heed unto
themselves.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) Neither is it to be
doubted but that the disciples did remember Judas with great grief and
sorrow. But Peter doth here express by name the excellency of his
function, that he might make them more attentive and more careful to
provide a remedy.

<span id="viii.vi-p19"></span><span id="viii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p20"></span>**18.** *And he truly* It seemeth unto me
a thing like to be true, that this narration of the death of Judas was
put in by Luke; therefore, it seemeth good to me to include it within a
parenthesis, that it may be separated from Peter’s sermon. For to what
end should Peter here reckon up unto the disciples those things which
they already knew well enough?

<span id="viii.vi-p21"></span>Secondly, it should have been an absurd
thing to have spoken after this among them, that the field which was
bought with the money that was given to betray Christ was called of the
Hebrews, in their own mother tongue, *Aceldama.* But whereas some do
answer, that Peter spoke this unto the Galileans, whose speech did
disagree with the Jewish tongue, it is but vain and frivolous. In very
deed they did somewhat disagree in pronunciation; yet not so much but
that they did well understand one another; like as do these of Paris and
the men of Rouen.

<span id="viii.vi-p22"></span>Furthermore, how could this be a fit word
for Jerusalem, where Peter made his sermon? To what end should he
interpret in Greek among the Hebrews their own mother tongue? Therefore
doth Luke of himself put in this sentence concerning the death of Judas,
lest Peter’s words might seem strange  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) through ignorance of that history.

<span id="viii.vi-p24"></span>*He possessed a field* This word hath a
double signification, which, in my opinion, doth rather signify in this
place to possess than to get; yet because it skilleth little whether way
we read it, I leave it indifferent. And he speaketh after this sort, not
because Judas had the use of the field, or that he himself did buy it,
seeing it was bought after his death. But Luke’s meaning was, that his
burial was the perpetual note of ignominy; was the reward which he had
for his falsehood and wicked act. Neither did he so much sell Christ for
thirty pieces as his apostleship. He enjoyed not the money;  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) he only possessed the field. Furthermore,
it came to pass through the marvelous providence of God, that the very
common name of the field should be a note of infamy for the priests,
which had bought (the) innocent blood of \[from\] the traitor. He saith
that the Hebrews did call it by that name in their tongue, because he
himself was a Grecian born; and he calleth that the Hebrew tongue which
the Jews did use after the captivity of Babylon, namely, such as was
mixed of the Assyrian tongue and of the Chaldean tongue.

<span id="viii.vi-p26"></span>*It is written in the book of Psalms* He
taketh away, by authority of Scriptures, all offense which might have
happened by reason of the falling away of Judas. Yet might this place
seem to be greatly wrested: First, in that David did not wish that these
things might befall any particular person, but (in the plural number) he
wisheth them unto his enemies. Secondly, it seemeth that Peter doth
apply these things amiss unto Judas, which were spoken of the enemies of
David. I answer, that David doth there speak after this \[afterwards\]
of himself, that he may describe the condition and state of Christ’s
kingdom.

<span id="viii.vi-p27"></span>In that Psalm (I say) is contained the
common image of the whole Church, which is the body of the Son of God.
Therefore, the things which are there set down must needs have been
fulfilled in the head, which are indeed fulfilled, as the evangelists do
testify, know, if any man object that those things which there were
spoken against the enemies of David do not fitly agree unto Judas, we
may easily gather that they do so much the rather agree with him,
because David doth not respect himself as being separated from the body
of the Church; but rather as he was one of the members of Christ, and so
taking upon him his image, he steppeth forth in his name.

<span id="viii.vi-p28"></span>Whosoever shall mark that this singular
person was attributed to David, that he should be a figure of Christ,
will not marvel if all these things be applied unto him which were
prefigured in David. Although, therefore, he doth comprehend the whole
Church, yet he beginneth at the head thereof, and doth especially
describe what things Christ should suffer by the hands of the wicked.
For we learn out of Paul’s doctrine, that whatsoever afflictions the
godly suffer, they are part of the afflictions of Christ, and serve to
the fulfilling of the same, (<span id="viii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014)<span id="viii.vi-p28.1"></span>..md)
This order and connection did David observe, or rather the Spirit of
God, who meant by the mouth of David to instruct the whole Church. But
as touching the persecutors of Christ, all that which is commonly spoken
of them is by good right referred unto their standard-bearer; whose
impiety and wickedness, as it is most famous, so his punishment ought to
be made known unto all men. If any man do object again, that that which
is recited in the Psalm is only certain cursings, and not prophecies;
and that, therefore, Peter doth gather improperly that it was of
necessity that it should be fulfilled, it is soon answered. For David
was not moved with any perverse or corrupt affection of the flesh to
crave vengeance; but he had the Holy Spirit to be his guide and
director. Therefore, what things soever he prayed for there, being
inspired with the Holy Ghost, they have the same strength which
prophecies have, because the Spirit doth require no other thing than
that which God hath determined with himself to perform, and will also
promise unto us. But whereas Peter doth cite out of the Scriptures two
diverse testimonies; by the first is meant, that Judas, together with
his name and family, should quite be extinguished, that his place might
be empty; the other, which he fetcheth out of the 109th Psalm, tendeth
to this end, that there should be another chosen to supply his place.
These seem at first to be contrary; namely, a waste habitation and
succession. Yet, because the Spirit saith only, in the former place,
that the adversaries of the Church should be taken away, that their
place might be empty, and without one to dwell therein, in respect of
themselves, this is no let why another may not afterward supply their
empty place. Yea, this doth also augment their punishment, in that the
honor, after it was taken from him that was unworthy thereof, is given
to another.

<span id="viii.vi-p29"></span>*And his bishopric* The Hebrew word could
not be translated more fitly. For <span id="viii.vi-p29.1"></span>פכודה
*(pecudah)* doth signify a jurisdiction or government, so called of the
overseeing and beholding of things. For as for those which interpret it
*wife,* the text  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) refuteth them;
for it followeth in the next verse, of his wife, that she may be made a
widow. Therefore, after that he had wished that the wicked may be
deprived of his life, he addeth, moreover, that he may be spoiled of his
honor; neither doth he stay here, but also he desireth that another may
succeed him, whereby, as I have said before, his punishment is doubled.
In the meanwhile, he noteth by the way,  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) that this false, treacherous, and wicked
person, whereof he speaketh, should not be some one of the common sort,
but such an one as should be indued with honor and dignity; from which,
nevertheless, he shall fall. And out of this place must we learn, that
the wicked shall not escape scott free, which have persecuted the Church
of God; for this miserable and wretched end is prepared for them all.

<span id="viii.vi-p32"></span><span id="viii.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p33"></span>**21.** *We must therefore.* This which he
bringeth in might seem, at the first sight, to be far set \[fetched.\]
For if so be it David did speak of transposing  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) Judas’s bishopric, it did not thereupon
straightway follow that the disciples should choose another to be his
successor; yet, because they knew that they had this charge given them
to order the Church, so soon as Peter had told them that it did please
the Lord that it should be so, he gathereth thereupon that they ought to
do it. For whensoever God will use as means,  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) to maintain the government of his Church,
so soon as we know what his will is, we must not linger, but stoutly
perform whatsoever is required in our ministry (and function.) That was,
without all controversy, what was the duty of the Church; like as, at
this day, when we hear that those must be put from their office which
behave themselves ungodly and wickedly, and that others must be chosen
in their rooms, the Church must take this charge in hand. Wherefore, it
was superfluous to move any question about a thing that was not to be
doubted of. Therefore, let us always remember to consider what we have
to do, that we may be ready to obey the Lord. Furthermore, when as he
intreateth of the making of an apostle, he saith, He must be a witness
of the resurrection; which signifieth that the apostleship is not
without the preaching of the gospel. Whence it may appear how vain and
frivolous the Popish bishops are, which having on only dumb visors, brag
that they are the successors of the apostles; but wherein are they like
unto them? I grant that Peter doth here require such a witness as saw
the Lord after his resurrection, of which sort John professeth himself
to be one, when he saith, “He which saw it beareth witness,” (<span
id="viii.vi-p35.2"></span>[Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035.md)<span
id="viii.vi-p35.2"></span>.) For this did serve for the confirmation of
faith; yet, nevertheless, Peter maketh it a thing necessary in him and
the rest of his fellows in office, that they should teach, whilst he
maketh them and himself preachers or witnesses of the resurrection.

<span id="viii.vi-p36"></span>He nameth the resurrection, not because
they must bear witness thereof alone; but because, first, under this is
comprehended the preaching of the death of Christ; secondly, because we
have the end of our redemption therein, and the accomplishment thereof,
and also it bringeth with it the celestial government of Christ, and the
power of the Spirit in defending his, in establishing justice and
equity, in restoring order, in abolishing the tyranny of sin, and in
putting to flight all the enemies of the Church. Let us know, therefore,
that those things are not excluded by this word which are necessarily
knit together. Nevertheless, let us note that the resurrection is here
named before other things, as being the chief point of the gospel, as
also Paul teacheth, (<span id="viii.vi-p36.1"></span>[1Co
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.vi-p36.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.vi-p37"></span>But were the apostles alone witnesses of
the resurrection? Was not this also common to the rest of the disciples?
For Peter seemeth to challenge this as proper only to the apostles. I
answer, that this title is therefore attributed unto them, because they
were chosen peculiarly unto that function, and because they had the
chief room amongst those which did bring this embassage; therefore,
though they were the chief of those which were assigned, yet were not
they only appointed thereunto.

<span id="viii.vi-p38"></span>*All that time.* He beginneth at that time
when Jesus began to show himself unto the world, which is diligently to
be observed, as before I have said; for he lived privately until such
time as he was almost thirty years of age. For he would not make himself
known further than was needful for our salvation. Therefore, when the
time was come wherein he must go about that business which his Father
had appointed him, he came abroad like a new man, and one that was but
lately born. Every man may easily perceive what great force this hath to
bridle our curiosity. The whole life of Christ might have been a mirror
most marvelous,  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) of more than
absolute perfection; and yet, notwithstanding, that he might keep us
occupied in the study and meditation of those things which were most
needful to be known, he would lead the better part of his life obscurely
and in secret.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) Who dare now wander
without Christ, seeing that he doth apply the knowledge of himself to
the edifying of faith?

<span id="viii.vi-p41"></span>The Hebrews take this, to go in and out,
for to be conversant and to lead the life among men. In which sense,
citizens are said to go in and out by the gates of their city; so <span
id="viii.vi-p41.1"></span>[Joh
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.vi-p41.1"></span>,

<span id="viii.vi-p42"></span>“If any man enter in by me, he shall go in
and out,  
and shall find pasture.”

<span id="viii.vi-p43"></span>Although, in the Second Book of the
Chronicles, the first chapter, and tenth verse, it seemeth to be a token
of rule and government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc36013.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p7.1"></span>Ut ita
loquar claudicaret,” had been, so to speak, lame, defective.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc36013.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p11"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p11.1"></span>Universae Ecclesiae,” the Universal Church.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc36013.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p12"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>Illis
valere jussis,” omitting these things.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc36013.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p13"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p13.1"></span>Offendicula,” small scandals.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc36013.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p17"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p17.1"></span>Atrocitatem sceleris,” the atrocity of the
crime.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc36013.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p18.1"></span>Ut sibi
caveant et metuani,” to be cautious and fear.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc36013.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p23"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p23.1"></span>Lectoribus obscura essent,” might be obscure
to his readers.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc36013.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p25.1"></span>Argento
potitus non est,” he did not obtain the money.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc36013.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p30"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p30.1"></span>Contextus,” context.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc36013.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p31"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p31.1"></span>Oblique,” indirectly.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc36013.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p34"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p34.1"></span>Transferendo,” transferring.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc36013.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p35"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p35.1"></span>Quum
opera nostra uti velit Deus,” since God is pleased to use our agency.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc36013.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p39"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p39.1"></span>Admirable speculum,” an admirable mirror.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc36013.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p40"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p40.1"></span>Quasi
sepultam,” as it were buried.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 1:23-26](cc36014.md)
