[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36111)  [Next](cc36113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.viii"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p1"></span><span id="xx.viii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038)<span
id="xx.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p2"></span>**38.** Therefore, be it known unto you,
 <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) that through him remission of
sins is promised to you: **39.** And from all things, from which ye
could not be justified in the law of Moses. **40.** Whosoever believeth
in this man is justified. **41.** Therefore, take heed, lest that befall
you which is said in the prophets; **42.** Behold, ye despisers, and
wonder, and vanish away; because I do a work in your days, a work which
ye shall not believe, if a man tell it you.

<span id="xx.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.viii-p5"></span><span id="xx.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p6"></span>**38.** *Therefore, be it known unto you.*
After that he hath declared the mean whereby salvation is purchased
through Christ, he doth now intreat of his office and power. And this is
the principal point, to know what good things we have by the coming of
Christ, and what we are to hope for at his hands. And although Luke
setteth down in a word that Paul preached of the benefits of Christ, yet
there is no cause why any man should doubt but that so great matters
were handled weightily, and only according as their dignity did require.
By this word, *Be it known unto you,* Paul meaneth that nothing should
hinder them from knowing such an excellent and plain matter, save only
sloth; and that, therefore, it was an absurd thing that those benefits
of God should be hidden from the faithful which were offered by Christ.
For he was sent with the shrill preaching of the gospel, which our faith
ought to hear, that it may enter into the sure possession of his good
things; for we must know what he is, that we may enjoy him truly.
Forgiveness of sins is set first, whereby God doth reconcile us unto
himself. That which God will have preached to all his people doth he
show to be necessary for all men; for Paul speaketh not to one or two,
but to all the Jews which were at Antioch.

<span id="xx.viii-p7"></span>Therefore, we must first mark that we be
all enemies to God through sin, (<span id="xx.viii-p7.1"></span>[Col
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013)<span id="xx.viii-p7.1"></span>.)
Whereupon it followeth that we are all excluded from the kingdom of God,
and are given over to eternal death, until God receive us to favor by
the free forgiveness of sins. We must also note this, that God doth
pardon to us our sins, and that he is reconciled through the Mediator,
because like as without him there is no satisfaction, so neither is
there any pardon or forgiveness of guiltiness. These be principles of
our faith which are not learned in the schools of the philosophers, that
all mankind is condemned and drowned in sin, that there is in us no
righteousness which is able to reconcile us to God; that the only hope
of salvation resteth in his mercy, whilst that he doth freely forgive
us; and that those remain under the guilt which fly not unto Christ, and
seek not forgiveness  <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) in his
death.

<span id="xx.viii-p9"></span>*And from all things.* He doth secretly
prevent that which might seem contrary to the former doctrine. For look
how many ceremonies of the law there were, so many exercises were there
to obtain remission of sins. Therefore, the Jews might readily object,
If he alone do reconcile God to us, our sins being done away, to what
end serve so many washings and sacrifices, which we have hitherto used
according to the prescript of the law? Therefore, lest the ceremonies of
the law hinder the Jews, Paul teacheth that Christ doth that which they
were not able to do. Not that Paul spake so briefly and compendiously,
(for he did not hope that the Jews would at the first come unto Christ,
casting from them suddenly the affiance which they had in the
righteousness of the law;) but it was sufficient for Luke briefly to
collect  <span id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) the sum of those things
which he then taught in just and due order. His meaning is, that the
Mediator took away that let from the Jews wherein they did stick. The
ceremonial law ought indeed to have been a schoolmaster to lead them by
the hand unto Christ; all rites commanded by God were helps to help and
further their faith; but as men use preposterously to corrupt the holy
ordinances of God, they stop the way before themselves by their
ceremonies, and they shut the gate of faith, that they could not come to
Christ. They thought they had righteousness in sacrifices; that by
washings was gotten true cleanness; that God was pleased with them so
soon as they had ended their external pomp: in sum, forsaking the body,
they laid hold upon vain shadows. God did indeed appoint no unprofitable
or vain thing in the law; wherefore ceremonies were sure and undoubted
testimonies of remission of sins. For God did not lie in these words,
Let the sinner do sacrifice, and his iniquity shall be purged. But as
Christ was the end of the law, and the heavenly pattern of the
tabernacle, so the force and effect of all ceremonies did depend upon
him; whereby it is proved that they were vain shadows, when he was set
aside, (<span id="xx.viii-p10.2"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)<span id="xx.viii-p10.2"></span>.)
Now we see Paul’s drift and purpose; to wit, that he meant to draw away
the Jews from the false and perverse confidence which they reposed in
the law; lest being puffed up, they should think that they had no need
of Christ’s help, or lest they should seek only external felicity in
him.

<span id="xx.viii-p11"></span>*Be justified in the law.* This place doth
plainly show what the word *justified* doth import in all other places
where it is used; to wit, to be delivered and acquitted. There was
mention made of remission of sins; Paul affirmeth that there is no other
way whereby we can obtain the same but the grace of Christ. Lest any man
should object that there be remedies to be found in the law, he
answereth that there was in them no force. Therefore the sense is plain,
that they cannot be justified from sin in the law, because the rites of
the law were neither just nor lawful prices to remove guiltiness; they
were nothing worth of themselves to deserve righteousness, neither were
they sufficient recompenses to appease God. Certainly, it cannot be
denied (but wickedly) that that justification annexed to remission of
sins is, as it were, the means and way to obtain the same. For what else
doth Paul go about but to confirm that saying, that our sins are
forgiven us through the benefit of Christ, by answering contrary
objections? And he proveth it, because neither satisfactions, neither
all the rites of the law, call justify us from sin. Therefore he is
justified by Christ, who is freely loosed from the guilt and judgment of
eternal death to which he was subject. This is the righteousness of
faith, whilst that God counteth us just, by not imputing our sins.

<span id="xx.viii-p12"></span>This only propriety of the word is
sufficient to refute the cavils of the Papists, who hold that we are not
justified by pardon or by free accepting, but by habit and infused
righteousness. Therefore, let us not suffer them to rend in pieces
unworthily and wickedly this text of Paul, when he saith that they are
justified from all things, that we may be assured of remission of sins.
And now we must know that the law of Moses is set against Christ, as the
principal mean to obtain righteousness, if there had been any besides
Christ. Paul disputeth, indeed, of ceremonies; but we must note that
there was nothing omitted in them which might serve to purge sins and to
appease God. Yet there was not one of all the ceremonies of the law
which did not make man guilty, as a new handwriting; as Paul teacheth,
<span id="xx.viii-p12.1"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="xx.viii-p12.1"></span>.
What then? Assuredly God meant to testify that men are justified by the
death of his Son alone, because he made him sin for us who did \[knew\]
no sin, that we might have righteousness in him, (<span
id="xx.viii-p12.2"></span>[2Co
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="xx.viii-p12.2"></span>.)
Whereupon it followeth that whatsoever satisfactions are invented by
men, they tend to rob Christ of his honor. *In the law* and *in Christ*
signify as much as *by the law* and *by Christ,* according to the Hebrew
phrase.

<span id="xx.viii-p13"></span>*From all things.* By this member is
refuted the wicked invention of the Papists, who teach that only
original sin and actual sins committed before baptism are clearly and
freely forgiven by Christ, and that others are redeemed by
satisfactions. But Paul saith plainly that we are justified from sins by
Christ throughout the whole course of our life. For we must remember
that the ceremonies \[rites\] of the law were committed to the Jews,
that as well the profit as the use thereof might flourish daily in the
Church; that is, that the Jews might indeed understand that their
sacrifices and washings were not continually reiterated in vain. If the
truth and substance of them be found in Christ, it followeth that there
is no other satisfaction or sacrifice to put away sins but his death;
otherwise there should be no analogy or proportion between this and the
old figures. The Papists call us back unto repentance and the keys, as
if the ceremonies of the law were not exercises to think upon
repentance, and as if the power of the keys were not annexed unto them.
But the faith of the godly was holpen by such helps, that they might fly
unto the grace of the Mediator alone. Therefore, let this remain sure
and certain that the righteousness which we have in Christ is not for
one day or a moment, but it is everlasting, as the sacrifice of his
death doth daily reconcile us to God.

<span id="xx.viii-p14"></span><span id="xx.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p15"></span>**39.** *Every one that believeth.* Paul
showeth how men obtain the righteousness of Christ; to wit, when they
receive it by faith; and that which faith doth obtain is not obtained by
any merits of works. Wherefore, Paul’s opinion is plain, that we are
justified by faith alone, which, notwithstanding the Papists oppugn
\[oppose\] and strive against no less obstinately than bitterly,
nevertheless, it is requisite that we know what the word *believe* doth
import, which is made unsavory to the Papists through ignorance. There
be also other benefits of Christ which we reap by faith; for when he
regenerateth us by his Spirit, he restoreth in us the image of God; and
after that the old man is crucified he fashioneth us unto newness of
life. But it was enough for Luke to express this one thing, how men
return into favor with God, from whom they be estranged by sin, because
we may easily pass thence unto the residue.

<span id="xx.viii-p16"></span><span id="xx.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p17"></span>**40.** *Take heed that that come not upon
you.* Because he had to do with stiff-necked men, or at least there were
diverse in the company which were stiff-necked (as if he meant with a
hammer to soften their stubbornnesses) he addeth a chiding unto
doctrine. For if the Jews had been obedient and willing to obey,
undoubtedly he would have sought sweetly to allure them unto Christ. But
it was either their sluggishness, or else their willfulness, that caused
him to be more angry; like as all those must be cited to appear before
God’s judgment-seat who contemn the grace of Christ and the horrible
judgment of eternal death must be denounced to those. He signifieth,
indeed, that there is yet place left for repentance, when he willeth
 <span id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) them to take heed; yet,
notwithstanding, he telleth them therewithal, that unless they beware in
time, the horrible vengeance of God is not far off.

<span id="xx.viii-p19"></span>*Which is said in the prophets.* The place
which is cited is taken out of the first chapter of Habakkuk, (<span
id="xx.viii-p19.1"></span>[Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)<span id="xx.viii-p19.1"></span>;)
but because all prophecies were gathered into one volume or body, Paul
saith that it is written in the prophets.

<span id="xx.viii-p20"></span><span id="xx.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p21"></span>**41.** And yet he doth not recite word
for word the words of Habakkuk, which go thus, “Behold, ye Gentiles, and
see and wonder, and be astonished; because a work shall be done in your
days which no man shall believe when it shall be told him.” Paul saith,
“Behold, ye despisers,” that the Jews may know that the vengeance which
was once brought upon their fathers is common to the despisers of the
word; as if he should say, God doth at this day make no less account of
his word, the contempt whereof he did once punish so sharply. Therefore,
the prophet’s denunciation doth appertain unto all ages, so that the
despisers cannot hope that they can escape that vengeance now whereof
others have tasted. They boasted of the temple; they vaunted that they
were the people of God; being puffed up with wicked pride, they despised
all threatenings. Therefore Paul putteth them in mind of that which God
by his prophets doth threaten to the despisers.

<span id="xx.viii-p22"></span>*A work in your days.* The sense is, Those
who refuse to believe the word of God shall feel his hand, that being at
length with plagues convicted, they may know that he spake in earnest.
It is a common proverb, that experience is the mistress of fools. So the
Lord doth indeed punish the wicked,  <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) that being tamed with miseries, they
may begin to confess his power. And what manner \[of\] punishment doth
he denounce? Because you (saith he) do not believe my word, I will show
an example among you which no man will believe; by which words he
meaneth, that he will punish them, so that the world shall be afraid to
see it. For as rebellion against God is a detestable monster, so it is
no marvel if of itself it beget monsters of punishments. Therefore, we
must beware, lest, if we cease to give credence to God’s word, we feel
his hand more mighty than all our senses do comprehend, and even unto
the astonying \[astonishment\] of all the whole world; and lest even we
be made astounded through fear. Habakkuk prophesieth of the destruction
brought upon them by the Chaldeans; but the punishment whereby God
revenged the contempt of his gospel was more cruel, \[severe.\]
Therefore, let us accustom ourselves to fear God and reverently embrace
his word, lest some such things befall us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_821"></span>[822](cc36112.htm#fr_821) <span
id="xx.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p3"></span> “<span id="xx.viii-p3.1"></span>Viri
fratres,” brethren, omitted.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[823](cc36112.htm#fr_822) <span
id="xx.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p8"></span> “<span
id="xx.viii-p8.1"></span>Expiationem... peccati,” expiation of sin.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[824](cc36112.htm#fr_823) <span
id="xx.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xx.viii-p10.1"></span>Perstringere,” glance at.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[825](cc36112.htm#fr_824) <span
id="xx.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p18"></span> “<span
id="xx.viii-p18.1"></span>Hortatur,” exhorteth.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[826](cc36112.htm#fr_825) <span
id="xx.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xx.viii-p23"></span> “<span id="xx.viii-p23.1"></span>Re ipsa
impios coarguit,” convicts the wicked by the reality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:42-45](cc36113)
