[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc36010)  [Next](cc36012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Acts
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**9.** And when he had spoken these things,
while they beheld, he was taken up on high, and a cloud received him out
of their sight. **10.** And while they looked up steadfastly into
heaven, as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel,
**11.** Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
so come as you have seen him go into heaven.

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span><span id="viii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span>**9.** The readers may learn out of our
Institutions what profit we reap by the ascension of Christ.
Notwithstanding, because it is one of the chiefest points of our faith,
therefore doth Luke endeavor more diligently to prove the same; yea,
rather, the Lord himself meant to put the same out of all doubt, when as
he hath ascended so manifestly, and hath confirmed the certainty of the
same by other circumstances. For, if so be it he had vanished away
secretly, then might the disciples have doubted what was become of him;
 <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) but now, sith that they, being in
so plain a place,  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) saw him taken up
with whom they had been conversant, whom also they heard speak even now,
whom they beheld with their eyes, whom also they see taken out of their
sight by a cloud, there is no cause why they should doubt whither he was
gone. Furthermore, the angels are there also to bear witness of the
same. And it was needful that the history should have been set down so
diligently for our cause, that we may know assuredly, that although the
Son of God appear nowhere upon earth, yet doth he live in the heavens.
And this seemeth to be the reason why the cloud did overshadow him,
before such time as he did enter into his celestial glory; that his
disciples being content with their measure  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) might cease to inquire any further. And
we are taught by them that our mind is not able to ascend so high as to
take a full view of the glory of Christ; therefore, let this cloud be a
mean to restrain our boldness, as was the smoke which was continually
before the door of the tabernacle in the time of the law.

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span><span id="viii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span>**10.** *Two men* He calleth them so by
reason of their form. For although it might be that they had the bodies
of men in deed, concerning which thing I will not greatly stand in
defense of either part, yet certain it is they were not men; but because
this *metonymia* is commonly used in the Scriptures, especially in the
First Book of Moses, I will not greatly stand thereupon. Their *white
garments* were a token of rare and excellent dignity. For God meant by
this, as by an evident token to distinguish them from the common sort of
people, that the disciples might give better ear unto them;  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) and that at this day we also may know
that this vision was showed them of God.

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span><span id="viii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span>**11.** *Ye men of Galilee, etc.* I am not
of their opinion who think that this name was given the apostles after
an opprobrious sort, as if the angels meant to reprehend the slowness
and dullness of the apostles. In my opinion, it was rather to make them
more attentive, in that men, whom they did never see before, did name
them as though they had perfectly known them. But they seem to reprehend
without cause, for looking up into heaven. For where should they rather
seek for Christ than in heaven? Doth not the Scriptures also oftentimes
exhort us thereunto? I answer, that they were not reprehended because
they looked up towards heaven; but because they coveted to see Christ,
when as the cloud which was put between them and him did keep them from
seeing him with their bodily senses: Secondly, because they hoped that
he would return again straightway, that they might enjoy the sight of
him again, when as lie did ascend to stay in the heavens until such time
as he should come  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) to judge the
world. Wherefore, let us first learn out of this place that we must not
seek Christ either in heaven, either upon earth, otherwise than by
faith; and also, that we must not desire to have him present with us
bodily in the world; for he that doth  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) either of those two shall oftentimes go
farther from him. So this their admiration is reprehended, not simply,
but inasmuch as they were astonied by the strangeness of this matter;
like as we are oftentimes carried unadvisedly into a wonderful great
wondering at God’s works; but we never apply ourselves to consider for
what end and purpose they were done.

<span id="viii.iv-p16"></span>*Jesus, which is taken up into heaven*
There are two members in this one sentence. The first is, that Christ
was taken up into heaven, that they may not henceforth foolishly desire
to have him any longer conversant with them upon earth. The other is
straightway added as a consolation concerning his second coming. Out of
these two jointly, and also severally, is gathered a firm, stable, and
strong argument, to refute the Papists, and all other which imagine that
Christ is really present in the signs of bread and wine. For when it is
said that Christ is taken up into heaven; here is plainly noted the
distance of place. I grant that this word *heaven* is interpreted divers
ways, sometimes for the air, sometimes for the whole connection  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) of the spheres, sometimes for the
glorious kingdom of God, where the majesty of God hath his \[its\]
proper scat, howsoever it doth fill the whole world. After which sort
Paul doth place Christ above all heavens, (<span
id="viii.iv-p17.2"></span>[Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022)<span id="viii.iv-p17.2"></span>,.md)
because he is above all the world, and hath the chiefest room in that
place of blessed immortality, because he is more excellent than all the
angels, (<span id="viii.iv-p17.3"></span>[Eph
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)<span id="viii.iv-p17.3"></span>..md)
But this is no let why he may not be absent from us bodily, and that by
this word *heavens,* there may not be signified a separation from the
world. Let them cavil as much as they will, it is evident that the
heaven whereinto Christ was received is opposite to the frame of the
world; therefore it doth necessarily follow, that if he be in heaven, he
is without \[beyond\] the world.

<span id="viii.iv-p18"></span>But, first, we must mark what the purpose
of the angels was, for thereby we shall more perfectly know what the
words mean. The angels’ intent was to call back the apostles from
desiring the carnal presence of Christ. For this purpose was it that
they said that he should not come again until he came to judge the
world. And to this end serveth the assigning of the time, that they
might not look for him in vain before that same time. Who seeth not that
in these words is manifestly showed that he was bodily absent out of the
world? Who seeth not that we are forbidden to desire to have him upon
the earth? But, they think they escape safe with that crafty answer,
when as they say that then he shall come visibly; but he cometh now
invisibly daily. But we are not here to dispute of his form; only the
apostles are taught that Christ must abide in heaven until such time as
he appear at the latter day. For the desiring of his corporeal presence
is here condemned as absurd and perverse. The Papists deny that he is
present in the sacrament carnally, while that his glorious body is
present with us after a supernatural sort, and by a miracle; but we may
well enough reject their inventions concerning his glorious body, as
childish and frivolous toys. They feign unto themselves a miracle not
confirmed with any testimony of Scripture. The body of Christ was then
glorious, when as he was conversant with his disciples after his
resurrection. This was done by the extraordinary and secret power of
God; yet, notwithstanding, the angels do forbid to desire him afterward
after that sort, and they say that he shall not come unto men in that
sort (before the latter day.) Therefore, according to their commandment,
let us not go about to pull him out of the heavens with our own
inventions; neither let us think that we call handle him with our hands,
or perceive him with our other senses, more than we can see him with our
eyes. I speak always of his body. For in that they say it is infinite,
as it is all absurd dream, so is it safely to be rejected. Nevertheless,
I willingly confess that Christ is ascended that he may fulfill \[fill\]
all things; but I say that he is spread abroad everywhere by the power
of his Spirit, not by the substance of his flesh. I grant, furthermore,
that he is present With us both in his word and in the sacraments.
Neither is it to be doubted, but that all those which do with faith
receive the signs of his flesh and blood, are made truly partakers of
his flesh and blood. But this partaking doth nothing agree with the
dotings of the Papists; for they feign that Christ is present in such
sort upon the altar as Numa Pompilius did call down his Jupiter
Elicitus, or as those witches did fetch down the moon from heaven with
their enchantments. But Christ, by reaching us the bread in his Supper,
doth will us to lift up our hearts into heaven, that we may have life by
his flesh and blood. So that we do not eat his flesh grossly, that we
may live thereby, but he poureth into us, by the secret power of his
Spirit, his force and strength.

<span id="viii.iv-p19"></span>*He shall so come* I have said before,
that by this consolation all sorrow which we might conceive, because of
Christ’s absence, is mitigated, yea, utterly taken away, when as we hear
that lie shall return again. And also the end for which he shall come
again is to be noted; namely, that he shall come as a Redeemer, and
shall gather us with him into blessed immortality. For as lie doth not
now sit idle in heaven, (as Homer signifieth, that his gods be busied
only about their bellies;) so shall not he appear again without profit.
Therefore, the only looking for Christ’s coming must both restrain the
importunate desires of our flesh, and support our patience in all our
adversities; and, lastly, it must refresh our weariness. But it worketh
this only in the faithful, which believe that Christ is their Redeemer;
for it bringeth unto the wicked nothing but dread, horror, and great
fearfulness. And howsoever they do now scoff’ and jest when as they hear
of his coming, yet shall they be compelled to behold him sitting upon
his tribunal-seat, whom now they will not vouchsafe to hear speak.
Furthermore, it were but frivolous to move any question about his
apparel wherewith he was then clothed, whether he shall come again being
clothed with the same or no. Neither am I now determined to refute that
which Augustine, in his Epistle unto Consentius, doth touch, *(August.
ad Con.* Epist. 146;) notwithstanding, it is better for me to omit that
thing which I cannot unfold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc36011.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p6.1"></span>Haesissent
attoniti,” might have stood astonished.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc36011.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p7.1"></span>Quam in
edito et undique experto ac patente loco et constituti,” when they were
standing on an elevated spot, open on all sides, with nothing to
interrupt the view.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc36011.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p8.1"></span>Modulo,”
little measure.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc36011.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p11.1"></span>Ad eorum
dicta attentiores,” might be more attentive to what they said.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc36011.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p14.1"></span>Secundo,” a second time, omitted.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc36011.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p15"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p15.1"></span>Haerebit,” shall cling to.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc36011.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p17"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>Complexa,” system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 1:12-14](cc36012.md)
