[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36058)  [Next](cc36060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
7:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035)<span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p2"></span>**35.** This Moses, whom they had denied,
saying, Who made thee a ruler and judge? him, I say, hath God sent to be
a ruler and a redeemer, in the hand of the angel which appeared unto him
in the bush. **36.** He brought them out, having showed wonders and
signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness
forty years. **37.** This is Moses, which said unto the children of
Israel, The Lord your God shall raise up unto you a Prophet, out of the
midst of your brethren, like unto me; hear him.

<span id="xiv.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p5"></span>**35.** Stephen passeth over many things,
because he maketh haste unto this stun, that the Jews may understand
that the fathers were not delivered therefore, because they had deserved
that with their godliness, but that this benefit *was* bestowed upon
them, being altogether unworthy; and, secondly, that there is some more
perfect thing to be hoped for of these beginnings. When Moses, being
ordained of God to be their revenger and deliverer, was now in a
readiness, they stopped the way before him; therefore God doth deliver
them now, as it were against their will. That which is added touching
miracles and wonders, serveth as well to the setting forth of the grace
of God, as to make known the calling of Moses. It is surely a strange
thing, that God doth vouchsafe to declare his power by divers wonders,
for such an unthankful people’s sake. But in the mean season, he
bringeth his servant in credit. Therefore, whereas the Jews set less by
him afterward, whereas they essay sometimes to drive him away by
railing, whereas they scold sometimes, sometimes murmur, sometimes set
upon him outrageously, they bewray thereby both their wickedness, and
also their contempt of the grace of God. Their unthankfulness and
ungodliness was so increased always, that God must needs have striven
with wonderful patience with such a froward and stubborn people.

<span id="xiv.vii-p6"></span>*A ruler and a deliverer.* We must
understand the contrarieties  <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436)
which augment the fault. They would have obeyed Moses if a tyrant had
appointed him to be a judge, but they contemn him proudly, and refuse
him disdainfully, being appointed of God, and that to be a deliverer.
Therefore, in despising him, they were wicked; and in rejecting grace,
unthankful. And whereas Moses hath such an honorable title given him,
God doth not so give and resign unto man that honor which is due to
himself, that he loseth any whit of his authority thereby. For doubtless
Moses was not called a redeemer or deliverer in any other respect save
only because he was the minister of God. And by this means the glory of
the whole work remaineth in the power of God wholly. Therefore let us
learn that so often as men have the titles which belong to God given
them, God himself is not despoiled of his honor; but because the work is
done by their hands, they are by this means commended. To this end
tendeth that which Stephen saith, that this charge was committed to
Moses in the hand of the angel. For by this means Moses is made subject
to Christ, that under his conduct and direction he may obey God. For
*hand* is taken in this place not for ministry, but for principality.
Wherefore, God did so use the service of Moses, that the power of Christ
did surpass him, as he is even at this day the chief governor, in
accomplishing the salvation of the Church; yea, he useth the ministry of
men in that sort, that the force and effect dependeth upon him alone.

<span id="xiv.vii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p9"></span>**37.** *A Prophet shall God raise up.*
Stephen endeavoreth undoubtedly to prove by these words that Christ is
the end of the law; although he doth not express the same in plain
words. And assuredly, (as we have already said,) Luke reciteth not word
for word all those things which Stephen uttered; but it is sufficient
for him to note the principal points of matters. Furthermore, we have
said before in the third chapter, that this testimony is so applied to
Christ, that notwithstanding it agreeth to the other prophets also. For
after that Moses had forbidden the people to be carried to and fro with
the wicked superstitions of the Gentiles, he showeth what ought to
follow. There is no cause (saith he) why thou shouldst desire magicians
and enchanters; for God will never suffer thee to want prophets to teach
thee faithfully. And now it is certain that the ministry of the prophets
was temporal, as was also the ministry of the law; until Christ should
bring the full perfection of wisdom into the world. Therefore Stephen’s
speech tendeth to this end, that Moses doth not keep the people fast
bound to himself alone when as he setteth before them and commendeth
unto them another teacher. The prophets were indeed, interpreters of the
law and all their doctrine was, as it were, an addition or appurtenance
 <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) of those things which were
uttered by Moses; but forasmuch as this was also certain, that Christ
should bring a more perfect kind of doctrine, because he should make an
end of all the prophecies, it followeth, that he is made the chief; and
that the principal mastership (that I may so call it) is his, lest the
faith of the gospel should be doubtful. Now we know to what end Stephen
intermingled Moses’ testimony, to wit, that he may prove that the Jews
did no less contemn him, (of whom they made boast with open mouth to be
their only teachers) even now when he is dead, than they did in times
past, whilst he lived, wickedly and frowardly reject him. For whosoever
believeth Moses, he will not refuse to be the disciple of Christ, whose
messenger and crier he was, (<span id="xiv.vii-p10.2"></span>[Joh
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="xiv.vii-p10.2"></span>.)
For the rest  <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) out of the third
chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](cc36059.htm#fr_436) <span
id="xiv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p7"></span> “<span
id="xiv.vii-p7.1"></span>Subaudiendae sunt antitheses,” we must supply
the antitheses.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](cc36059.htm#fr_437) <span
id="xiv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xiv.vii-p10.1"></span>Appendix,” an appendix.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc36059.htm#fr_438) <span
id="xiv.vii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p11.1"></span>Reliqua
pete,” for the rest see.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 7:38-41](cc36060)
