[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc36110)  [Next](cc36112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 36: Acts, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.vii"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p1"></span><span id="xx.vii-p1.1"></span>[Acts
13:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#032)<span id="xx.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p2"></span>**32.** And we preach to you glad tidings,
that the promise made to the fathers, **33.** Hath God fulfilled to
their children: having raised up Jesus, as it is written in the second
Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. **34.** And in
that he hath raised him up from the dead, not to return hereafter to
corruption, he hath said thus, I will give you the holy things of David.
**35.** Therefore he saith also in another place, Thou shalt not suffer
thine Holy One to see corruption. **36.** David, indeed, when he had
served his time, by the counsel of God he fell on sleep, and was laid
unto his fathers, and saw corruption. **37.** But he whom God raised saw
no corruption.

<span id="xx.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.vii-p4"></span><span id="xx.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p5"></span>**32.** *We preach to you glad tidings.* He
doth now challenge to himself the office and honor of an apostle, that
he may be heard as a lawful minister of God. And he saith the sum of the
embassage enjoined him is, that that is revealed and given in their time
which was promised in times past. And in few words doth he comprehend
many and great matters. First, he giveth them to understand that he
bringeth in nothing which is new, or contrary to the law and prophets,
but that he did reveal the fulfilling of that doctrine which they
themselves did confess, and were persuaded to have been delivered by
God. Whereupon it followeth that they cannot refuse that which he
offereth them, but they shall break the covenant made with the fathers
by God, so much as in them shall lie; secondly, he commandeth the
faithfulness of God, because it doth now in very deed appear that there
was nothing promised in times past unadvisedly or in vain; but he doth
chiefly extol the greatness of the grace given at length in Christ. For
we must note the comparison between them and the fathers, when he saith,
that they had gotten that which was promised to the fathers. For the
more liberally the grace of God is poured out upon them, the more filthy
shall their unthankfulness be, if they shall despise or loathe that
inestimable good thing. For what else were this, but to cast down at
their feet a treasure even reached out to them, that they might take
hold thereof, and so consequently laid in their lap, the hope whereof
was reverently embraced by the fathers, when it was showed them afar
off, and which they did foster  <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810)
during their whole life.

<span id="xx.vii-p7"></span>But some man may ask this question
concerning those who lived under the law, whether even they were not
made partakers of the promises? I answer, that there is such a society
of the same grace among us which doth not hinder the long distance. But
this was Paul’s meaning, that their faith stood, as it were, in doubt
until Christ appeared, in whom all the promises of God are yea and amen;
as he teacheth, (<span id="xx.vii-p7.1"></span>[2 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="xx.vii-p7.1"></span>.)
Therefore we be the heirs of the same kingdom of heaven, and partakers
of the same spiritual good things, which God bestoweth upon his
children; also, God gave to them some taste of his love in this life, as
we taste him now. But Christ, who is the substance of all good things
and of eternal life, was only promised to them, but he is given to us;
and they desired him, as being far off; we enjoy him, being present.

<span id="xx.vii-p8"></span><span id="xx.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p9"></span>**33.** *To their children, namely, to us.*
It is certain that Paul speaketh of natural children, who had their
beginning of the holy fathers, which we must therefore note, because
certain brain-sick men, drawing all things unto allegories, dream that
there is no respect to be had in this place of kindred, but only of
faith. And with such an invention they make the holy covenant of God of
none effect, where it is said,

<span id="xx.vii-p10"></span>“I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed,”  
(<span id="xx.vii-p10.2"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="xx.vii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xx.vii-p11"></span>It is faith (say they) alone which maketh
us the children of Abraham. But I say, on the other side, that even
those who are born the children of Abraham according to the flesh, are
also counted the spiritual children of God, unless they grow out of kind
through unbelief  <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) For the boughs
be naturally holy, because they spring from a holy root, until they
become profane through their own fault, (<span
id="xx.vii-p12.2"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="xx.vii-p12.2"></span>.)
And assuredly it is Paul’s drift to allure the Jews unto Christ; and
that he may do this, they must be distinguished from the common sort by
some privilege. And yet it followeth not thereupon (which these knaves
do odiously object) that the grace of God is tied to the carnal seed;
because, though the promise of life came by inheritance to the posterity
of Abraham, yet many were deprived by their unbelief. Therefore faith is
the cause, that of a great multitude only a few are counted children.
And that is the double election whereof I spake before. The one common
to the whole nation alike; because the first adoption of God containeth
the whole family of Abraham. The other, which is restrained unto the
secret counsel of God, and is at length established by faith, that it
may be confirmed to men.

<span id="xx.vii-p13"></span>Therefore Paul doth well and truly affirm
that that was performed to the Jews which God had promised to the
fathers. For it was promised to them also, as Zacharias saith in his
song, “The oath which he sware to our father Abraham, that he would give
himself for us,” etc. And yet the worthiness of that nation doth not
hinder but that the grace of Christ may also spread itself throughout
the whole world; because the first-begotten hath the first degree of
honor, so that he doth, notwithstanding, leave the second place to his
brethren. For in that after the old people were cast off, the possession
of the church was left empty for strangers, it began to be a new
occasion of gathering the Church of the Gentiles; but and if that people
had stood in the faith, the Gentiles had been joined into the common
society of honor.

<span id="xx.vii-p14"></span>*After that he had raised Christ.* The word
*raised,* in my judgment reacheth farther than it doth where it is
shortly after repeated. For he doth not only say that Christ rose from
the dead, but that he was appointed of God, and, as it were, brought to
light by the hand of God, that he might fulfill the office of the
Messiah, as the Scripture teacheth everywhere that kings and prophets
are raised up.  <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) For the word
<span id="xx.vii-p15.2"></span>αναστησαι is sometimes taken in this
sense: And this reason moveth me thus to think, because God, by sending
his Son into the world, did fulfill his promise made to his servants in
times past, by the effect itself.

<span id="xx.vii-p16"></span>*Likeas, in the second Psalm.* Though the
Greek books,  <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) agree in the
number, yet we must not pass over that which Erasmus saith, that many of
the old writers read the *first Psalm.* And it may be that Luke wrote
so; for that which at this day is counted the second Psalm, might have
been called the first not without reason, seeing that it is likely that
the first Psalm was added instead of a proem by the scribes and priests,
by whose industry the Psalms were gathered into one body. For the name
of the author is not set to it, and it doth only exhort to meditate upon
the law of God. But there is no great weight in that matter.  <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) For this is the chiefest thing, that
we know how properly and how well Paul applieth the testimony taken out
of the Psalm unto the matter which he hath in hand. We do not deny that
David, when he saw that he was on every side assailed by his enemies*,*
and that they were of greater power and might than that he was able to
resist them, doth set against them God’s aid, who he knew was the author
of his kingdom and reign. But forasmuch as he was a figure of the true
Messiah, we know that those things were shadowed in his person, which do
appertain, wholly and perfectly to the Messiah alone. And the text
itself doth prove sufficiently that there is not only a simple and bare
thanksgiving contained there, agreeable to David’s kingdom, but it is a
higher prophecy. For it is well known that David did in his life scarce
taste of the hundredth part of the glory which is spoken of in this
place, concerning which we have spoken more at large, chapter 4.

<span id="xx.vii-p19"></span>Now let us look higher into the words:
Kings are indeed called sons of God, (<span id="xx.vii-p19.1"></span>[Ps
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="xx.vii-p19.1"></span>.)
But seeing that God doth intend to prefer David before all other kings,
and to exempt him out of the number of them, this title of honor is
given to him principally above all other; not because so great honor
resteth in his person, because by this means he should pass  <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) the angels, as it is in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, 1st chapter. Therefore he is thus gorgeously set out in
respect of Christ, whose image he was, that God doth not take him for
one of the common sort, or for some one of a great multitude, but he
doth, as it were, acknowledge him to be his only begotten Son. The proof
followeth, because God did beget him when he established the kingdom in
his hand. For that was not done by man’s industry, but God showed from
heaven the invincible power of his hand, whereby it might plainly appear
that he reigned according to God’s counsel. Therefore this begetting, by
him mentioned, must be referred unto the understanding of knowledge of
men; to wit, because it was then openly known that he was begotten of
God, when as he was set upon the throne of the kingdom wonderfully,
contrary to the hope of all men, and did, by the heavenly power of the
Spirit, break infinite conspiracies; because he could not reign until he
had brought all nations round about him in subjection, as if a certain
world were subdued.

<span id="xx.vii-p21"></span>Now, let us come unto Christ. He came not
into the world without testimony, whereby he did prove that he was the
Son of God. For his glory did appear as became the only begotten Son of
God, as it is written, <span id="xx.vii-p21.1"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="xx.vii-p21.1"></span>,
and he saith everywhere that he hath God for the witness and maintainer
of this honor. Therefore God begat Christ, when he gave him certain
marks, whereby he might be known to be his true and lively image and
Son. And yet this doth not let but that Christ is the Wisdom begotten of
the Eternal Father before time. But that is the secret generation; and
now David declareth that it was revealed to men; so that the relation
is, as we have said, unto men and not unto God; because that which was
hidden in the heart of God was make known to men. And it is a very fine
figure, because Christ’s divinity was no less declared and established,
than if he had been begotten of God before the eyes of men. I know that
Augustine’s deep sight  <span id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) doth
please some, that by *today* is meant *perpetuity.* But when as the
Spirit of God himself is his own interpreter, and whereas he doth
expound that by the mouth of Paul which he had said by David, we must
not invent any other sense. And forasmuch (as the same Paul doth
witness) that Christ was declared to be the Son of God in power when he
rose from the dead, (<span id="xx.vii-p22.2"></span>[Ro
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="xx.vii-p22.2"></span>,)
we gather that this was the principal token of celestial excellency, and
that the Father did then bring him truly to light, that the world might
know that he was begotten of him. Therefore, though God began to raise
Christ when he came into the world, yet his raising was then, as it
were, perfect and full; because whereas he was humbled before, having
taken, as it were, the form of a servant, (<span
id="xx.vii-p22.3"></span>[Php 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="xx.vii-p22.3"></span>,) he did then appear to be the conqueror of
death and the Lord of life; so that he wanted nothing of that majesty
which was meet for the Son of God, and that for the only begotten Son.

<span id="xx.vii-p23"></span><span id="xx.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p24"></span>**34.** *That he should not return.* He
addeth now the other member, that Christ was once raised from death that
he may live for ever, as Paul teacheth, <span
id="xx.vii-p24.1"></span>[Ro 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span
id="xx.vii-p24.1"></span>,

<span id="xx.vii-p25"></span>“He dieth no more, neither shall death have
dominion over him any more; because he liveth to God.”

<span id="xx.vii-p26"></span>For the hope conceived of Christ’s
resurrection should be slender and cold, if he were yet subject to
destruction, or to any change. Therefore he is said to be entered into
the kingdom of God, that he may also give to his \[people\] eternal
felicity, living for ever. For because Christ rose rather for our sake
than for himself, the perpetuity of life which the Father hath given him
reacheth unto us all, and is ours. Notwithstanding the place of Isaiah
which is here cited, seemeth to make but a little for proof of Christ’s
immortality, I will give you the holy things of David, (<span
id="xx.vii-p26.1"></span>[Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003)<span id="xx.vii-p26.1"></span>.)
But it is not so. For seeing Isaiah speaketh of the redemption promised
to David, and affirmeth that the same shall be firm and stable, we do
well gather by this the immortal kingdom of Christ, wherein the eternity
of salvation is grounded. And Paul followed the Greek interpreters when
he put *holy things* for mercies. *Chessed,* which signifieth *meek,
merciful,* and *gentle,* is wont by the Grecians to be translated
*holy.* Therefore they translated <span id="xx.vii-p26.2"></span>הסדי
*of David,* the *holy things of David,* whereas the prophet meaneth
rather the grace promised to David. But Paul granted this to the
ignorant and weak, who were better acquainted with the Greek reading,
especially forasmuch as the force of the testimony consisteth in another
point. For this is Paul’s meaning in sum, If the grace be eternal which
God saith he will give in his Son, the life of his Son must be eternal,
and not subject to corruption.  <span id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817)
For we must hold this rule, that all the promises of God are in Christ
yea and amen, (<span id="xx.vii-p27.2"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="xx.vii-p27.2"></span>;)
and that therefore they cannot be of any force unless he do quicken
them.

<span id="xx.vii-p28"></span><span id="xx.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p29"></span>**35.** *Thou shalt not suffer thy Holy
One.* This place was likewise cited by Peter in the first sermon, set
down by Luke in the second chapter, (<span id="xx.vii-p29.1"></span>[Ac
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027)<span id="xx.vii-p29.1"></span>,)
where I expounded the same; therefore, let the readers repair thither.
Only I will touch this briefly, that David putteth two Hebrew words for
*the grave,* as he useth repetitions commonly; the former whereof is
derived of *desiring* or *lusting,* because the grave devoureth all
things as an insatiable gulf; and the other of *corruption.* According
to this etymology David’s meaning is faithfully expressed in Greek; for
the quality of the grave is noted, when as it receiveth the corpse, and
doth, as it were, swallow it up, that it may rot there, and may at
length perish when it is consumed. Paul affirmeth that that belongeth to
Christ alone, that he was free and saved from corruption; for though his
body was laid in the grave, corruption had, notwithstanding, no title to
it, seeing that it lay there whole, as in a bed, until the day of the
resurrection.

<span id="xx.vii-p30"></span><span id="xx.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p31"></span>**36.** *When David had served his time.*
Lest any man should think that that place intreateth of David, Paul
showeth briefly that this agreeth not to David in all points, whose
corpse was rotten in the grave. Therefore it remaineth, that because
this was a privilege belonging to Christ alone, that David prophesied of
him in spirit. Nevertheless, we must note the proportion between the
members and the head; for as the truth of this prophecy was found whole
and perfect in Christ alone, as in the head, so it taketh place in all
the members according to the measure and order of every man. And
forasmuch as Christ rose to this end, that he may fashion and make our
base body like to his glorious body, (<span
id="xx.vii-p31.1"></span>[Php
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="xx.vii-p31.1"></span>;)
upon this condition do the godly go down into the pit, that rottenness
may not \[finally\] consume their bodies. Therefore, according to the
hope of the resurrection to come, David saith by good right that he
shall not see corruption; for that ought not altogether to be counted
corruption for which there is a better restoring prepared; for the
bodies of the faithful corrupt to this end, that they may put on blessed
incorruption in their time. Yet this is no let but that the estate of
the head and members may be far unlike, and that we may follow the Son
of God afar off and lazily.  <span id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818)

<span id="xx.vii-p33"></span>Now we see that both things are true and
fitly said, that David and the rest of the faithful, inasmuch as they
shall be like to their head, shall not see corruption, and yet the Son
of God alone shall be free from corruption wholly. We must note the
phrase, when he saith, that *David served his age,* or the men of his
time.

<span id="xx.vii-p34"></span>The old interpreter distinguisheth it
otherwise, and certain Greek copies agree thereto, to wit, that *David
served the will of God in his time;* which reading, though it is to be
allowed,  <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) yet it doth not cause
me to mislike the other. For it is neither superfluous nor cold, that he
slept by the will of God, or the counsel of God; because the meaning
thereof is, that God, in the death of David, did not forget that
prophecy; as if he should say that the body of David lay in the grave
not without the counsel or purpose of God, until it should rise again,
that the effect of the prophecy might be extended unto Christ. If no man
mislike that which I say, we are taught hereby to what end men live in
the world, to wit, that one man may help another. For every man doth not
live, neither is born, for himself, but mankind is knit together with a
holy knot. Therefore, unless we be disposed to overthrow the laws of
nature, let us remember that we must not live for ourselves, but for our
neighbors.

<span id="xx.vii-p36"></span>But here may a question be asked, whether
we ought not also to care for our posterity? I answer, that the ministry
of the godly is also profitable for the posterity, as we see that David,
being dead, doth profit us more at this day than a great part of those
which live with us; but Paul meaneth simply, that the faithful during
their whole life employ themselves and their offices to help their
neighbors, and that death is unto them as a goal, because they have made
an end then, when the Lord calleth them out of the world. The sum is,
that we must have respect first to our time, that we may serve our
brethren, with whom and among whom we lead our life; and, secondly, we
must do our endeavor that the fruit of our ministry may redound unto our
posterity. Seeing that God prescribeth his servants this law, their
rashness cannot be excused who feign that the dead pray for us, and that
they do no less serve the Church than whilst they lived.

<span id="xx.vii-p37"></span>*By the counsel of God he fell on sleep.*
Paul might have said simply that David died; he addeth by *the counsel
of God,* that we may know that that was not fulfilled in the person of
the prophet which is read in the Psalm. Notwithstanding, we are taught
that the bond of life and death is in like sort appointed for us by God,
as it is <span id="xx.vii-p37.1"></span>[Ps
90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003)<span id="xx.vii-p37.1"></span>,

<span id="xx.vii-p38"></span>“Thou sendest out men, and makest them to
pass over; again thou sayest, Come again, ye children of men.”

<span id="xx.vii-p39"></span>Yea, Plato setteth down this very
eloquently, that it is meet that men pass out of the world not without
the leave and pleasure of God, by whose hand they are placed there as a
standing for a time.  <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) And for
this cause, when he speaketh of David’s death, he maketh mention of the
counsel of God, that we may know that corruption did not happen to him
by chance, as if God had forgotten his promise; but that it came to pass
by God’s providence, that the faithful might know that the prophecy was
to be referred unto another. *To sleep,* and to be *laid unto the
fathers,* are forms of speech so well known and so common, that they
need no exposition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_810"></span>[811](cc36111.htm#fr_810) <span
id="xx.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p6.1"></span>Patienter
foverint,” patiently foster.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[812](cc36111.htm#fr_811) <span
id="xx.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p12"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p12.1"></span>Nisi sua
infidelitate degenerent.” unless they degenerate through their own
infidelity.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[813](cc36111.htm#fr_812) <span
id="xx.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p15"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p15.1"></span>A Domino,”
by the Lord, omitted.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[814](cc36111.htm#fr_813) <span
id="xx.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p17"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p17.1"></span>Codices,”
manuscripts.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[815](cc36111.htm#fr_814) <span
id="xx.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p18"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p18.1"></span>Sed in ea
re non est multum momenti,” but the point is not of much importance.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[816](cc36111.htm#fr_815) <span
id="xx.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p20"></span> “<span
id="xx.vii-p20.1"></span>Praestantior esset,” be more excellent than.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[817](cc36111.htm#fr_816) <span
id="xx.vii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p22.1"></span>Augustini
argutiam,” the subtlety of Augustine.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[818](cc36111.htm#fr_817) <span
id="xx.vii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p27"></span> “<span
id="xx.vii-p27.1"></span>Mutationi,” change.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[819](cc36111.htm#fr_818) <span
id="xx.vii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p32"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p32.1"></span>Lente,”
slowly.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[820](cc36111.htm#fr_819) <span
id="xx.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p35"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p35.1"></span>Tametsi
probabilis est,” though it is probable.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[821](cc36111.htm#fr_820) <span
id="xx.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xx.vii-p40"></span> “<span id="xx.vii-p40.1"></span>Cujus manu
in ea, tanquam in statione, ad tempus locati sunt,” by whose hand they
are placed in it for a time, as at a station.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts 13:38-42](cc36112)
