[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt03)  [Next](pyt05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### 1. NUT AND THE DECEASED KING, UTTERANCES 1-11

*Utterance 1*.

1a. To say by Nut, the brilliant, the great: This is (my) son, (my)
first born, N., opener of (my) womb;

1b. this is (my) beloved, with whom I have been satisfied.

*Utterance 2*.

1c. To say by Geb: This is (my) son, N., of (my) body -----

1d. --------

*Utterance 3*.

2a. To say by Nut, the great, who is within the lower mansion: This is
(my) son, N., (my) beloved,

2b. (my) eldest (son), (who is) upon the throne of Geb, with whom he has
been satisfied,

2c. to whom he gave his inheritance in the presence of the Great Ennead.

3a. All the gods are in exultation; they say: "How beautiful is N., with
whom his father Geb is satisfied!

*Utterance 4*.

A To say by Nut: N., I have given to thee thy sister Isis,

3c. that she may take hold of thee, that she may give thy heart to thee
which belongs to thy body.

*Utterance 5*.

3d. To say by Nut: N., I have given to thee thy sister Nephthys,

3e. that she may take hold of thee, that she may give thy heart to thee
which belongs to thy body.

*Utterance 6*.

4a. To say by Nut-Nekhbet, the great: This is (my) beloved, N., (my)
son;

4b. I have given the horizons to him, that he may be powerful over them
like Harachte.

4c. All the gods say: "It is a truth that thy beloved among thy children
is N.,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

4d. to whom one will do service of courtier for ever."

*Utterance* 7.

5a. To say by Nut, the great, (who is) within the encircled mansion:
This is (my) son N., of (my) heart.

5b. I have given to him the *Dȝ.t*, that he may be chief therein, like
Horus, chief of the *Dȝ.t*.

5c. All the gods say (to Nut):

5d. "Thy father Shu knows that thou lovest N. more than thy mother
Tefnut."

*Utterance 8*.

6\. He lives, king of Upper and Lower Egypt, beloved of Rē‘, living for
ever.

*Utterance 9*.

7a. Horus \[lives\], beloved of the two lands, N., king of Upper and
Lower Egypt, N., of the two goddesses beloved bodily, N., lords of
Ombos, N.

7b. Heir of Geb, whom he loves, N., beloved of all the gods, N., given
life, endurance, joy, health, all happiness, like Rē‘.

*Utterance 10*.

8a. Horus lives, living apparition of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
N.,

8b. (of the land of) the two goddesses, living apparition, N.,

8c. (of the land of) the two lords (of Ombos), N.,

8d. Osiris, lord of the *Dȝ.t*, N.,

8e. the beloved son of Geb, N.,

8f. son of Nut, opener of her body (womb), N.,

8g. endowed with life, endurance, joy, health, like Rē‘, eternally.

*Utterance 11*.

8h. To say by Nut: I unite thy beauty with this body (and with) this
*ba*, for life, endurance, joy, health

8i. of Horus, divine apparition, king of Upper and Lower Egypt, N. (of
the land of) the two goddesses, divine apparition, N.,

8j. powerful lord (of Ombos), N., living eter\[nally\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Ritual of Bodily Restoration of the Deceased, and Offerings,
Utterances 12-203](pyt05.md)
