[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt06)  [Next](pyt08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. A SERIES OF OLD HELIOPOLITAN TEXTS PARTLY OSIRIANIZED, UTTERANCES 213-222.

*Utterance 213*.

134a. O N., thou didst not depart dead; thou didst depart living,

134b. (so) thou sittest upon the throne of Osiris, thy *‘bȝ*-sceptre in
thy hand, thou commandest the living;

134c. (thy) *mkś*-sceptre and thy *nḥb.t*-sceptre in thy hand,
commanding those of secret places.

135a. Thine arm is like that of Atum; thy shoulders are like those of
Atum; thy body is like that of Atum; thy back is like that of Atum;

135b. thy seat is like that of Atum; thy legs are like those of Atum;
thy face is like that of Anubis.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

135c. Thou travelest over the regions of Horus; thou travelest over the
regions of Set (or, the regions of Horus serve thee; the regions of Set
serve thee).

*Utterance 214*.

136a. O N., beware of the ocean (sea?). To say four times.

136b. The messengers of thy *ka* are come for thee; the messengers of
thy father are come for thee; the messengers of Rē‘ are come for thee.

137a. Go after (pursue) thy sun (days); purify thyself,

137b. (for) thy bones are (those of) female-falcons, goddesses, who are
in heaven,

137c. that thou mayest be at the side of the god; that thou mayest leave
thy house to thy son

137d. who is thine heir. Everyone who speaks, evil against the name of
N.,

138a. when he ascends, Geb reckons him as an evil-doer in his own city,

138b. so that he weakens, he falters. Thou purifiest thyself in the dew
of the stars;

138c. thou descendest on firm (copper?) cables, on the shoulders of
Horus in his name of "He who is in the *Ḥnw*-boat."

139a. The blessed dead (?) lament for thee (after) the imperishable
stars bore thee (away).

139b. Enter the abode of thy father, to the abode of Geb,

139c. that he may give to thee that which is on the brow of Horus, that
thou mayest be a *ba* thereby, that thou mayest be a *śḫm* thereby,

139d. that thou mayest be a *Ḫnti-’imntiw* thereby.

*Utterance 215*.

140a. O N.,

140b. let thy messengers go; let thine envoys hasten to thy father, to
Atum.

140c. Atum, let him ascend to thee; enfold him in thine embrace,

141a. (for) there is no god, (who has become) a star, who has not his
companion. Shall I be thy companion?

146\. Look (at me); thou hast regarded the form of the children of their
fathers,

141c. who know their speech. (They are now) imperishable stars.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

141d. (So) shalt thou see those who are in the palace, (that is) Horus
and Set.

142a. Mayest thou spit in the face of Horus; mayest thou drive away the
injury from him.

142b. Mayest thou catch the testicles of Set; mayest thou drive away his
mutilation.

142c. That one was born to thee; this one was conceived by thee.

143a. Thou art born, O Horus, as one whose name is "Him at whom the
earth quakes." \[Thou art conceived, O Set, as one whose name is\] "Him
at whom heaven trembles."

143b. That one (Horus) has not a mutilation; this one (Set) has not an
injury; this one (Set) has not an injury; that one (Horus) has not a
mutilation.

144a. Thou art born, Horus, of Osiris; thou art more *ba* than he, thou
art more *śḫm* than he.

144b. Thou art conceived, Set by Geb; thou art more *ba* than he, thou
art more *śḫm* than he.

145a. No seed of a god, which belongs to him, goes to ruin; so thou who
belongest to him wilt not go to ruin.

145b. Rē‘-Atum does not surrender thee to Osiris. He judges (lit.
numbers) not thy heart; he gains not power over thy heart.

145c. Rē‘-Atum does not surrender thee to Horus. He judges (lit.
numbers) not thy heart; he gains not power over thy heart.

146a. Osiris, thou dost not gain power over him (Set); thy son gains not
power over him.

146b. Horus, thou dost not gain power over him (Set); thy father gains
not power over him.

147a. Thou belongest, O *mn*, to that god, of whom the twin-children of
Atum said (to him):

147b. "Arise," said they, "in thy name of god"--and so thou becomest an
Atum to (of) every god:

148a. Thy head is (that of) Horus of the *Dȝ.t*, O Imperishable.

148b. Thy face is that of *Mḫnti-’irti*, O Imperishable.

148c. Thine ears are the twin-children of Atum, O Imperishable. Thine
eyes are the twin-children of Atum, O Imperishable.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

148d. Thy nose is (that of) Anubis, O Imperishable. Thy teeth are (those
of) Sopdu, O Imperishable.

149a. Thine arms are *Hp* and *Dwȝ-mw.t.f*, which thou needest to ascend
to heaven, when thou ascendest;

149b. thy legs are *’Imś.ti* and *Ḳbḥ-śn.w.f*, which thou needest to
descend to the lower heaven (underworld) when thou descendest.

149c. Thy (other) members are the twin-children of Atum, O Imperishable.

149d. Thou perishest not, thy *ka* perishes not, (for) thou art a *ka*.

*Utterance 216*.

150a. To say: I had come to thee Nephthys; I am come to thee Boat of the
Evening (*mśkt.t*-boat);

150b. I am come to thee *Mȝ‘-ḥri-<u>t</u>r.wt*;

150c. I am come to thee *Mśḫȝ.t-kȝ.w*; remember him--N.

151a. *Śȝḥ* is enveloped by the *Dȝ.t*, pure and living, in the horizon;

151b. So this is enveloped by the *Dȝ.t*, pure and living, in the
horizon;

151c. N. is enveloped by the *Dȝ.t*, pure and living, in the horizon.

151d. He is content because of them; he is cool because of them,

151e. in the arms of his father, in the arms of Atum.

*Utterance 217*.

152a. To say: Rē‘-Atum, N. comes to thee, an imperishable spirit, lord
(by) decree of the places of the four papyrus-pillars.

152b. Thy son comes to thee; N. comes to thee,

152c. that ye may stride over the sky (way), reunited in obscurity;

152d. that ye may arise in the horizon, in a place which is pleasing to
you.

153a. Set and Nephthys, hasten, announce to the gods of Upper Egypt and
their spirits:

153b. "N. comes, an imperishable spirit;

153c. if he wills that ye die, you will die; if he wills that ye live,
you will live."

154a-d == 1152a-d.

155a. Osiris and Isis, hasten, announce to the gods of Lower Egypt and
their spirits:

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

155b. "N. comes, an imperishable spirit, like the morning star over the
Nile;

155c. the spirits in the waters adore him;

155d. whom he wills that he live, be lives; whom he wills that be die,
he dies."

156a-d = 152a-d.

157a. Thot, hasten, announce to the gods of the West and their spirits:

157b. "N. comes, an imperishable spirit, masked to the neck like an
Anubis, chief of the western highland,

157c. that he may count hearts, that he may be powerful over the best of
the hearts;

157d. whom he wills that he live, he lives; whom he wills that he die,
he dies."

1158a-d = 152a-d.

159a. Horus, hasten, announce to the Souls of the East and their
spirits:

159b. "N. comes, an imperishable spirit;

159c. whom he wills that he live, he lives; whom he wills that he die,
he dies,."

160a. Rē‘-Atum, thy son comes to thee; N. comes to thee;

160b. let him ascend to thee, enfold him in thy embrace;

160c. he is thy bodily son for ever.

*Utterance 218*.

161a. To say: Osiris, N. comes; he is displeased (?) with the Nine
(Bows?), an imperishable spirit,

161b. to count hearts, to seize *kas*, to subdue *kas*. Each of his
functions

161c. obliges him whom he (himself) protected, (as well as him who)
asked him (to help him). There is no one who withdraws-

162a. (such) would have no bread, his *ka* would have no bread, his
bread would be withheld from him.

162b. Geb has said, and it comes out of the mouth of the Ennead:

162c. "Falcon, *m-ḫt-’i<u>t</u>i.f*," said they, "behold, thou art *ba*,
thou art *śḫm*."

163a. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?), an
imperishable spirit,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

163b. who surpasses thee, who is more like thee, who is more weary than
thou, who is greater than thou, who is fresher than thou,

163c. who is more praised than thou. Thy time of silence about it is no
more.

163d. Behold what Set and Thot have done, thy two brothers, who knew not
how to weep for thee.

164a. Isis and Nephthys embrace ye, embrace ye;

164b. unite ye, unite ye.

164c. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?), an
imperishable spirit.

164d. The Westerners, who are on the earth belong to N.

164e. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?) an
imperishable spirit.

165a. The Easterners who are on the earth belong to N.

165b. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?) an
imperishable spirit.

165c. The Southerners who are on the earth belong to N.

165d. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?), an
imperishable spirit.

166a. The Northerners who are on the earth belong to N.

166b. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?), an
imperishable spirit.

166c. Those who are in the underworld belong to N.

166d. N. comes, he is displeased (?) with the Nine (Bows?), an
imperishable spirit.

*Utterance 219*.

167a. To say: Atum, this thy son is this one here, Osiris, whom thou
hast made to endure and to live.

167b. He lives, N. (also) lives; he dies not, N. (also) dies not;

167c. he perishes not, N. (also) perishes not, he is not judged, N.
(also) is not judged;

167d. he judges, N. (also) judges.

168a. Shu, this thy son is this one here, Osiris, whom thou hast made to
endure and to live.

168b-168d = 167b-167d.

169a. Tefnut, this thy son is this one here, Osiris, whom thou hast made
to endure and to live.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

169b-169d = 167b-167d.

170a. Geb, this thy son is this one here, Osiris, whom thou hast made to
endure and to live.

170b-170d = 167b-167d.

171a. Nut, this thy son is this one here, Osiris, whom thou hast made to
endure and to live.

171b-171d = 07b-167d.

172a. Isis, this thy brother is this one here, Osiris, whom thou hast
made to endure and to live.

172b-172d = 167b-07d.

173a. Set, this thy brother is this one here, Osiris, who is made to
endure and to live, that he may punish thee.

173b-173d = 167b-167d.

174a. Nephthys, this thy brother is this one here, Osiris, whom thou
hast made to endure and to live.

174b-174d = 167b-167d.

175a. Thot, this thy brother is this one here, Osiris, who is made to
endure and to live, that he may punish thee.

175b-175d = 167b-167d.

176a. Horus, this thy father is this one here, Osiris., whom thou hast
made to endure and to live.

176b-176d = 167b-167d.

177a. Great Ennead, this one here is Osiris, whom ye have made to endure
and to live.

177b-177d = 167b-167d.

178a. Little Ennead, this one here is Osiris, whom ye have made to
endure and to live.

178b-178d = 167b-167d.

179a. Nut, this thy son is this one here, Osiris, of whom thou hast
said: "One born to your father."

179b. Thou hast wiped for him his mouth; his mouth was opened by his
son, Horus, whom he loves;

179c. his limbs are counted by the gods.

180a-180c = 167b-167d.

181a. In thy name, "He who is in Heliopolis, while he remains
everlastingly in his necropolis":

181b-181d = 167b-167d.

182a. In thy name, "He who is in Busiris, chief of his nomes":

182b-182d = 167b-167d.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

183a. In thy name, "He who is in the House of Śerḳet, the satisfied
*ka*":

183b-183d = 167b-167d.

184a. In thy name, "He who is in the Divine Hall, who is in fumigation,

184b. (who is in the) chest, (who is in the) portable chest, (who is in
the) sack":

184c-184e = 167b-167d.

185a. In thy name, "He who is in the White Chapel of *pȝ‘r*-wood":

185b-185d = 167b-167d.

186a. In thy name, "He who is in *Śȝḥ*": Thou sojournest in heaven; thou
sojournest on earth.

186b. Osiris, turn thy face around, that thou mayest see N.,

186c. thy seed which came forth from thee, the pointed (*śpd.t*).

187a-187c = 167b-167d.

188a. In thy name, "He who is in Buto":

188b. Let thine arms be about "provisions", thy daughter; equip thyself
with her.

188c-188e = 167b-167d.

189a. In thy name, "He who is in the House of the Great Ox":

189b. Let thine arms be about "provisions", thy daughter; equip thyself
with her.

189c-189e = 167b-167d.

190a. In thy name, "He who is in Hermopolis of the South":

190b. Let thine arms be about "provisions", thy daughter; equip thyself
with her.

190c-190e = 167b-167d.

191a. In thy name, "He who is in Hermopolis of the North":

191b. Let thine arms be about "provisions", thy daughter, equip thyself
with her.

191c-191d = 167b-167d.

192a. In thy name, "He who is in the City of Waters":

192b. That which thou hast eaten is an eye; thy body is full of it; thy
son, Horus, parts with it for thee, that thou mayest live by it.

192c-192d = 167b-167d.

193a. Thy body is the body of N.; thy flesh is the flesh of N.;

193b. thy bones are the bones of N.

193c. Thou goest, N. goes; N. goes, thou goest.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

*Utterance 220*.

194a. The two doors of the horizon are open; its bolts slide.

I 94b. He has come to thee, *N.t* (Crown of Lower Egypt); he has come to
thee, *Nsr.t* (Uraeus);

194c. he has, come to thee, Great One; he has come to thee,
Great-in-magic (Crown of Lower Egypt).

194d. He is pure for thee; he is in awe of thee.

195a. Mayest thou be satisfied with him; mayest thou be satisfied with
his purity;

195b. mayest thou be satisfied with his word, which he speaks to thee:

195c. "How beautiful is thy face, when it is peaceful, new, young, for a
god, father of the gods, has begotten thee!"

195d. He has come to thee, Great-in-magic (Crown of Lower Egypt).

195e. It is Horus, who has fought in protection of his eye,
Great-in-magic.

*Utterance 221*.

196a. To say: O *N.t* (Crown of Lower Egypt), O *’Inw* (Crown of Lower
Egypt), O Great One (Crown of Lower Egypt),

196b. O Great-in-magic (Crown of Lower Egypt), O Nsr.t (Uraeus),

197a. make thou the terror of N. to be like the terror of thee;

197b. make thou the awe of N. to be like the awe of thee;

197c. make thou the respect for N. to be like the respect for thee;

197d. make thou the love for N. to be like the love for thee;

197e. make thou that his *‘bȝ*-sceptre be at the head of the living;
make thou that his *śḫm*-sceptre be at the head of the spirits;

197f. make thou that his blade be firm against his enemies.

198a. O *’Inw*-Crown, thou has come forth from him as he came forth from
thee.

198b. The great *’Iḫ.t* has given birth to thee, the *’Iḫ.t-wt.t* has
adorned thee;

198c. the *’Iḫ.t-wt.t* has given birth to thee, the great *’Iḫ.t* has
adorned thee,

198d. for as for thee, thou art like Horus, who fought in protection of
his eye.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

*Utterance 222*.

199a. To say: Stand thou upon it, this earth, which comes forth from
Atum, the saliva which comes forth from *Ḫprr*;

199b. be thou above it; he thou high above it,

199c. that thou mayest see thy father; that thou mayest see Rē‘.

200a. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, Rē‘.

200b. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, *Ndi*.

200c. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, *Pndn*.

200d. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, *Dndn*.

201a. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, *Śmȝ-wr*.

201b. He has, come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, *Sḫn-wr*.

201c. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, Sopdu.

201d. He has come to thee, his father; he has come to thee, Sharp of
Teeth.

202a. Cause thou that N. seize *ḳbḥ.w*, that he take the horizon;

202b. cause thou that N. govern the Nine Bows, that he equip the Ennead;

202c. cause thou that the shepherd's crook be in the hand of N., so that
Lower Egypt and Upper Egypt may bow (before him).

203a. He accepts ("takes on") his opponent and stands up, the great
chief, in his great kingdom;

203b. Nephthys praised him when he seized his opponent:

204a. "Thou hast equipped thyself as the Great-in-magic, Set, who is in
Ombos, lord of the land of the South;

204b. nothing is lacking in thee; nothing ceases with thee,

204c. for behold thou art more glorious, more powerful than the gods of
Upper Egypt and their spirits.

205a. Thou whom the pregnant brought forth, as thou didst cleave the
night,

205b. thou art equipped like Set, who mightily broke forth". Fortunate
is he whom Isis has praised:

206a. "Thou hast equipped thyself like Horus, the youthful,

206b. nor is there anything lacking in thee, nor anything ceases with
thee,

206c. for behold thou art more glorious, more powerful than the northern
gods and their spirits.

207a. Thou puttest away thine uncleanness for Atum in Heliopolis, thou
ascendest with him;

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

207b. thou judgest distress in the underworld,. thou standest above the
places of the abyss;

207c. thou art (king) with thy father Atum, thou art high with thy
father Atum;

207d. thou appearest with thy father Atum, distress disappears.

207e. The midwife of Heliopolis (holds) thy head.

208a. Thou ascendest, thou openest thy way through the bones of Shu;

208b. thou envelopest thyself in the embrace of thy mother Nut;

208c. thou purifiest thyself in the horizon, thou puttest away thine
impurity in the lakes of Shu.

209a. Thou risest, thou settest, thou settest with Rē‘, in obscurity
with *Ndi*;

209b. thou risest, thou settest, thou risest with Rē‘,

209c. thou appearest with *Sḫn-wr*;

210a. thou risest, thou settest, thou settest with Nephthys, in
obscurity with the *mśkt.t*-boat;

210b. thou risest, thou settest, thou risest with Isis;

210c. thou appearest with the *m‘n<u>d</u>.t*-boat.

211a. Thou art master of thyself; there is no one in thy way.

211b. Thou art born because of (like) Horus; thou art conceived because
of (like) Set;

211c. Thou didst purify thyself in the Falcon-nome; thou didst receive
thy purification in the Nome of the Integral Ruler, from thy father,
from Atum.

212a. Thou hast come into being, thou hast become high, thou hast become
content;

212b. thou hast become well in the embrace of thy father, in the embrace
of Atum.

213a. Atum, let N. ascend to thee, enfold him in thine embrace,

213b. for he is thy bodily son for ever".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Deceased King Receives Offerings and is Re-Established in
His Functions and Possessions, Utterances 223-225](pyt08.md)
