[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt14)  [Next](pyt16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

### 12. THE FERRYMAN AND THE DECEASED KING'S ASCENSION, UTTERANCES 300-311.

*Utterance 300*.

445a. To say: O *<u>H</u>rti* of *Nsȝ.t*, ferryman of the *’Iḳh.t*-boat,
made by Khnum,

445b. bring this (boat) to N. N. is Seker of *R-Ś<u>t</u>ȝ.w*.

445c. N. is on the way to the place of Seker, chief of *P<u>d</u>w-š*.

445d. It is our brother who is bringing this (boat) for these
bridge-girderers (?) of the desert.

*Utterance 301*.

446a. To say: Thy established-offering is thine, O *Niw* (Nun) together
with *Nn.t* (Naunet),

446b. ye two sources of the gods, protecting the gods with their (your)
shade.

446c. Thy established-offering is thine, O Amūn together with Amūnet,

446d. ye two sources of the gods, protecting the gods with their (your)
shade.

447a. Thy established-offering is thine, O Atum together with the two
lions, ye double power of the gods, yourselves, who created yourselves,

447b. that is, Shu together with Tefnut, (who) created the gods, begat
the gods, established the gods.

448a. Say ye to your father (Ptaḥ)

448b. that N. has given to you your established-offering, that N. has
satisfied you with your due.

448c. Ye shall (or, should) not hinder N. when he ferries to the horizon
to him.

449a. N. knows him, knows his name. *Nḥi* is, his name, *Nḥi* lord of
the year is his name;

449b. he with the warrior's arm, Horus who is over the *ś<u>h</u>d.w* of
heaven, who causes Rē‘ to live every day.

450a. He will rebuild N.; he will cause N. to live every day.

450b. N. comes to thee, Horus of *<u>H</u>ȝ.t*; N. comes to thee, Horus
of *Šsm.t*;

450c. N. comes to thee, Horus of the East.

451a. Behold, N. brings to thee thy great left eye as healer.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

451b. Take it, the intact (one), to thyself from N.; its water is in it,
being intact;

451c. its blood is in it, being intact; its breath is in it, being
intact.

452a. Enter into it; take possession of it, in this thy name of "Sacred
*Ḥḳ3ś*" (a god),

452b. that thou mayest approach to it in this thy name of "Rē‘"'.

453a. Put it on thy brow, in this, its name of "choice oil",

453b. that thou mayest rejoice in it, in this its name of "willow-tree",

454a. that thou mayest sparkle thereby among the gods, in this its name
of "that which sparkles", (or, "*<u>t</u>ḥnw.t*-oil"),

454b. that thou mayest be pleased with it in this its name of "oil of
pleasure", (or, "*ḥkn.w*-oil").

454c. (Then) will the *Rnn-wt.t*-serpent love thee.

455a. Stand there, great reed-float, like *Wp-wȝ.wt*,

455b. filled with thy splendour, come forth from the horizon,

455c. after thou hast taken possession of the white crown in the
water-springs, great and mighty, which are in the south of Libya,

456a. (like) Sebek, lord of *Bȝ<u>h</u>.w*.

456b. Thou journeyest to thy fields, thou passest through thy
*kśb*.t-woods,

456c. thy nose breathes the fragrance of the *Šsmt.t*-land.

456d. Thou causest the *ka* of N. to approach his side,

456e. like as thy Wig (deified) approaches thee.

457a. Purify N., make N. bright

457b. in this thy jackal-lake, O jackal, where thou purifiest the gods.

457c. Thou art become a soul, thou art become pre-eminent (sharp),
(like.) Horus lord of the green-stone--(to say) four times--(like) the
two green falcons.

*Utterance 302*.

458a. To say: Heaven is serene (?); Sothis lives, for it is N. who
lives, the son of Sothis.

458b. The Two Enneads have purified themselves for him

458c. as (in the form of) the *mśḫtiw*-hook-star, the imperishable.

458d. The house of N. in heaven will not go under, the throne of N. on
earth will never be destroyed.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

459a. Men bury themselves (in their grave (?); the gods fly up.

449b. Sothis caused N. to fly to heaven among his brothers the gods.

449c. Nut, the great, uncovered her arms for N.

460a. The two souls who are at the head of the souls of Heliopolis, who
genuflected at sun-rise,

460b. passed the night, while they did this, weeping for the god.

460c. The throne of N. is by thee, O Rē‘; he will not give it to anyone
else.

461a. N. ascends to heaven, to thee, O Rē‘;

461b. the face of N. is as (that of) falcons;

461c. the wings of N. are as (those of) geese;

461d. his claws are as the fangs of the god of the *<u>D</u>w.f*-nome.

462a. There is not a word among men on earth against N.;

462b. there is no condemnation of him among the gods in heaven.

462c. N. has removed the word against him; N. has destroyed (it) so as
to mount up to heaven.

463a. *Wp-wȝ.wt* has caused N. to fly to heaven among his brothers, the
gods.

463b. N. moved (flapped) his arms like a *śmn*-goose;

463c. N. flaps his wings like a kite.

463d. He flies who flies, O men; N. also flies away from you.

*Utterance 303*.

464a. To say: Gods of the West, gods of the East, gods of the South,
gods of the North--

464b. these four pure reed-floats, which ye placed for Osiris,

464c. for his ascension to heaven,

465a. that he might ferry over to *ḳbḥ.w*, while his son Horus was at
hand (at his fingers),

465b. (whom) he reared and whom he caused to dawn as a great god in
*ḳbḥ.w*,

465c. place them for N.

466a. Art thou Horus, son of Osiris? Art thou, O N., the god, the
eldest, son of Hathor?

466b. Art thou the seed of Geb?

467a. Osiris has ordained that N. dawn as a second Horus.

467b. Those four souls (spirits), who are in Heliopolis, have written it

467c. in the register of the two Great Gods who are in *ḳbḥ.w*.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

*Utterance 304*.

468a. To say: Greetings to thee, O daughter of Anubis, who is at the
windows, of heaven,

468b. thou friend of Thot, who is at the double rail (end) of the
ladder.

468c. Open the way for N., that N. may pass.

469a. Greetings to thee, O ostrich, who is on the shore of the Winding
Watercourse.

469b. Open the way for N., that N. may pass.

470a. Greetings to thee, O ox of Rē‘, with four horns,

470b. thy horn in the West, thy horn in the East, thy horn in the South,
thy horn in the North.

470c. Incline thy western horn for N., that N. may pass.

47m. Art thou a pure westerner? I come from the falcon city.

471b. Greetings to thee, O Marsh of my Offerings (or, O Marsh of my
Peace);

471c. greetings to the honourable ones (dead?) who are in thee. N. will
honour those who are there.

471d. Comfortable are the pure who are in me.

*Utterance 305*.

472a. To say: The ladder is fastened by Rē‘ in the presence of Osiris;

472b. the ladder is fastened by Horus in the presence of his father
Osiris,

472c. as he goes to his *ȝḫ* (spirit).

472d. One of them is on this side, one of them is on this side, while N.
is between them.

473a. Art thou then a god, pure in dwellings (places)? (I am) come from
a pure (place).

473b. Stand (here), O N., says Horus; sit (here), O N., says Set;

473c. Take his arm (certificate), says Rē‘.

474a. The spirit belongs to heaven; the body belongs to the earth.

474b. That which men receive when they are buried

474c. are their thousand loaves of bread, their thousand mugs of beer
from the offering-table of *Ḫnti-’imnti.w*.

475a. If the heir is poor because he has no testament,

475b. then shall N. (really, "he") write with his great finger;

475c. but he shall not write with his little finger,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

*Utterance 306*.

476a. To say: "How beautiful indeed is the sight, how pleasant indeed is
the view," say they, say the gods,

476b. "'the ascension of this god to heaven, the ascension of N. to
heaven,

477a. his renown over him, his terror on both sides of him,

477b. his magic preceding him!"

477c. Geb has done for him as was done for himself; (and)

478a. the gods, the Souls of Buto come to him, (and) the gods, the Souls
of Hierakonpolis, the gods who are in heaven, the gods who are on the
earth;

478b. they make for thee (they serve thee as), N., supports of their
arms,

479a. and thou ascendest, N., to heaven, and thou climbest on it in this
its name of "ladder."

479b. "Let heaven be given to N.; let the earth be given to him," said
Atum.

480a. He who had spoken (with Atum) about it was Geb.

480b. The regions of the kingdom, the kingdom of Horus, the kingdom of
Set, (and)

480c. the Marshes of Reeds, they adore thee

480d. in this thy name of *Dwȝ.m*, as Sopdu, (who lives) under his
*kśb.t*-trees.

481a. Has he killed thee after his heart had said that thou shouldst die
for him?

481b. But, behold, thou for thy part become in spite of him as the
remaining bull of the wild-bulls.

481c. There remains, there remains the remaining bull,

481d. (so) thou art remaining, O N., as their chief, as chief of the
spirits, eternally.

*Utterance 307*.

482a. To say: A Heliopolitan is in N., O god; a Heliopolitan as thou
(art) is in N. O god;

482b. a Heliopolitan is in N., O Rē‘; a Heliopolitan as thou (art) is in
N. O Rē‘.

482c. The mother of N. is a Heliopolitan; the father of N. is a
Heliopolitan.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

483a. N. himself is a Heliopolitan, who was born in Heliopolis,

483b. when Rē‘ ruled the Two Enneads, (when) Nefertem ruled men,

483c. (as) one without an equal, the heir of his father Geb.

484a. Any god who puts out his arm (menacingly),

484b. when the face of N. turns to thee to adore thee,

484c. (and) when N. calls to thee on behalf of his person, O god, on
behalf of his nose, O god,

484d. he shall have no bread, he shall have no cake among his brothers,
the gods;

485a. he shall send no message, he shall not cover in heat among his
brothers, the gods;

485b. the double doors of the *mśkt.t*-boat shall not be opened for him,
the double doors of the *m‘n<u>d</u>.t*-boat shall not be opened for
him;

485c. his speech shall not be judged as (that of one) in his city; the
double doors of the destroyer ("Hell") shall not be open (again) for
him.

486a. N. comes to thee.

486b. N. is the wild-bull of the highlands, the bull with the large
head, which comes from Heliopolis.

486c. N., wild-bull of the highlands, comes to thee.

486d. Henceforth N. is he who has given birth to thee and who gives
birth to thee.

*Utterance 308*.

487a. To say: Greetings to thee, O Horus, in the regions of Horus;

487b. greetings to thee, O Set, in the regions of Set;

487c. greetings to thee, O *’Iȝr.w*, in the Marshes of Reeds;

488a. greetings to you, ye two harmonius (goddesses), daughters of the
four gods, who dwell in the great palace (Heliopolis),

488b. ye who are come forth at the voice of N., naked.

489a. N. has looked to you, as Horus looked to Isis;

489b. N. has looked to you, as the *Nḥb.w-kȝ.w* (serpent) looked to
*Śrḳ.t-ḥtw*;

489c. N. has looked to you, as Sebek looked to Neit;

489d. N. has looked to you, as Set looked to the two harmonius
(goddesses).

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

*Utterance 309*.

490a. To say: N. is the *<u>d</u>ḥȝ.i* of the gods, who is behind the
house of Rē‘,

490b. born of the wish of the gods, which is in the prow of the boat of
Rē‘.

490c. N. sits before him;

491a. N. opens his boxes; N. breaks open his edicts;

491b. N. seals his rolls (of papyrus);

491c. N. sends forth his messengers, the indefatigables.

491d. N. does, that which he (Rē‘) says to N.

*Utterance 310*.

492a. To say: If N. should be bewitched, so will Atum be bewitched.

492b. If N. should be slandered, so will Atum be slandered.

492c. If N. should be beaten, so will Atum be beaten.

492d. If N. should be hindered on this road, so will Atum be hindered.

493a. N, is Horus. N. comes after his father (in time); N. comes after
Osiris.

493b. O thou, whose face is before him, whose face is behind him,

494a. bring this (boat) to N. Which boat shall I bring to thee, O N.?

494b. Bring to N. that which flies up and alights.

*Utterance 311*.

495a. To say: Look at N., O Rē‘; recognize N., O Rē‘.

495b. He belongs to those who know thee. He knows (that)

495c. when his lord (Rē‘) goes forth, he should not forget the *ḥtp-di*,

496a. so that she "who excludes whom she will exclude" may open the
doors of the horizon for the going forth of the boat of the morning-sun.

496b. (N.) knows the hall of the royal throne, which is in the midst of
the platform of *’iskn*, whence thou goest forth,

497a. that thou mayest enter (step down into) the boat of the
evening-sun.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

497b. Commend N.; commend him, commend him--to say four times one after
another--to those four raging ones (winds),

497c. who are around thee (Rē‘) who see with two faces, who speak with
two mouths (?),

498a. who are evil with those who are unfortunate, with those who would
destroy them (the winds?),

498b. that they put not out their arm, when N. turns to thee, when N.
comes to thee,

499a. as one who says to thee this thy name of "great flood," which
proceeds from the great (one).

499b. N. will not be blind when thou leavest him in darkness;

499c. he will not be deaf when he does not hear thy voice.

500a. Mayest thou take N. with thee, with thee;

500b. he who drives away the storm for thee; be who chases off the
clouds for thee; he who breaks up the hail for thee.

500c, N. will do homage (upon) homage to thee; he will cause acclamation
(upon) acclamation to thee.

500d. Mayest thou set N. over *<u>d</u>t3.t*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. A Series of Five Charms, Utterances 312-316](pyt16.md)
