[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pyt20)  [Next](pyt22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 18. UTTERANCES CONCERNING WELL-BEING, ESPECIALLY FOOD AND CLOTHES, 401-426.

*Utterance 401*.

697a. To say: N. is come from Buto, red as a flame, living as Khepri.

697b. N. has seen the great uraeus-serpent; N. has perceived the great
uraeus-serpent.

697c. The face of N. is fallen upon the great uraeus-serpent.

697d. *Ḥw* bowed his temples to N.,

697e. when N. ferried over his lake, his uraeus-serpent in his
following.

*Utterance 402*.

698a. To say: The place of N. with Geb is enlarged;

698b. the *śḥd*-star of N. with Rē‘ will be made high,

698c. that N. may promenade in the Marshes of Offering.

698d. N. is the eye of Rē‘, which was conceived in the night and born
each day.

*Utterance 403*.

699a. To say: O thou whose *‘ȝb*-tree becomes green, who is over his
field;

699b. O thou flower-opener, who is on his sycamore;

699c. O thou with the green lands, who is over his *’iȝm*-tree;

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

700a. O lord of the green fields, rejoice to-day.

700b. N. will henceforth be among you; N. will go forth in your
neighbourhood;

700c. N. will live on that on which you live.

701a. O bulls of Atum,

701b. make N. fresh, refresh N. more than the red crown which is upon
his head;

701c. more than the inundation which is up to his breast (or, lap, or
knee), more than the dates, which are in his fist.

*Utterance 404*.

702a. To say: N. juggles about with thee, O juggler--further (to say)
four times--he who was over the officials of Buto.

702b. N. is greater than the Horus adorned with red, the red crown which
was (once) on the head of Rē‘.

702c. The green eye-paint of N. consists in the papyrus-umbel of thine
eye, which is aflame;

702d. N. is green (fresh) with (or, like) thee.

*Utterance 405*.

703a. To say: O Rē‘, O *wȝḫ-ti*, O *wȝḫ-ti*, O *pnd.ti*, O *pnd.ti*,

703b. N. is thou, thou art N.

704a. Praise be to N.; praise be to the *ka* of N.

704b. Cause N. to be well, f or N. causes thee to be well;

704c. cause N. to be well, for N. causes thee to be well.

704d. Cause N. to be refreshed, for N. causes thee to be refreshed.

705a. N. is that eye of thine which was on the horn of Hathor,

705b. which repeats the repeating (successive) years for (or, upon) N.,

705c. while N. is conceived in the night and born every day.

*Utterance 406*.

706a. To say: Greetings to thee Rē‘ in thy beauty, in thy beauties,

706b. in thy places, in thy two-thirds gold.

707a. Mayest thou bring the milk of Isis to N., and the flood of
Nephthys,

707b. the swishing of the lake, the primaeval flood of the ocean,

707c. life, prosperity, health, happiness,

707d. bread, beer, clothing, food, that N. may live thereof.

708a. May the brewers listen to (come to terms with) him!

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

708b. As they are long in days (patient at work), as they are satisfied
in the nights,

708c. so he (the deceased) takes his place at the table (partakes of his
meal), since they are satisfied with their nourishment (contentment).

709a. May N. behold thee when thou goest forth as Thot,

709b. when the course is set for the boat of Rē‘,

709c. to his fields which are in the *’iȝś.w*-part of heaven,

709d. and when thou stormest forth as he who is at the head of his
*ḥi*-carriers.

*Utterance 407*.

710a. To say: N. is pure, so that he can receive for himself his pure
place which is in heaven.

710b. N. will remain, the beautiful places, of N. will remain.

710c. N. receives for himself his pure place which is in the bow of the
boat of Rē‘.

711a. And the sailors who row Rē‘,

711b. they also will row N.;

711c. and the sailors will take Rē‘ round about the horizon.,

711d. they also will take N. round about the horizon.

712a. N.'s mouth is opened for him, N.'s nose is opened for him,

712b. N.'s ears are opened for him,

712c. that N. may judge words, that he may separate the two contenders,

713a. that he may command words to him who is greater than he.

713b. Rē‘ purifies N.; Rē‘ protects N. against the evil which is done
against him.

*Utterance 408*.

714a. To say: "Born-in-the-night," come ye; N. is born.

714b. Ye two women, ye who conceived by day, that ye may be patient and
bear him who dwells in the egg-city,

715a. since ye have given birth to N., ye must also nourish N.

715b. The heart of N. is glad as he who is chief of the *Dȝ.t*;

715c. the heart of the gods rejoices over N., as soon as they see N. how
rejuvenated he is.

716a. Now the banquet of the sixth day of the month shall be for the
breakfast of N.;

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

716b. the banquet of the seventh day of the month shall be for the
supper of N.

716c. Cows shall be slaughtered for N. (at) the *wȝg*-feast.

716d. The desideratum, that which is given of it, that is the gift for
N.,

716e. for N. is indeed the bull of Heliopolis.

*Utterance 409*.

717a. To say: N. is the bull of the Ennead,

717b. lord of the five meals, three in heaven, two on earth.

717c. It is the boat of the evening sun and the boat of the morning sun,

717d. which convey this to N. from the *nḫn*-house of the god.

718a. The abomination of N. is offal; he rejects urine;

718b. he drinks it not.

718c. N. lives on sweet-wood (i.e. sweets), and from fumigations which
are in the earth.

*Utterance 410*.

719a. To say: O Busirite, thou *<u>d</u>d*, he who is in his
*Grg.w-bȝ.f*,

719b. N. is a *wrw.t.k*; N. will be a *wrw.t.k*.

719c. N. finds thee, sitting on that fortress of *Ḫȝti*,

719d. in which the gods sit (live), to which the lords of *kas* are
drawn.

719e. Comes ------------------

*Utterance 411*.

720a. --------------------------------

720b. bring it to N.; put N. \[on that side of life and joy\].

*Utterance 412*.

721a. To say: The Great One is fallen on his side;

721b. he who is in *Ndi.t* stirs;

721c. his head is lifted up by Rē‘;

721d. his abomination is to sleep, he hates to be tired.

722a. Flesh of N.,

722b. rot not, decay not, let not thy smell be bad.

722c. Thy foot shall not pass over, thy step shall not stride through,

722d. thou shalt not tread upon the (corpse)-secretion of Osiris.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

723a. Thou shalt tiptoe heaven like *Śȝḥ* (the toe-star); thy soul shall
be pointed like Sothis (the pointed-star).

723b. Soul shalt thou be and soul thou art; honoured shalt thou be and
honoured thou art.

723c. Thy soul stands there (like a king(?)) among the gods, like Horus
who lives in *’Irw*.

724a. Thy dread gets into the heart of the gods,

724b. like (the dread) of the red crown which is on the head of the king
of Lower Egypt, like the white crown which is on the head of the king of
Upper Egypt,

724c. like the lock (of hair) which is upon the head of *Mn<u>t</u>i.w*.

724d. Thou layest hold of the hand (lit. arm) of the imperishable stars.

725a. Thy bones will not be destroyed; thy flesh will not sicken, N.;

725b. thy limbs will not be distant from thee,

725c. for thou art as one among the gods.

725d. Buto ferries up to thee; Hierakonpolis ferries down to thee,

726a. the *śmnt.t*-woman mourns for thee; the *’imi-ḫnt*-priest robes
himself for thee.

726b. A welcome comes out for thee, O N., on the part of thy father; a
welcome comes out for thee on the part of Rē‘.

727a. The double doors of heaven are open for thee; the double doors of
the *śḥd.w*-stars are open for thee,

727b. after thou art descended (in the grave) as the jackal of Upper
Egypt,

727c. as Anubis on his belly, as *Wpi.w* who resides in Heliopolis.

728a. The great damsel who lives in Heliopolis has given her arm to
thee,

728b. for thou hast no mother among mankind who has borne thee,

728c. for thou hast no father among men who has conceived thee.

729a. Thy mother is the great wild-cow who lives in el-Kâb, the white
crown, the royal head-dress,

729b. she with the long feathers, she with the two hanging breasts;

729c. she will nurse thee; she will not wean thee.

730a. Get up (from) on thy left side, sit (put thyself) on thy right
side, O N.

730b. Thy places among the gods will remain, while Rē‘ leans upon thee
with his arm;

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

730c. thy fragrance is as their fragrance;

730d. thy sweetness is as the sweetness of the Two Enneads.

731a. Thou appearest, N., in the royal head-dress (the things of the
forehead),

731b. thy hand seizes the Horus-weapon (*ȝmś*), thy fist grasps the
*ḥ<u>d</u>*-mace,

731c. thou standest, N., as he who is in (or, who is chief of) the two
*’itr.t*-palaces, who judges the words of the gods.

732a. Thou belongest to the *nḫḫ.w* (-stars), the servants, of Rē‘, who
are before the morning star.

732b. Thou wilt be born (again) at thy new moons (feasts) like the moon

732c. while Rē‘ leans upon thee in the horizon, N.,

733a. and the imperishable stars serve (follow) thee.

733b. Command thyself until Rē‘ comes, N.;

733c. purify thyself; ascend to Rē‘.

733d. Heaven will not be empty of thee, N., for ever.

*Utterance 413*.

734a. To say: Raise thyself up, O king. Thy water belongs to thee.,
thine abundance belongs to thee,

734b. thy milk belongs to thee, which is in the breasts of thy mother,
Isis.

734c. The children of Horus raise thee up; the children of him who is in
*<u>D</u>b‘.wt-P* (Buto),

734d. like Set who is in *Ḥn.t* (Hypselis, or Ombos).

735a. This Great One slept, after he had fallen to sleep.

735b. Awake, N., raise thyself up, take to thee thy head;

735c. unite to thee thy bones; shake off thy dust.

736a. Sit thou upon thy firm throne,

736b. that thou mayest eat the leg of meat, that thou mayest pass the
cutlet (over thy mouth),

736c. that thou mayest nourish thyself with thy double-rib piece in
heaven among the gods.

*Utterance 414*.

737a. To say: O N.,

737b. take thy garment of light, take thy veil upon thee,

737c. clothe thyself with the eye of Horus, which was in *Tȝi.t*,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

737d. that it may gain thy respect among the gods, that it make for thee
a sign of recognition among the gods,

737e. that thou mayest take the *wrr.t*-crown by means of it among the
gods,

737f. that thou mayest take the *wrr.t*-crown by means of it with Horus
lord of men.

*Utterance 415*.

738a. To say: Greetings to thee *Tȝi.t*,

738b. thou wast on the edge of the great nest which united the god with
his brother.

738c. Thou wilt be or not be; thou wilt be or not be.

739a. Protect the head of N., that it may not detach itself;

739b. collect the bones of N., that they may not separate.

739c. Mayest thou put the love for N. in the body of every god who will
see him.

*Utterance 416*.

740\. To say: This is a sound garment which Horus has made for his
father, Osiris.

*Utterance 417*.

741a. To say: A Great One slept on his mother, Nut.

741b. Thy mother *Tȝi.t* clothed thee;

741c. she carried thee to heaven, in her name of "Kite,"

741d. the fondling whom she found, her Horus.

741e. Thy Horus is this one, O Isis; mayest thou bring his certificate
(lit. arm) to Rē‘, to the horizon.

*Utterance 418*.

742a. To say: Greetings to thee, Fine Oil.

742b. Greetings to thee which was on the brow of Horus, which Horus put
on the head (horns) of his father, Osiris.

742c. N. put thee on his head (horns), as Horus put thee on the head
(horns) of his father, Osiris.

*Utterance 419*.

743a. To say: Greetings to thee, N., on this thy day,

743b. as thou standest before Rē‘, when he ariseth in the east,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

743c. adorned with this thy dignity among the spirits.

743d. The arms interlace for thee; the feet agitate for thee; the hands
wave for thee.

744a. Isis laid hold of thine arm; she caused thee to enter into the
*min.w*.

744b. The earth is adorned; thy mourners lament.

745a. May Anubis First of the Westerners give an offering:

745b. thy thousands of loaves of bread, thy thousands of mugs of beer,
thy thousands of jars of ointment,

745c. thy thousands of alabaster vases (of perfume), thy thousands of
garments,

745d. thy thousands of heads of oxen.

746a. The *śmn*-goose will be beheaded for thee; the *<u>t</u>rp*-goose
will be killed for thee.

746b. Horus has exterminated the evil which was in N. in his four day
(term);

746c. Set has annulled that which he did against N. in his eight day
(term).

747a. The doors are open for those in secret places.

747b. Stand up, remove thy earth, shake off thy dust, raise thyself up,

748a. voyage thou with the spirits.

748b. Thy wings are those of a falcon; thy brightness is that of a star.

748c. No enemy (?) will bend over N.;

748d. the heart of N. will not be taken; his heart will not be carried
off.

749a. N. is a great one with an uninjured *wrr.t*-crown.

749b. N. equips himself with his firm (or, iron, shining) limbs.

749c. N. voyages, over the sky to the Marsh of Reeds;

249d. N. makes his abode in the Marsh of Offerings,

749e. among the imperishable stars in the following of Osiris.

*Utterance 420*.

750a. To say: O N., be pure, cense thyself for Rē‘.

750b. How beautiful is thy purity to-day!

750c. To-day, establish thyself among the gods, to-day.

750d. To-day, establish thyself among those who are in the
*sḥ-n<u>t</u>r*, to-day.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

*Utterance 421*.

751a. To say: N., thou climbest up, thou reachest the radiance.

751b. Thou art the brilliance which is upon the eastern(?)-quarter of
the sky.

*Utterance 422*.

752a. To say: O N.,

752b. thou art departed that thou mayest become a spirit, that thou
mayest become mighty as a god, an enthroned one like Osiris,

753a. since thou hast thy soul in thy body, since thou hast thy might
behind thee,

753b. since thou hast thy *wrr.t*-crown on thy head, since thou hast thy
*misw.t*-crown before thee (at hand).

753c. Thy face is before thee, thy homage is before thee;

754a. the followers of a god are behind thee, the nobles of a god are
before thee;

754b. they recite: "A god comes, a god comes, N. comes (who shall be) on
the throne of Osiris,

754c. that spirit comes who is in *Ndi.t*, that power which is in the
Thinite nome."

755a. Isis speaks to thee; Nephthys laments for thee.

755b. The spirits come to thee, bowing down; they kiss the earth at thy
feet,

755c. because the terror of thee, N., is in the cities of *Śiȝ*.

756a. Thou ascendest to thy mother Nut; she lays hold of thine arm;

756b. she shows thee the way to the horizon, to the place where Rē‘ is.

756c. The double doors of heaven are opened for thee, the double doors
of *ḳbḥ.w* are opened for thee.

757a. Thou findest Rē‘ standing, while he waits for thee.

757b. He lays hold of thy hand, he leads thee into the double
*’itr.t*-palace of heaven,

757c. he places thee on the throne of Osiris.

758a. O N., the eye of Horus comes to thee, it addresses thee:

758b. "Thy soul which is among the gods comes to thee; thy might which
is among the spirits comes to thee.

758c. A son has avenged his father; Horus has avenged Osiris."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

758d. Horus has avenged N. on his enemies.

759a. Thou standest, N., avenged, equipped as a god,

759b. endued with the form of Osiris; on the throne of him who is First
of the Westerners,

759c. and doest what he was accustomed to do among the spirits, the
imperishable stars.

760a. Thy son stands on thy throne endued with thy form;

760b. he does what thou wast accustomed to do formerly at the head of
the living

760c. by the command of Rē‘, the Great God.

761\. He tills barley, he tills spelt, that he may present thee
therewith.

762a. O N., all life and health are given to thee, eternity is thine,
saith Rē‘ to thee,

762b. that thou thyself mayest speak after thou hast taken the form of a
god,

762c. wherewith thou shalt be great among the gods who are over the lake
(*ḫnti.w-š*).

763a. O N., thy soul. stands among the gods, among the spirits,

763b. it is thus that thy fear is in their hearts.

763c. O N., N. stands upon thy throne at the head of the living,

763d. it is thus that thy terror is in their hearts.

764a. Thy name which is upon the earth lives; thy name which is upon the
earth endures;

764b. thou wilt not perish; thou wilt not pass, away for ever and ever.

*Utterance 423*.

765a. To say: O Osiris N., take to thyself this thy libation, which is
offered to thee by Horus,

765b. in thy name of "He who is come from the cataract"; take to thyself
thy natron that thou mayest be divine.

765c. Thy mother Nut has made thee to be as a god to thine enemy (or, in
spite of thee), in thy name of "God."

766a. Take to thyself the efflux which goes forth from thee.

766b. Horus has made me assemble for thee the gods from every place to
which thou hast gone.

766c. Take to thyself the efflux which goes forth from thee.

766d. Horus has made me count for thee his children even to the place
where thou wast drowned.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

767a. *Ḥr-rnp.wi* recognizes thee, for thou art made young again, ill
this thy name of "Fresh water."

767b. Horus is indeed a soul, for he recognizes his father in thee, in
his name of "*Ḥr-bȝ-’iti-rp.t*."

*Utterance 424*.

768a. To say: O N., this thy going, these thy goings;

768b. is that going of Horus, by this his going, by these his goings,

769a. as his runners hastened, so his envoys rushed on behind,

769b. so that they might announce him to him who lifts up the arm in the
East.

769c. Rejoice, N.,

769d. thine arms are like those of *Wpi.w*, thy face like that of
*Wp-wȝ-wt*.

770a. O N., may the king make an offering,

770b. that thou mayest occupy thy Horite regions, that thou mayest pass
through thy Setite regions.

770c. Thou sittest on thy firm throne,

770d. thou directest their words to him who is at the head of the Great
Ennead, who are in Heliopolis.

771a. O N., *Mḫnti-n-’irti* protects thee,

771b. thy herdsman, who is behind thy calves.

771c. O N., *‘r*--- protects thee against the spirits.

772a. O N., know

772b. that thou shalt take for thyself this thy divine offering, that
thou mayest be satisfied with it every day:

773a. thousands of loaves of bread, thousands of mugs of beer, thousands
of heads of oxen, thousands of geese,

773b. thousands of all sweet things, thousands of all textures.

7 74a. O N., thy water belongs to thee, thy abundance belongs to thee,

774b. thy natron belongs to thee, (all) which is brought to thee by thy
brother, *Nḫḫ*.

*Utterance 425*.

775a. To say: Osiris N., thou art avenged; I have given all gods to
thee,

775b. together with their inheritance, together with their food,

775c. together with all their things. Thou shalt not die.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

*Utterance 426*.

776a. To say: Osiris N., thou hast dawned as king of Upper and Lower
Egypt,

776b. for thou hast gained power over the gods together with their *kas*
(attributes).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. In Praise of Nut, Utterances 427-435](pyt22)
