[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild17) 
[Next](wild19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_959">p. 959</span>

### 18

<span class="smallcaps">I record</span> that, once upon a time, down
from the sky came a shower of virgins.

Of course they weren't really virgins. I can't accept the reality of
anything, in such an indeterminate existence as ours.

See the *English Mechanic*, 87-436—a shower of large hailstones, at
Remiremont, France, May 26, 1907. Definitely upon some of these objects
were printed representations of the Virgin of the Hermits.

It used to be the fashion, simply and brusquely to deny such a story,
and call it a device of priestcraft: but the tendency of disbelievers,
today, is not to be so free and monotonous with accusations, and to
think that very likely unusual hailstones did fall, at Remiremont, and
that out of irregularities or discolorations upon them, pious
inhabitants imagined pictorial representations. I think, myself, that
the imprints upon these hailstones were of imaginative origin, but in
the sense that illustrations in a book are; and were not simply imagined
by the inhabitants of Remiremont, any more than are some of the
illustrations of some books only smudges that are so imaginatively
interpreted by readers that they are taken as pictures.

The story of the hailstones of Remiremont is unique in my records. And a
statement of mine has been that our data are of the not extremely
uncommon. But, early in this book, I pointed out that any two discordant
colors may be harmonized by means of other colors; and there are no
data, thinkable by me, that cannot be more or less suavely co-ordinated,
if smoothly doctored; or that cannot be aligned with the ordinary, if
that be desirable.

I am a Jesuit. I shift aspects from hailstones with pictures on them, to
pictures on hailstones—and go on with stories of pictures on other
unlikely materials.

According to accounts—copied from newspapers—in the *Spiritual
Magazine*, n.s., 7-360, and in the *Religio-Philosophical Journal*,
March 29, 1873, there was more excitement in Baden-Baden, upon

<span id="page_960">p. 960</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> March 12, 1872,
than at Remiremont. Upon the morning of this day, people saw pictures
that in some unaccountable way had been printed upon windowpanes of
houses, with no knowledge by occupants as to how they got there. At
first the representations were crosses, but then other figures appeared.
The authorities of Baden ordered the windows to be washed, but the
pictures were indelible. Acids were used, without effect. Two days
later, crosses and death's heads appeared upon window glass, at Rastadt.

The epidemic broke out at Boulley, five leagues from Metz. Here, because
of feeling, still intense from the Franco-Prussian War, the authorities
were alarmed. Crosses and other religious emblems appeared upon
windowpanes—pictures of many kinds—death's heads, eagles, rainbows. A
detail of Prussian soldiers was sent to one house to smash a window,
upon which was pictured a band of French Zouaves and their flags. It was
said that at night the pictures were invisible. But the soldiers did not
miss their chance: they smashed a lot of windows, anyway. Next morning
it looked as if there had been a battle. In the midst of havoc, the
Zouaves were still flying their colors.

This story, I should say, then became a standardized newspaper yarn. I
have a collection of stories of pictures appearing upon window glass
that were almost busily told in American newspapers, after March, 1872,
not petering out until about the year 1890.

But it cannot be said that all stories told in the United States, of
this phenomenon, or alleged phenomenon, were echoes of the reported
European occurrences, because stories, though in no such profusion as
subsequently, had been told in the United States before March, 1872.
*New York Herald*, Aug. 20, 1870—a representation of a woman's face,
appearing upon window glass, in a house in Lawrence, Mass. The occupant
of the house was so pestered by crowds of sightseers that, not
succeeding in washing off the picture, he removed the window sash.
*Human Nature*, June, 1871—copied from the *Chicago Times*—house in
Milan, Ohio, occupied by two tenants, named Horner and Ashley. On
windowpanes appeared blotches, as if of water mixed with tar, or crude
oil—likenesses of human faces taking form in these places. *New York
Times*, Jan. 18,

<span id="page_961">p. 961</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1871—that, in
Sandusky and Cincinnati, Ohio, pictures of women had appeared upon
windowpanes.

Still, it might be thought that there was one origin for all the
stories, and that that was the spirit-photograph controversy, which, in
the early eighteen-seventies, was a subject of intense beliefs and
disbeliefs, in both Europe and America. A point that has not been taken
up, in this controversy, which continues to this day, even after the
fateful spread of knowledge of double exposure, is whether the human
imagination can affect a photographic plate. I incline to the idea that
almost all spirit-photographs have been frauds, but that a few may not
have been—that no spirits were present, but that, occasionally, or very
rarely, a quite spookless medium has, in a profound belief in spirits,
engendered, out of visualizations, something wraith-like that has been
recorded by a camera. Against the explanation that stories of pictures
on windowpanes probably had origin in the spirit-photograph craze, I
mention that similar stories were told centuries before photography was
invented. For an account of representations of crosses that appeared,
not upon window glass, but upon people's clothes, as told by Joseph
Grünpech, in his book, *Speculum Naturalis Coelestis*, published in the
year 1508, see *Notes and Queries*, April 2, 1892.

"After the death of Dean Vaughan, of Llandaff, there suddenly appeared
on a wall of the Llandaff Cathedral, a large blotch of dampness, or
minute fungi, formed into a life-like outline of the dean's face"
(*Notes and Queries*, Feb. 8, 1902).

Throughout this book, my views, or preconceptions, or bigotries, are
against spiritual interpretations, or assertions of the existence of
spirits, as independent very long from human bodies. However, I think of
the temporary detachability of mentalities from bodies, and that is much
like an acceptance of the existence of spirits. My notion is that Dean
Vaughan departed, going where any iceberg goes when it melts, or where
any flame goes when it is extinguished: that intense visualizations of
him, by a member of his congregation, may have pictorially marked the
wall of the church.

According to reports, in the *London Daily Express*, July 17 and 30, and
in the *Sunday Express*, Aug. 12, 1923, it may be thought, by anybody so
inclined to think, that, in England, in the summer

<span id="page_962">p. 962</span>

of 1923, an artistic magician was traveling, and exercising his talents.
Somebody, or something, was perhaps impressing pictures upon walls and
pillars of churches. The first report was that, on the wall of Christ
Church, Oxford, had appeared a portrait of the famous Oxford cleric,
Dean Liddell, long dead. Other reports came from Bath, Bristol, and
Uphill, Somerset. At Bath—in the old abbey of Bath—the picture was of a
soldier, carrying a pack. The Abbey authorities scraped off this
picture, but the portrait, at Oxford, was not touched.

There is a description, in *T. P.’s and Cassell’s Weekly* (London),
Sept. 11, 1926, of the portrait on the wall of Christ Church, Oxford, as
seen three years later. It is described as "a faithful and unmistakable
likeness of the late Dean Liddell, who died in the year 1898." "One does
not need to call in play any imaginative faculty to reconstruct the
head. It is set perfectly straight upon the wall, as it might have been
drawn by the hand of a master artist. Yet it is not etched; neither is
it sketched, not sculptured, but it is there plain for all eyes to see."

And it is beginning to look as if, having started somewhat eccentrically
with a story of virgins, we are making our way out of the marvelous. Now
accept that there is a very ordinary witchcraft, by which, under the
name of telepathy, pictures can be transferred from one mind to another,
and there is reduction of the preposterousness of stories of
representations on hailstones, window glass, and Other materials. We are
conceiving that human beings may have learned an extension of the
telepathic process, so as to transfer pictures to various materials. So
far as go my own experiences, I do not know that telepathy exists. I
think so, according to many notes that I have taken upon vagrant
impressions that come and go, when my mind is upon something else. I
have often experimented. When I incline to think that there is
telepathy, the experiments are convincing that there is. When I think
over the same experiments, and incline against they, they indicate that
there isn't.

*New York Sun*, Jan. 16, 1929—hundreds of persons standing, or kneeling,
at night, before the door of St. Ann's Roman Catholic Church, in
Keansburg, N. J. They saw, or thought they saw, on the dark, oak door,
the figure of a woman, in trailing, white robes,

<span id="page_963">p. 963</span>

emitting a glow. The pastor of the church, the Rev. Thomas A. Kearney,
was interviewed. "I don't believe that it is a miracle, or that it has
anything to do with the supernatural. As I see it, it is unquestionably
in the outline of a human figure, white-robed, and emitting light. It is
rather like a very thin motion picture negative that was under-exposed,
and in which human outlines and detail are extremely thin. Yet it seems
to be there."

Or pictures on hailstones—and wounds that appeared on the bodies of
people. In the name of the everlasting *If*, which mocks the severity of
every theorem in every textbook, and is not so very remote from every
datum of mine, we can think that, by imaginative means, at present not
understood, wounds appeared upon people in Japan, and Germany, and in a
turning, off Coventry Street, London, if we can accept that in some such
way, pictures ever have appeared upon hailstones, windowpanes, and other
places. And we can think that pictures have appeared upon hailstones,
windowpanes, and other places, if we can think that wounds have appeared
upon people in Japan and other places. *Ave* the earthworm!

It is my method not to try to solve problems—so far as the
solubility-insolubility of problems permits—in whatever narrow
specializations of thought I find them stated: but, if, for instance, I
come upon a mystery that the spiritualists have taken over, to have an
eye for data that may have bearing, from chemical, zoological,
meteorological, sociological, or entomological sources—being unable to
fail, of course, because the analogue of anything electrical, or
planetary, is findable in biological, ethical, or political phenomena.
We shall travel far, even to unborn infants, to make hailstones
reasonable.

I have so many heresies—along with my almost incredible credulities—or
pseudo-credulities, seeing that I have freed my mind of beliefs—that,
mostly, I cannot trace my infidelities, or enlightenments, back to their
sources. But I do remember when first I doubted the denial by
conventional science of the existence of prenatal markings. I read Dr.
Weismann's book upon this subject, and his arguments against the
possibility of pre-natal markings convinced me that they are quite
possible. And this conversion cost me something. Before reading Dr.
Weismann, I had felt superior to

<span id="page_964">p. 964</span>

peasants, or the "man in the street," as philosophers call him, whose
belief is that pregnant women, if frightened, mark their offsprings with
representations of rats, spiders, or whatever; or, if having a longing
for strawberries, fruitfully illustrate their progeny, and were at one
time of much service to melodrama. I don't know about the rats and the
strawberries, but Dr. Weismann told of such cases as that of a woman
with a remarkable and distinctive disfigurement of an ear, and of her
similarly marked offspring. His argument was that thousands of women are
disfigured in various ways, and that thousands of offsprings are
disfigured, and that it is not strange that in one case the
disfigurement of an offspring should correspond to the disfigurement of
a parent. But so he argued about other remarkable cases, and left me in
a state of mind that has often repeated: and that is with the idea that
much mental development is in rising down to the peasants again.

If there can be pre-natal markings of bodies, and, as I interpret Dr.
Weismann's denials, there can be, and, if they be of mental origin, my
mind is open to the idea that other—and still more profoundly damned
stories of strange markings—may be similarly explained. If a
conventional physician is scornful, hearing of a human infant,
pre-natally marked, I'd like to hear his opinion of a story that I take
from the *London Daily Express*, May 14, 1921. Kitten, born at Nice,
France—white belly distinctly marked with the gray figures, *1921*—the
mother cat had probably been looking intently at something, such as a
[calendar](errata.htm#4), so dated. "Or reading a newspaper?" said
scornful doctor would ask, pointing out that, if I think there are
talking dogs, it is only a small "extension," as I'd call it, to think
of educated cats keeping themselves informed upon current events.

London *Sunday News*, Aug. 3, 1926—"Dorothy Parrot, 4-year-old child of
R. S. Parrot, of Winget Mill, Georgia, was marked by a red spot on her
body. Out of this spot formed three letters, *R. I. C.* Doctors cannot
explain."

*London Daily Express*, Nov. 17, 1913—phenomena of a girl, aged 12, of
the village of Bussus-Bus-Suel, near Abbeville, France. If asked
questions, answers appeared in letterings on her arms, legs,

<span id="page_965">p. 965</span>

and shoulders. Also upon her body appeared pictures, such as of a
ladder, a dog, a horse.

In September, 1926, a Rumanian girl, Eleonore Zegun, was taken to
London, for observation by the National Laboratory for Psychical
Research. Countess Wassilko-Serecki, who had taken the girl to London,
said, in an interview (London *Evening Standard*, Oct. 1, 1926), that
she had seen the word *Dracu* form upon the girl's arm. This word is the
Rumanian word for the Devil.

Or the *Handwriting on the Wall*—and why don't I come out frankly in
favor of all, or anyway a goodly number of, the yarns, or the data, of
the Bible? *The Defender of Some of the Faith* is clearly becoming my
title.

In recent years I have noted much that has impressed upon my mind the
thought that religionists have taken over many phenomena, as exclusively
their own—have colored and discredited with their emotional
explanations—but that someday some of these occurrences will be rescued
from theological interpretations and exploitations, and will be the
subject-matter of—

New enlightenments and new dogmas, new progresses, delusions, freedoms,
and tyrannies.

I incline to the acceptance of many stories of miracles, but think that
these miracles would have occurred, if this earth had been inhabited by
atheists.

To me, the Bible is folklore, and therefore is not pure fantasy, but
comprises much that will be rehabilitated. But also to me the Bible is
non-existent. This is in the sense that, except in my earlier writings,
I have drawn a dead-line, for data, at the year 1800. I may, upon rare
occasions, dip farther back, but my notes start in the year 1800. I
shall probably raise this limit to 1850, or maybe 1900. I take for a
principle that our concern is not in marvels. It is in repetitions, or
sometimes in almost the commonplace. There is no desirability in going
back to antiquity for data, because, unless phenomena be appearing now,
they are of only historical interest. At present, there is too much
history.

Handwritings on walls—I have several accounts: but, if anybody should be
interested enough to look up this phenomenon for himself, he will find
the most nearly acceptable record in the

<span id="page_966">p. 966</span>

case of Esther Cox, of Amherst, Nova Scotia. This case was of wide
notoriety, and, of it, it could be said that it was well-investigated,
if it can be supposed that there ever has been a case of anything that
has been more than glanced at, or more than painstakingly and profoundly
studied, simply to confirm somebody's theory.

If I should tell of a woman, who, by mental picturings, not only marked
the body of her unborn infant, but transformed herself into the
appearance of a tiger, or a lamppost, or became a weretiger, or a
werelamppost—or of a magician, who, beginning with depicting forest
scenes on window glass, had learned to transform himself into a
weredeer, or a weretree—I'd tell of a kind of sorcery that used to be of
somewhat common occurrence.

I have a specimen. It is a Ceylon leaf insect. It is a wereleaf. The
leaf insect's likeness to a leaf is too strikingly detailed to permit
any explanation of accidental resemblance.

There are butterflies, which, with wings closed, look so much like dried
leaves that at a distance of a few feet they are indistinguishable from
dried leaves. There are tree hoppers with the appearance of thorns;
stick insects, cinder beetles, spiders that look like buds of flowers.
In all instances these are highly realistic portraitures, such as the
writer, who described the portrait of Dean Liddell, on the church wall,
would call the handiwork of a master artist.

There have been so many instances of this miracle that I now have a
theory that, of themselves, men never did evolve from lower animals: but
that, in early and plastic times, a human being from somewhere else
appeared upon this earth, and that many kinds of animals took him for a
model, and rudely and grotesquely imitated his appearance, so that,
today, though the gorillas of the Congo, and of Chicago, are only
caricatures, some of the rest of us are somewhat passable imitations of
human beings.

The conventional explanation of the leaf insect, for instance, is that
once upon a time a species of insects somewhat resembled leaves of
trees, and that the individuals that most closely approximated to this
appearance had the best chance to survive, and that in succeeding
generations, still higher approximations were still better protected
from their deceived enemies.

<span id="page_967">p. 967</span>

An intelligence from somewhere else, not well-acquainted with human
beings—or whatever we are—but knowing of the picture galleries of this
earth, might, in Darwinian terms, just as logically explain the origin
of those pictures—that canvases that were daubed on, without purpose,
appeared; and that the daubs that more clearly represented something
recognizable were protected, and that still higher approximations had a
still better chance, and that so appeared, finally, highly realistic
pictures, though the painters had been purposeless, and with no
consciousness of what they were doing

Which contrasts with anybody's experience with painters, who are not
only conscious of what they're doing, but are likely to make everybody
else conscious of what they're so conscious of.

It is not merely that hands of artists have painted pictures upon
canvas: it is that, upon canvas, artists have realized their imaginings.
But, without hands of artists, strikingly realistic pictures and
exquisite modelings have appeared. It may be that for crosses on
windowpanes, emblems on hailstones, faces on church walls, pre-natal
markings, the stigmata, telepathic transferences of pictures, and leaf
insects we shall conceive of one expression.

To the clergyman who told the story of the hailstones of Remiremont, the
most important circumstance was that, a few days before the occurrence,
the Town Council had forbidden a religious procession, and that, at the
time of the fall of the hailstones, there was much religious excitement
in Remiremont.

*English Mechanic*, 87-436—story told by Abbé Gueniot, of Remiremont:

That, upon the afternoon of the 26th of May, 1907, the Abbé was in his
library, aware of a hailstorm, but paying no attention to it, when a
woman of his household called to him to see the extraordinary hailstones
that were falling. She told him that images of "Our Lady of the
Treasures" were printed on them.

"In order to satisfy her, I glanced carelessly at the hailstones, which
she held in her hand. But, since I did not want to see anything, and
moreover could not do so, without my spectacles, I turned to go back to
my book. She urged: 'I beg of you to put on your glasses.' I did so, and
saw very distinctly on the front of the hailstones, which were slightly
convex in the center, although

<span id="page_968">p. 968</span>

the edges were somewhat worn, the bust of a woman, with a robe that was
turned up at the bottom, like a priest's cope. I should, perhaps,
describe it more exactly by saying that it was like the Virgin of the
Hermits. The outline of the images was slightly hollow, as if they had
been formed with a punch, but were very boldly drawn. Mlle. André asked
me to notice certain details of the costume, but I refused to look at it
any longer. I was ashamed of my credulity, feeling sure that the Blessed
Virgin would hardly concern herself with instantaneous photographs on
hailstones. I said: 'But do you not see that these hailstones have
fallen on vegetables, and received these impressions? Take them away:
they are no good to me.' I returned to my book, without giving further
thought to what had happened. But my mind was disturbed by the singular
formation of these hailstones. I picked up three in order to weigh them,
without looking closely. They weighed between six and seven ounces. One
of them was perfectly round, like balls with which children play, and
had a seam all around it, as though it had been cast in a mold."

Then the Abbé's conclusions:

"Savants, though you may try your hardest to explain these facts by
natural causes, you will not succeed." He thinks that the artillery of
heaven had been directed [against](errata.htm#5) the impious Town
Council. However people with cabbages suffered more than people with
impieties.

"What appeared most worthy of notice was that the hailstones, which
should have been precipitated to the ground, in accordance with the laws
of acceleration of falling bodies, appeared to have fallen from a height
of but a few yards." But other, or unmarked, hailstones, in this storm,
did considerable damage. The Abbé says that many persons had seen the
images. He collected the signatures of fifty persons who asserted that
they had been witnesses.

I notice several details. One is the matter of a hailstone with a seam
around it, as if it had been cast in a mold. This looks as if some
hoaxer, or pietist—who was all prepared, having prophetic knowledge that
an extraordinary shower of big hailstones was coming—had cast printed
lumps of ice in a mold. But accounts of big hailstones, ridged or
seamed, are common. Another detail is something

<span id="page_969">p. 969</span>

that I should say the Abbé Gueniot had never before heard of. The detail
of slow-falling objects is common in stories of occult occurrences, but,
though for more than ten years I have had an eye for such reports, in
reading of hundreds, or thousands, of hailstorms, I know of only half a
dozen records of slow-falling hailstones.

In the *English Mechanic*, 87-507, there is more upon this subject. It
is said that, according to the newspapers of Remiremont, these "prints"
were inside the hailstones, and were found on surfaces of hailstones
that had been split: that 107 persons had given testimony to the Bishop
of Sainte-Dié; and that several scientists, one of whom was M. de
Lapparent, the Secretary of the French Academy, had been consulted. The
opinion of M. de Lapparent was that lightning might have struck a medal
of the Virgin, and might have reproduced the image upon the hailstones.

I have never come upon any other supposition that there can be manifold
reproductions of images, or prints, by lightning. The stories of
lightning-pictures are mostly unsatisfactory, because most of them are
of alleged pictures of leaves of trees, and, when investigated, turn out
to be simply forked veinings, not very leaf-like. There is no other
record, findable by me, of hailstones said to be pictorially marked by
lightning, or by anything else. It would be much of coincidence, if, at
a time of religious excitement in Remiremont, lightning should make its
only known, or reported, pictures on hailstones, and make those pictures
religious emblems. But that the religious excitement did have much to do
with the religious pictures on hailstones, is thinkable by me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19](wild19)
