[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild15) 
[Next](wild17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_949">p. 949</span>

### 16

<span class="smallcaps">But</span> why this everlasting attempt to solve
something?—whereas it is our acceptance that, in a final sense, there
is, in phenomenal affairs, nothing—or that there is only the state of
something-nothing—so that all problems are only soluble-insoluble—or
that most of the social problems we have, today, were at one time
conceived of as solutions of preceding problems—or that every Moses
leads his people out of Egypt into perhaps a damn sight worse—Promised
Lands of watered milk and much-adulterated honey—so why these
everlasting attempts to solve something?

But to take surgical operations upon warders of Sing Sing Prison, and
the loss of rectitude by lace curtains, and the vanishing man of Berlin;
"Typhoid Mary," and a Chinese hair-clipper, and explosions of coal, and
bodies on benches in a Harlem Park—

Robert Browning's conception was to take three sounds, and make, not a
fourth, but a star.

Out of seven colors, not to lay on daubs, but to paint a picture. Out of
seven million Americans, Russians, Germans, Irishmen, Italians, and on,
so long as geography holds out, not to pile a population, but to
organize—more or less—into New York City.

Sulphur and lava in a barren plain, and a salty block of stone, shaped
roughly like a woman—signs of erosion on rocks far above water-level—a
meteor that had set a bush afire—the differences of languages of
peoples—and all the other elements that organized into *Genesis*.

Data of variations and heredity and adaptations; of multiplications and
of checks and of the doctrine of Malthus; of acquired characters and of
transmissions—and they organized into *The Origin of Species*—

Just as, once upon a time, minerals that had affinity for one another
came together and took on geometrical appearances. But a crystal is not
supposed to be either a prohibition or an

<span id="page_950">p. 950</span>

anti-prohibition argument. I know of a crystal of quartz that weighs
several hundred pounds. But it has not been mistaken for propaganda—

Or all theories—theological, scientific, philosophical—and that they
represent the same organizing process—but that self-conscious theorists,
instead of recognizing that thought-forms were appearing in their minds,
as in wider existence have appeared crystalline constructions, have
believed that it was immortal Truth that they were conceiving.

Oxygen and sulphur and carbon—

Or Emma Piggott and Ambrose Small and Rose Smith—

Or let's have just a little, minor expression, or organization, a small
composition, arranging the data of poltergeist girls. The elements of
this synthesis are moving objects, fires, girls in strange surroundings,
youth and the atavism of youth.

Case of Jennie Bramwell—she was an adopted daughter. The Antigonish girl
was an adopted daughter. See the Dagg case—adopted daughter. "Adoption"
is a good deal of a disguise for getting little girls to work for not
much more than nothing. It is not so much that so many poltergeist girls
have been housemaids and "adopted daughters," as that so many of them
have been not in their own homes; lost and helpless youngsters; under
hard taskmasters, in strange surroundings—

Or the first uncertain and precarious appearances of human beings upon
this earth—and a need for them, and a fostering, a nurturing, a
protection, far different from conditions in these swarming times, when
the need is for eliminations—

A lost child in primordial woods—and the value of her, which no genius,
king, or leveler of kings, has today—

That objects moved in her presence—fruits of trees that came down from
the trees and set themselves beside her—the shaking of bushes that cast,
to her, berries—then night and coldness—faggots, joining twigs, and
dancing around her—heaping—the crackling of flames to warm her—

Or that, to this day, grotesque capers of chairs, the antics of sofas,
and the seeming wantonness of flames are survivals of co-operations

<span id="page_951">p. 951</span>

that once upon a time moved even the trees, when a child was lost in a
forest.

The old mathematicians had this aesthetic appraisal of their thoughts:
they wrought theorems and calculi "for elegance," and were scornful of
uses. But virtually everything that they produced "for elegance" was put
to work by astronomers, navigators, surveyors. I assemble,
compositionally, what I call data: but I am much depressed, perhaps,
fearing that they have meaning outside themselves, or may be useful.

There is, upon this earth, today, at least one artist. Prof. Albert
Einstein put together, into what he called one organic whole, such a
diversity of elements as electro-magnetic waves and irregularities in
the motions of the planet Mercury; the fall of a stone from a train to
an embankment, the geometry of hyper-space, and accelerated co-ordinate
systems, and Lorentz transformations, and the displacements of stars
during eclipses—

And the exploitation of everything by something, or, more or less
remotely, by everything else—the need of astronomers for Einsteinism,
because it was so encouragingly unintelligible, whereas schoolboys were
beginning to pick Newtonism to pieces—and in the year 1918 it was
announced that the useful Einstein had predicted displacements of stars,
according to his theory, and that his predictions had been confirmed.

For purposes of renewed confirmation—or maybe in innocence of trying to
confirm anything, or at least not consciously intending to observe
whatever was wanted—an expedition was sent by Lick Observatory to report
upon the displacement of stars during the solar eclipse of October,
1922. The astronomers of this expedition agreed that the displacements
of stars confirmed Einstein, the Prophet. Einstein was said to be
useful, and, in California, school children, dressed in white, sang unto
him kindred unintelligibilities. In New York, mounted policemen roughly
held back crowds from him, just as he, to make his system of thoughts,
had clubbed many astronomical data into insensibility. He had taken into
his system of thoughts irregularities of the planet Mercury, but had
left out irregularities of the planet Venus. Crowds took him into their
holiday-making, but omitted asking what it was all about.

<span id="page_952">p. 952</span>

Upon June 12, 1931, Prof. Erwin Freundlicher reported to the Physics
Association of Berlin that, according to his observations, during the
eclipse of May 9, 1929, stars were not displaced, as, according to
Einstein, they should be—or that, outside itself, Einsteinism is
meaningless.

There was no excitement over this tragedy, or comedy, because this
earth's intellectuals, mostly, take notice only when they're told to
take notice; and to orthodoxy it seemed wisest that this earth's
thinkers should not think about this. Prof. Freundlicher's explained the
astronomers of the Lick expedition, quite as I explain all astronomers.
He gave his opinion that they had confirmed Einstein because "they had
left out of consideration observations that did not fit in with the
results that they wanted to obtain." If there be much more of such
agreements with me, I shall have to hunt me some new heresies. For an
account of Prof. Freundlicher's report, see the *New York Herald
Tribune*, June 14, 1931.

Outside itself Einsteinism has no meaning.

As a worthless thing—As an unrelated thing its state is that of which
artists have dreamed, in their quest for absoluteness—the dream of "art
for art's sake."

Up to Dec. 6, 1931, I thought of Prof. Einstein's theories as almost
alone, or as representing almost sublime worthlessness. But *New York
Times*, Dec. 6, 1931—scientists of the University of California,
experimenting upon an admixture of phosphorus in the food of swine, were
developing luminous pigs. "Just what they will be good for has not yet
been announced."

Mine is a dream of being not worth a displaced star to anybody. I
protest that with the elements of this book my only motive is
compositional—but comes the suspicion that I protest too much.

There has been a gathering of suggestions—that there are subtler "rays"
than anything that is known in radioactivity, and that they may be
developed into usefulness. The Ascot Cup and the Dublin jewels—and, if
they were switched away by a means of transportation now not commonly
known, a common knowledge may be developed to enormous advantage in
commercial and recreational and explorative transportations.

In the period of my writing of this book, Californian scientists

<span id="page_953">p. 953</span>

were trying to make pigs shine at night. Another scientist, who could
not yet announce much usefulness, was feeding skimmed milk to
huckleberries. For all I know one of us may revolutionize something or
another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17](wild17)
