[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild06) 
[Next](wild08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7

<span class="smallcaps">Rabid</span> vampires—and froth on their bloody
mouths. See the *New York Times*, Sept. 5, 1931—rabies in vampire bats,
reported from the island of Trinidad. Or a jungle at night—darkness and
dankness, tangle and murk—and little white streaks that are purities in
the dark—pure, white froths on the bloody mouths of flying bats—or that
there is nothing that is beautiful and white, aglow against tangle and
dark, that is not symbolized by froth on a vampire's mouth.

I note that it is ten minutes past nine in the morning. At ten minutes
past nine, tonight, if I think of this matter—and can reach a pencil,
without having to get up from my chair—though sometimes I can scrawl a
little with the burnt end of a match—I shall probably make a note to
strike out those rabid bats, with froth on their bloody mouths. I shall
be prim and austere, all played out, after my labors of the day, and
with my horse powers stabled for the night. My better self is ascendant
when my energy is low. The best literary standards are affronted by
those sensational bats.

I now have a theory that our existence, as a whole, is an organism that
is very old—a globular thing within a starry shell, afloat in a
super-existence in which there may be countless other organisms—and that
we, as cells in its composition, partake of, and are ruled by, its
permeating senility. The theologians have recognized that the ideal is
the imitation of God. If we be a part of such an organic thing, this
thing is God to us, as I am God to the cells that compose me. When I see
myself, and cats, and dogs losing irregularities of conduct, and
approaching the irreproachable, with advancing age, I see that what is
ennobling us

<span id="page_878">p. 878</span>

is senility. I conclude that the virtues, the austerities, the
proprieties are ideal in our existence, because they are imitations of
the state of a whole existence, which is very old, good, and beyond
reproach. The ideal state is meekness, or humility, or the semi-invalid
state of the old. Year after year I am becoming nobler and nobler. If I
can live to be decrepit enough, I shall be a saint.

It may be that there are vampires other than vampire bats. I have
wondered at the specialization of appetite in the traditional stories of
vampires. If blood be desired, why not the blood of cattle and sheep?
According to many stories there have been unexplained attacks upon human
beings; also there have been countless outrages upon other animals.

Possibly the remote ancestors of human beings were apes, though no
evolutionist has made clear to me reasons for doubting the equally
plausible theory that apes have either ascended, or descended, from
humans. Still, I think that humans may have evolved from apes, because
the simians openly imitate humans, as if conscious of a higher state,
whereas the humans who act like apes are likely to deny it when
criticized. Slashers and rippers of cattle may be throw-backs to the
ape-era. But, though it is said that, in the Kenya Colony, Africa,
baboons sometimes mutilate cattle, I'd not say that the case against
them has been made out. *London Daily Mail*, May 18, 1925—that, for some
years, an alarming epidemic of sheep-slashing and cattle-ripping had
been breaking out, in the month of April, on Kenya stock ranches.
Natives were blamed, but then it was learned that their cattle, too, had
been attacked. Then it was said to be proved that chacma baboons were
the marauders. Possibly the baboons, too, were unjustly blamed. Then
what? The wounds were long, deep cuts, as if vicious slashes with a
knife; but it was explained that baboons kill by ripping with their
thumbnails.

The most widely known case of cattle-mutilation is that in which was
involved a young lawyer, George Edalji, son of a Hindu, who was a
clergyman in the village of Wyrley, Staffordshire, England. The first of
a series of outrages occurred upon the night of Feb. 2, 1903. A valuable
horse was ripped. Then, at intervals, up to August 27th, there were
mutilations of horses, cows, and sheep.

<span id="page_879">p. 879</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Suspicion was
directed to Edalji, because of anonymous letters, accusing him.

After the mutilation of a horse, August 27th, Edalji was arrested. The
police searched his house, and, according to them, found an old coat,
upon which were bloodstains. In the presence of Edalji's parents and his
sister, the police said that there were horse hairs upon this coat. The
coat was taken to the police station, where Dr. Butler, the police
surgeon, examined it, reporting that upon it he had found twenty-nine
horse hairs. The police said that shoes worn by Edalji exactly fitted
tracks in the field, where the horse had been mutilated. They learned
that the young man had been away from home, that night, "taking a walk,"
as told by him. The case against Edalji convinced a jury, which found
him guilty, and he was sentenced to seven years, penal servitude.

I now have a theory that our existence is a phantom—that it died, long
ago, probably of old age—that the thing is a ghost. So the unreality of
its composition—its phantom justice and make-believe juries and
incredible judges. There seems to be a ghostly justice surviving in the
old spook, having the ghost's liking for public appearances, at times.
Let there be publicity enough, and Justice prevails. In a Dreyfus case,
when the attention of the world is attracted, Justice, after much delay,
and after a fashion, appears. Probably in the prison with Edalji were
other prisoners who had been sent there, about as he had been sent. They
stayed there. But Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, with much publicity, took up
Edalji's case. In his account, in *Great Stories of Real Life*, Doyle
says that when the police inspector found the old coat, upon which,
according to him, there were horse hairs, Mrs. Edalji and Miss Edalji
examined it and denied that there was a horse hair upon it: that
Edalji's father said: "You can take the coat. I am satisfied that there
is no horse hair on it." Doyle's statements imply that somewhere near
the police station was a stable. As to the statement that Edalji's shoes
exactly fitted tracks in the field, where the horse was ripped, Doyle
says that the outrage occurred just outside a large colliery, and that
hundreds of excited miners had swarmed over the place, making it
impossible to pick out any one track. Because of Doyle's disclosures—so
it is said—or because of the publicity,

<span id="page_880">p. 880</span>

the Government appointed a Committee to investigate, and the report of
this Committee was that Edalji had been wrongfully convicted.

Sometimes slashers of cattle have been caught, and, when called upon to
explain, have said that they had obeyed an "irresistible impulse." The
better-educated of these unresisting ones transform the rude word
"slasher" into "vivisectionist," and, instead of sneaking into fields at
night, work at regular hours, in their laboratories. There are persons
who wonder at the state of mind of the people in general, back in times
when the torture of humans was sanctioned. The guts of a man were
dragged out for the glory of God. "Abdominal exploration" of a dog is
for the glory of Science. The state of mind that was, and the state of
mind that is, are about the same, and the unpleasant features of
anything are glossed over, so long as mainly anything is glorious.

According to a reconsideration, by the English Government, in the Edalji
case, the slasher of cattle, of Wyrley, remained uncaught. In the summer
of 1907, in the same region, again there was slashing.

Aug. 22, 1907—a horse mutilated, near Wyrley. It was said that blood had
been found on the horns of a cow, and that the horse had been gored.
Five nights later, two horses, in another field, were slashed so that
they died. September 8—horse slashed, at Breenwood, Staffordshire. A
young butcher, named Morgan, was accused, but he was able to show that
he had been in his home, at the time. For about a month injuries to
horses continued to be reported. They had been injured "by barbed
wires," or "by nails projecting from fences."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8](wild08)
