[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild11) 
[Next](wild13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12

<span class="smallcaps">From</span> the story of J. Temple Thurston, I
pick up that this man, with his clothes on, was so scorched as to bring
on death by heart failure, by a fire that did not affect his clothes.
This body was fully clothed, when found, about three o'clock in the
morning. Thurston had not been sitting up, drinking. There was no
suggestion that he had been reading. It was commented upon, at the
inquest, as queer, that he should have been up and fully clothed about
three o'clock in the morning. The verdict, at the inquest, was of death
from heart failure, due to inhaling smoke. The scorches were large red
patches on the thighs and lower parts of the legs. It was much as if,
bound to a stake, the man had stood in a fire that had not mounted high.

In this burning house, nothing was afire in Thurston's room. Nothing was
found—such as charred fragments of nightclothes—to suggest that, about
three o'clock, Thurston, awakened by a fire elsewhere in the house, had
gone from his room, and had been burned, and had returned to his room,
where he had dressed, but had then been overcome.

It may be that he had died hours before the house was afire.

It has seemed to me most fitting to regard all accounts in this book, as
"stories." There has been a permeation of the fantastic, or whatever we
think we mean by "untrueness." Our stories have not

<span id="page_913">p. 913</span>

been realistic. And there is something about the story of J. Temple
Thurston that, to me, gives it the look of a revised story. It is as if,
in an imagined scene, an author had killed off a character by burning,
and then, thinking it over, as some writers do, had noted
inconsistencies, such as a burned body, and no mention of a fire
anywhere in the house—so then, as an afterthought, the fire in the
house—but, still, such an amateurish negligence in the authorship of
this story, that the fire was not explained.

To the firemen, this fire in the house was as unaccountable as, to the
coroner, was the burned body in the unscorched clothes. When the firemen
broke into Hawley Manor, they found the fire raging outside Thurston's
room. It was near no fireplace; near no electric wires that might have
crossed. There was no odor of paraffin, nor was there anything else
suggestive of arson, or of ordinary arson. There had been no robbery. In
Thurston's pockets were money and his watch. The fire, of unknown
origin, seemed directed upon Thurston's room, as if to destroy, clothes
and all, this burned body in the unscorched clothes. Outside, the door
of this room was blazing, when the firemen arrived.

We have had other stories of unaccountable injuries. According to them,
men and women have been stabbed, but have not known until later that
they were wounded. There was no evidence to indicate that Thurston knew
of his scorched condition, tried to escape, or called for help.

There are stories of persons who have been found dead, with bullet
wounds, under clothing that showed no sign of the passage of bullets.
The police-explanation has been of persons who were killed, while
undressed, and were then dressed by the murderers. *New York Times*,
July I, 1872—mysterious murder, at Bridgeport, Conn., of Capt.
Colvocoresses—shot through the heart—clothes not perforated. *Brooklyn
Eagle*, July 8, 1891—Carl Gros found dead, near Maspeth, L. I.—no marks
in the clothes to correspond with wounds in the body. Man found dead in
Paris, Feb. 14, 1912—bullet wound—no sign of bullet passing through
clothes.

I have come upon so many stories of showers of stones that have entered
closed rooms, leaving no sign of entrance in either ceilings or walls,
that I have not much sense of strangeness in the idea that

<span id="page_914">p. 914</span>

bullets, or a knife, could pierce a body, under uncut clothes. There are
stories of bullets that have entered closed rooms, without disturbing
the materials of walls or ceilings.

Dispatch, dated March 3, 1929, to the *San Francisco Chronicle*—clipping
sent to me by Miriam Allen de Ford, of San Francisco—"Newton, N. J.—The
county prosecutor's office here is baffled by the greatest mystery in
its history. For days a rain of buckshot, at intervals, has been falling
in the office of the Newton garage, a small room, with one door and one
window. There are no marks on the walls or ceiling, and there are no
holes in the room, through which the shot could enter."

About two years later, being not very speedy in getting around to this,
I wrote to the County Prosecutor, at Newton, and received a reply,
signed by Mr. George R. Vaughan—"This occurrence turned out to be a
hoax, perpetrated by some local jokesters."

There is a story, in the *Charleston* (S. C.) *News and Courier*, Nov.
12, 1886, not of bullets falling in a closed room, but, nevertheless, of
unaccountable bullets—two men in a field, near Walterboro, Colleton Co.,
S. C.—small shot falling around them. They thought that it was a
discharge from a sportsman's gun, but the rain of lead continued. They
gathered specimens, which they took to the office of the Colleton Press.

*Religio-Philosophical Journal*, March 6, 1880—copying from the
*Cincinnati Inquirer*—that, at Lebanon, Ohio, people of the town were in
a state of excitement: that showers of birdshot were falling from the
ceiling of John W. Lingo's hardware store. A committee had been
appointed, and according to its report, the phenomenon was veritable:
slow-falling volleys of shot, not of the size of any sold in the store,
were appearing from no detectable point of origin. There was another
circumstance, and it may have had much to do with the phenomenon: about
five years before, somebody, at night, had entered this store, and had
been shot by Lingo, escaping without being identified.

In the R. P. J., April 24, 1880, a correspondent, J. H. Marshall, wrote,
after having read of the Lingo case, of experiences of his, in the
summer of 1867. Bullets fell in every room in his house, forcefully, but
not with gunshot velocity—large birdshot—broad daylight—

<span id="page_915">p. 915</span>

short intervals, and then falls that lasted an hour or more. Many
bullets appeared, but when Marshall undertook to gather them, he could
never find more than half a dozen. About the same time raps were heard.

How bullets could enter closed rooms is no more mysterious than is the
howness of Houdini's escape from prison cells, though, according to all
that was supposed to be known of physical confinements, that was
impossible. In Russia, Houdini made, from a prison van, an escape that
involved no expert knowledge, nor dexterity, in matters of locks. He was
put into this van, and the door was soldered. He appeared outside, and
the police called it an unfair contest, because, so to pass through
solid walls, he must have been a spirit. Anyway, this story is told by
Will Goldston, President of the Magicians’ Club (London).

I have a story of a horse that appeared in what would, to any ordinary
horse, be a closed room. It makes one nervous, maybe. One glances
around, and would at least not be incredulous, seeing almost any damned
thing, sitting in a chair, staring at one. I'd like to have readers, who
consider themselves superior to such notions, note whether they can
resist just a glance. The story of the horse was told in the *London
Daily Mail*, May 28, 1906. If anyone wants to argue that it is all
fantasy and lies, I think, myself, that it is more comfortable so to
argue. One morning, in May, 1906, at Furnace Mill, Lambhurst, Kent,
England, the miller, J. C. Playfair, went to his stable, and found
horses turned around in their stalls, and one of them missing. It is
common for one who has lost something, to search in all reasonable
places, and then, in desperation, to look into places where not at all
reasonably could the missing thing be. Adjoining the stable, was a hay
room: the doorway was barely wide enough for a man to enter. Mr.
Playfair, unable to find a trace of his missing horse, went to the hay
room doorway, probably feeling as irrational as would somebody, who had
lost an elephant, peering into a kitchen closet. The horse was in the
hay room. A partition had to be knocked down to get him out.

There were other occurrences that could not be. Heavy barrels of lime,
with nobody perceptibly near them, were hurled down the stairs. This was
in the daytime. Though occasionally I do go slinking

<span id="page_916">p. 916</span>

about, at night, with our data, mostly ours are sunlight mysteries. The
mill was an isolated building, and nobody—at least nobody seeable—could
approach it unseen. There were two watchdogs. A large water butt, so
heavy that to move it was beyond human strength, was overthrown. Locked
and bolted doors opened. I mention that the miller had a young son.

About the middle of March, 1901—that a woman was stabbed to death, in a
fiction—or in a scene like an imagined scene that did not belong to what
we call "reality." The look of the story of Lavinia Farrar is that it,
too, was "revised," and by an amateurish, or negligent, or in some
unknown way hampered, "author," who, in an attempt to cover up his
crime, bungled—or that this woman had been killed inexplicably, in
commonplace terms, and that, later, means were taken, but awkwardly, or
almost blindly, and only by way of increasing the mystery, to make the
murder seem understandable in terms of common human experience.

*Cambridge* (England) *Daily News*, March 16, 1901—that Lavinia Farrar,
aged 72, a blind woman, "of independent means," had been found dead on
her kitchen floor, face bruised, nose broken. Near the body was a
blood-stained knife, and there were drops of blood on the floor. The
body was dressed, and, until the post-mortem examination, no wound to
account for the death was seen. At the inquest, two doctors testified
that the woman had been stabbed to the heart, but that there was no
puncture in her garments of which there were four. The woman, undressed,
could not have stabbed herself, and then have dressed, because death had
come to her almost instantly. A knife could not have been inserted
through openings in the garments, because their fastenings were along
lines far apart.

A knife was on the floor, and blood was on the floor. But it seemed that
this blood had not come from the woman's wound. This wound was almost
bloodless. Only one of her garments, the innermost, was blood-stained,
and only slightly. There had been no robbery. The jury returned an open
verdict.

Upon the evening of March 9, 1929—see the *New York Times*, March 10,
11, 1929—Isidor Fink, of 4 East 132nd Street, New York City, was ironing
something. He was the proprietor of the Fifth

<span id="page_917">p. 917</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Avenue Laundry. A
hot iron was on the gas stove. Because of the hold-ups that were of such
frequent occurrence at the time, he was afraid; the windows of his room
were closed, and the door was bolted.

A woman, who heard screams, and sounds as if of blows, but no sound of
shots, notified the police. Policeman Albert Kattenborn went to the
place, but was unable to get in. He lifted a boy through the transom.
The boy unbolted the door. On the floor lay Fink, two bullet wounds in
his chest, and one in his left wrist, which was powder-marked. He was
dead. There was money in his pockets, and the cash register had not been
touched. No weapon was found. The man had died instantly, or almost
instantly.

There was a theory that the murderer had crawled through the transom. A
hinge on this transom was broken, but there was no statement, as to the
look of this break, as indicating recency, or not. The transom was so
narrow that Policeman Kattenborn had to lift a boy through it. It would
have to be thought that, having sneaked noiselessly through this
transom, the murderer then, with much difficulty, left the room the same
way, instead of simply unbolting the door. It might be thought that the
murderer had climbed up, outside, and had fired through the transom. But
Fink's wrist was powder-burned, indicating that he had not been fired at
from a distance. More than two years later, Police Commissioner
Mulrooney, in a radio-talk, called this murder, in a closed room, an
"insoluble mystery."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13](wild13)
