[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild22) 
[Next](wild24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 23

<span class="smallcaps">Dead</span> men in a Harlem park—and houses are
torn by explosions, of unknown origin—the sneak of an invisible clipper
of hair—vampires and murder—theatrically a girl is stabbed, on a
staircase, in the presence of a large audience—the internal organs of a
woman are burned into unrecognizability—

And the stoutest opponents of witchcraft, one with persecutions, and the
other with denials, have been religion and science—

And more power to them, for it—

Except that witchcraft is appalling.

In our existence of the hyphen, the appalling can be only one view of a
state that combines the direst and the most desirable. Religion is
belief in a supreme being. Science is belief in a supreme
generalization. Essentially they are the same. Both are the suppressors
of witchcraft, and I shall take up these oppositions together. But, in a
state of realness-unrealness, there cannot be real opposition. In our
existence of the hyphen, what is called opposition is only one view of
the state of opposition-stimulation.

There is no way of judging anything, except by its manifestations. Just
as much as it has been light, religion has been darkness. Today it is
twilight. In the past it was mercy and charity and persecution and
bloody, maniacal, sadistic hatred—hymns from chapels and screams from
holy slaughterhouses—aspirations going up from this earth, with smoke
from burning bodies. I can say that from religion we have never had
opposition, because there never has been religion—that is that religion
never has existed, as apart from all other virtues and vices and
blessings and scourges—that, like all other alleged things, beings, or
institutions, religion never has, in a final sense, had identity. An
atheist, of zeal, may be thought of as religious. Or

<span id="page_1000">p. 1000</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I can take the
unmonistic view, and accept that there is, or used to be, religion, just
as, practically, I ignore that all things and beings of my daily
experiences are so bound up with one another that they have not
identities, and go about my daily affairs as if things and beings really
were entities.

*New York Sun*, March 26, 1910—eruption of Mt. Etna—people of Borelli
praying—the oncoming lava. The molten flood moved onward toward a
shrine. Here the praying ones concentrated. The lava reached the shrine,
and suddenly changed its course.

*New York Times*, July 27, 1931—"A revival of the ancient rain dance of
Northern Saskatchewan Indians, despite the ban by the government agents,
is reported to have occurred recently. Fields were parched and cattle
were suffering when Chief Buffalo Bow, head of the File Hills Reserve,
decided to invoke the Great Spirit. The forty-eight-hour dance, led by
six singers in relays, centered about a great tree, on the bark of which
a petition for aid had been carved. The Great Spirit seemed to answer,
for soon after the mystic rites had been performed, the rain began and
continued for two days, July 14 and 15, bringing relief all over
Saskatchewan."

If, according to the views of the majority of the inhabitants of this
earth, both Jehovah and the Great Spirit are myths, lava, if it would
not have changed its course anyway, and rain, if it would not have
fallen anyway, were influenced by witchcraft, if there be witchcraft. My
general situation is that of any mathematician. Consider any of his
theorems. The parallelogram of forces. In the textbooks, this
demonstration works out—if the incident forces be without
irregularities—if resistances be unchanging—if the body acted upon be
changeless—if the student has no awareness of the changes and the
irregularities that are everywhere.

In the London *Daily Chronicle*, July 7, 1924, was reported a case of an
English girl who had come back from Lourdes, cured, she thought. It is
not often that the doctors will have anything to do with one of these
cases; but it was arranged to investigate this case. At the Hospital of
St. John and St. Elizabeth, St. John's Wood, London, the girl was
examined by 50 doctors. She had gone, with a nurse, to Lourdes. The
nurse was questioned, and testified that the girl's hand had been
covered with sores, from blood poisoning, and

<span id="page_1001">p. 1001</span>

that she had been cured, at Lourdes. The diseased condition of the girl,
when she arrived in Lourdes, was certified by three doctors, of Lourdes.
The sores had disappeared, but some contraction of the hand remained.
The official decision of the 50 doctors, who were not of Lourdes, was:
"On the evidence submitted, the cure is not proven."

I should like to come upon a record of the opinions of 50 drivers of
hansom cabs, as to automobiles, when automobiles were new and uncertain,
but were of some slight menace to the incomes of hansom cabbies.

In the *New York World-Telegram*, July 24, 1931, there is a story of a
boy, who, at the Medical Center Hospital, New York, was cured of
paralysis by the touch of a bit of bone of St. Anne, taken to the
hospital from the Church of St. Anne, 110 East 12th Street, New York
City. The boy was the son of Hugh F. Gaffney, 348 East 18th Street, New
York City.

If, according to the views of the majority of the inhabitants of this
earth, there is no more divinity at Lourdes, or at 110 East 12th Street,
than anywhere else, there are reasons for thinking that it is witchcraft
that is practiced at these places.

The function of God is the focus. An intense mental state is impossible,
unless there be something, or the illusion of something, to center upon.
Given any other equally serviceable concentration-device, prayers are
unnecessary. I conceive of the magic of prayers. I conceive of the magic
of blasphemies. There is witchcraft in religion: there may be witchcraft
in atheism.

In the *New York Evening World*, Sept. 19, 1930, is an account of joy in
Naples: the shouts of crowds, and the ringing of church bells. In the
Cappella del Tesora Cathedral had been displayed the phial containing
the "blood of St. Januarius." It had boiled.

It is my notion that, if intenser than the faith in Naples, had been a
desire for a frustration of this miracle, the "blood of St. Januarius"
might have frozen.

Upon the 5th of March, 1931—see the *New York Herald Tribune*, March
6th-15,000 worshipers were kneeling, at a pontifical high mass, in the
Municipal Plaza, at San Antonio, Texas. Considering the intense
antagonism to Catholicism in Mexico, at this time, one

<span id="page_1002">p. 1002</span>

thinks of the presence of some of this feeling in San Antonio. From a
palm tree, the topmost tuft fell into the kneeling congregation. Six
persons were taken to the hospital.

My general expression is that some of the reported phenomena that are
called "miracles" probably have occurred, but have been arbitrarily
taken over by the religionists, though they are the exclusive properties
of priests no more than of traveling salesmen—that scientists have been
repelled by the reported phenomena, because of a fear of contamination
from priestcraft—but that any scientist who preaches the "ideals of
science," and also lets fear of contaminations influence him is as false
to his preachments as ever any priest has been.

See the *New York Herald Tribune*, Dec. 6, 1931—an account of the
opening, in Goa, Portuguese India, of the coffin of Saint Francis
Xavier.

"A special emissary, sent by Pope Pius XI, led the ceremonial
procession, in which marched three archbishops, fifteen bishops, and
hundreds of other members of the clergy. A throng of ten thousand
persons heard the papal mass and benediction, in the Church of Don
Jesus.

"The congregation passed before the coffin, and kissed the dead saint's
feet."

But there have been scientists, especially medical scientists, who, in
spite of contaminations, have not been held back from investigations.

In January, 1932, the New York newspapers told that many miracles had
been reported in Goa.

There is no opposition, as sheer, to witchcraft, by religionists. It is
competition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24](wild24)
