[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Fortean](../index) 
[ESP](../../psi/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wild05) 
[Next](wild07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P88AK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Wild Talents*, by Charles Fort, \[1933\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6

<span class="smallcaps">Conservatism</span> is our opposition. But I am
in considerable sympathy with conservatives. I am often lazy, myself.

It's evenings, when I'm somewhat played out, when I'm likely to be most
conservative. Everything that is highest and noblest in my composition
is most pronounced when I'm not good for much. I may be quite savage,
mornings: but, as my energy plays out, I become nobler and nobler, and
lazier, and conservativer. Most likely my last utterance will be a
platitude, if I've been dying long enough. If not, I shall probably
laugh.

I like to read my *Evening News*paper comfortably. And it is
uncomfortably that I come upon any new idea, or suggestion of the new,
in an *Evening News*paper. It's a botheration, and I don't understand
it, and it will cost me some thinking—oh, well, I'll clip it out,
anyway.

But where are the scissors? But they aren't. Has anybody a pin? Nobody
has. There was a time when one could maneuver over to the edge of a
carpet, without having to leave one's chair, and pull up a tack. But
everybody has rugs, nowadays. Oh, well, let it go.

Something in a newspaper about a mysterious hair-clipper. This is a new
department of data, though hair-stealing links with other mysterious
thefts. Where's a pin? Oh, well, there's nothing in particular about
this matter of hair-clipping. A petty thief stole hair to sell, of
course. Vague suggestions hanging over from reading of various phases of
"black magic"—but, if there is a market for human hair, hair-clippers
are accounted for—still—

And so I could go on, every now and then, for many years, feeling

<span id="page_871">p. 871</span>

a haunt of a new idea, but feeling more comfortable, if doing nothing
about it. But, daytimes, I go to Libraries, and, if several times, close
together, something that is new to me, in newspapers, attracts my
attention, I get the power somewhere to make a note of it.

These vague, new ideas that flutter momentarily in every mind—sometimes
they're as hard to catch as is the moment they flutter in. It's like
trying to pin a butterfly without catching it. They're gone. They can't
develop, because one doesn't, or can't, note them, and collect notes.
We'd all be somewhat enlightened—if that would be any good to us—were it
not for easy chairs. Where's a pin? Hereafter I'm going to have a pet
porcupine around the house. One can't learn much and also be
comfortable. One can't learn much and let anybody else be comfortable.

Two cases of hairdressers' windows broken, and women's switches stolen.
Probably to sell to other hairdressers.

I noted this, just as an oddity:

London *Daily Chronicle*, July 9, 1913—Paris—wealthy engineer, named
Leramgourg, arrested. "At Leramgourg's residence, the police found locks
of hair of 94 women."

I put this item with others upon freaks of collectors. In Oklahoma City,
July, 1907, somebody collected ears. Bodies of three men—ears cut off.
In April, 1913, a collector, who was known as *Jack the
Slipper-snatcher*, operated in the subways of New York City. Girl going
up the steps of a subway exit—one foot up from a step—the snatch of her
slipper—

The fantastic, or the amusing—but it is as close to the appalling as is
the beautiful to the hideous—

The murderer of the Conners child, in New York, in July, 1916, hacked
hair from his victim.

I have only two records of male victims of hair-clippers. I conceive
that once upon a time abundant whiskers were tempting. Where do
manufacturers of false whiskers get their material? Both of these
victims were children. There was a case of three gypsy women, who
waylaid a boy, aged eight, and cut off his hair. That they were gypsies
may be of occult suggestion, but this could be simply the theft of
something that could be sold.

<span id="page_872">p. 872</span>

A case is told of, in the *People* (London), Jan. 23, 1921. The
residents of Glenshamrock Farm, Anchenleck, Ayrshire, Scotland, awoke
one morning to find that during the night a burglar had made off with
various articles. There were screams from the bedroom of a young female
member of the household. Upon awakening, she had learned that her hair
had been cut off. I say that this case was told of—but a case of what?
And, in the *New York Sun*, March 7, 1928—a case of what? An old man had
entered the home of Angelo Nappi, 83½ Garside Street, Newark, N. J., and
had cut off the hair of his three little daughters.

Old age and youth—male and female—there is the haunt, in stories of
hair-clippers, of something that is not of hair-selling. If *Jack the
Slipper-snatcher* were in the second-hand business, he'd have maneuvered
girls into having both feet in the air.

I take a story from the Medium and Daybreak, Dec. 13, 1889. It was
copied from the *Brockville* (Ontario) *Daily Times*, November 13th.
There were doings in the home of George Dagg, a farmer, living in the
Township of Clarendon, Province of Quebec, Canada. With Dagg lived his
wife, two young children, and a little girl, aged i1, Dina McLean, who
had been adopted from an orphan asylum. The report from which I quote
was the result of investigations by Percy Woodcock. I know that that
sounds fictitious, but just the same Percy Woodcock was a well-known
painter. Also Mr. Woodcock was a spiritualist. It could be that he
colored as much on paper as on canvas.

The first of the "uncanny" occurrences—as they are so persistently
called by persons who do not realize how common they are—was upon
September 15th. Windowpanes broke. There were unaccountable fires—as
many as eight a day. Stones of unknown origin were thrown. A large stone
struck one of the children, and "strange to say, it did not hurt her in
the least"

And I give my opinion that, in comments upon my writings, my madness has
been over-emphasized. Of course I couldn't pass any alienist's
examination—but could any alienist? But when I come upon a detail like
this of stones striking people harmlessly, in an Ontario newspaper, and
have noted the same detail in a story in a Constantinople newspaper, and
have come upon it in newspapers

<span id="page_873">p. 873</span>

of Adelaide, South Australia, and Cornwall, England, and other
places—and when I note that it is no standardized detail of ghost
stories, so that probably not one of the writers had ever heard of
anything of the kind before—I'd consider myself sane and reasonable in
giving heed to this, if there were sanity and reasonableness.

"One afternoon, little Dina felt her hair, which hung in a long braid
down her back, suddenly pulled, and, on crying out, the family found her
braid almost cut off, simply hanging by a few hairs. On the same day,
the little boy said that something had pulled his hair all over.
Immediately it was seen by his mother that his hair, also, had been cut
off, in chunks, as it were, all over his head."

Woodcock told of a voice that was heard. This is an element that does
not appear in the great majority of cases of poltergeist disturbances.
His story is of conversations that were carried on between him and an
invisible being. There was a feud between the Daggs and neighbors named
Wallace; and "the voice" accused Mrs. Wallace of having sent him, or
her, or it, or whatever, to persecute the Daggs. Most of the time, the
house was crowded. When this accusation was heard, a number of farmers
went to the home of the Wallaces, and returned with Mrs. Wallace. The
story is that "the voice" again accused Mrs. Wallace, but then made
statements that were so inconsistent that it was not believed. It was an
obscene voice, and Mr. Woodcock was shocked. He reasoned with it,
pointing out that there were farmeresses present. And "the voice" was
ashamed of itself. It repented. It sang a hymn and departed.

I take something from the *Religio-Philosophical Journal*, Oct. 4, 1873,
and following issues, as copied from the Durand (Wisconsin) Times, and
other newspapers. Home of Mr. Lynch, 14 miles from Menomonie,
Wisconsin—had moved from Indiana, a few years before, and was living
with a second wife and the four children of the first wife. She had died
shortly before he had moved. Lynch went to town one day, and returned
with a dress for his wife. Soon afterward, this dress was found in the
barn, slashed to shreds. Objects all over the house vanished. Lynch
bought another dress. This was found, in the barn, cut down to fit one
of the children. Eggs rose from tables, teacups leaped, and a pan of
soft soap wandered from room to room. One of the children, a boy, aged
six, was

<span id="page_874">p. 874</span>

thought to be playing tricks, because phenomena centered around him.
Nobody lambasted him until he confessed, but he was tied in a
chair—teacups as lively as ever.

There was the usual openness. No midnight mysteries of a haunted house.
Sightseers were arriving in such numbers that there was no room in the
house for them. Several hundred of them lounged outside, sitting on
fences or leaning against anything that would hold them up, ready for a
dash into the house, at any announcement of doings.

"One day one of the children, named Rena, was standing close to Mrs.
Lynch. Her hair was sheared off, close to her scalp, and vanished."

There have been single instances, and there have been hair-clipping
scares that were attributed to "mass psychology." Also I have noted
cases in which girls were accused of having cut off their own hair,
hoping to take up some newspaper space. My only reason for doubt is the
satisfactory endings of these accounts, with statements that the girls
had confessed.

There were accounts in the London newspapers, of Dec. 2 and 10, 1922, of
a scare in places east and west of London. In a street, in Uxbridge,
Middlesex, a woman found that her braid had been cut off. She had been
aware of no such operation, but remembered that, in a crowd, her hat had
been pushed over her eyes. According to the stories, women were
terrorized by "a vanishing man." "Disappeared as if by magic." It is an
*uncatchable* again, a defiant fellow, operating openly, as if confident
that he could not be caught. Note that these are not ghost stories. They
are stories of human beings, who seemed to have ghostly qualities, or
powers. Dorris Whiting, aged 17, approaching her home, in the village of
Orpington, saw a man, leaning on the gate. As she was passing him, he
grabbed her, and cut off her hair. The girl screamed, and her father and
brother ran to her. They searched, but the clipper was unfindable. A
maid, employed by Mrs. Glanfield, of Crofton Hall, Orpington, was
pounced upon by a man, who hacked off a handful of her hair. He
vanished. There was excitement in Orpington, at the end of a bus route.
A girl exclaimed that much of her hair had been cut off. Merely this
does not seem mysterious; it seems that a deft

<span id="page_875">p. 875</span>

fellow could have done this without being seen by the other passengers.
But other girls were saying whatever girls say when they discover that
their hair has been cut off. At Enfield, a girl named Brand, employed as
a typist, at the Constitutional Club, was near the club house, one
morning, about eight o'clock, when a man grabbed her and cut off her
hair. "No trace of him was found, though the search was taken up a
minute after the outrage."

I have noted occurrences in London, which look as if there was a desire,
not generally for hair, or for anybody's hair, but for the hair, and
then more hair, of one victim. See the *Kensington* (London) *Express*,
Aug. 23, 5907. Twice a girl's hair had been clipped. In a London street,
she felt a clip, the third time. The girl accused a man. He was arrested
and was arraigned at the Mansion House. Neither the girl nor anybody
else had seen him as a clipper, but he had "walked sharply away," and
when accused had run. Nothing was said of either scissors or hair in any
quantity found in his possession. The hair that had been cut off was not
found. But "there was some hair on his jacket," and he was found guilty
and was fined.

I have record of another case of "mass psychology." It is my expression
that the description "mass psychology" does partly apply to it, just as
would "horizontal ineptitude," or "metacarpal iridescence," or any other
idea, or combination of ideas, apply, to some degree, to anything. In an
existence of the hyphen, it is impossible to be altogether wrong—or
right. This is why it is so hard to learn anything. It is hard to
overcome that which cannot be altogether wrong with that which cannot be
altogether right. I look forward to the time when I shall refuse to
learn another thing, having accumulated errors enough.

In the *Spiritualist*, July 21, 1876, was published a story of "mass
excitement" in Nanking and other cities of China. Uncatchables, who
could not even be seen, were cutting off the pigtails of Chinamen, and
there was a panic. More of the story was told, but I preferred to take
accounts from a local newspaper. I give details, as I found them, in
various issues of the *North China Herald*, from May 20 to Sept. 16,
1876.

Panic in Nanking and other towns, and its spread to Shanghai—

<span id="page_876">p. 876</span>

people believed that invisibles were cutting off their pigtails. It was
said that, regard this [story](errata.htm#0) of the invisibles as one
would, there was no doubt that a number of pigtails had been cut off,
and that great alarm existed, in consequence. "Many Chinamen have lost
their tails, and we can hardly admit that the imaginary spirits are real
men with steel shears, for it could hardly happen that someone would not
be detected, before this, in the act of cutting. The most likely
explanation is that the agents, whoever they may be, operate by means of
some potent acid."

Panic spreading to Hangchow—"Numerous cases are reported, but few of
them are authentic." "The cases are increasing daily."

In the streets of Shanghai, men, fearing attacks behind, were holding
their pigtails in front of them. Quack doctors were advertising charms.
Probably the reputable physicians, devoted to their own incantations,
were indignant about this. The Military Commandant stationed soldiers in
various parts of the city. "Suffice it to mention that, amongst much
that is untrustworthy, there seem good grounds for believing that some
children have actually lost part of their tails."

Sellers of charms suspected of cutting off pigtails, to stimulate
business—mischievous children suspected—missionaries accused, and
anti-Christian placards appearing in public places—rumors of drops of
ink thrown in people's faces, "by invisible agencies," and people so
treated dying—inhabitants of Woosin and Soochow mad with terror—the
lynching of suspected persons—arrests and torture. People had suspended
work, and had organized into guards. At Soo-chow broke out "the crushing
mania," or a belief that at night people were crushed in their beds. The
beating of gongs was taken up so that the supply ran out, and anybody
who wanted a gong had to wait for one to be made.

The standardized way of telling of such a scare is to elaborate upon the
extremities at the climax of the excitement, and to ignore, or
slightingly to touch upon, the incidents that preceded. There was a
panic, or a mania, in China. Perhaps there was. I have no Chinaman's
account. For all I know, some Chinaman may have sent an account to his
newspaper, of us, beating gongs, during the parrot-disease scare, of the
year 1929, having seen a janitor knocking

<span id="page_877">p. 877</span>

off dust from the cover of an ash can. There was
[probably](errata.htm#1) considerable excitement that was the product of
delusions: nevertheless it does seem acceptable that there were cases of
mysterious hair-clipping.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7](wild07)
