[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr03)  [Next](wnr05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### WOMAN'S STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM

BEHIND all customs of whatever nature; behind all social unrest, behind
all movements, behind all revolutions, are great driving forces, which
in their action and reaction upon conditions, give character to
civilization. If, in seeking to discover the source of a custom, of a
movement or of a revolution, we stop at surface conditions, we shall
never discern more than a superficial aspect of the underlying truth.

This is the error into which the historian has almost universally
fallen. It is also a common error among sociologists. It is the fashion
nowadays, for instance, to explain all social unrest in terms of
economic conditions. This is a valuable working theory and has done much
to awaken men to their injustice toward one another, but it ignores the
forces *within* humanity which drive it to revolt. It is these forces,
rather than the conditions upon

{p. 10}

which they react, that are the important factors. Conditions change, but
the animating force goes on forever.

So, too, with woman's struggle for emancipation. Women in all lands and
all ages have instinctively desired family limitation. Usually this
desire has been laid to economic pressure. Frequently the pressure has
existed, but the driving force behind woman's aspiration *toward
freedom* has lain deeper. It has asserted itself among the rich and
among the poor, among the intelligent and the unintelligent. It has been
manifested in such horrors as infanticide, child abandonment and
abortion.

The only term sufficiently comprehensive to define this motive power of
woman's nature is the *feminine spirit*. That spirit manifests itself
most frequently in motherhood, but it is greater than maternity. Woman
herself, all that she is, all that she has ever been, all that she may
be, is but the outworking of this inner spiritual urge. Given free play,
this supreme law of her nature asserts itself in beneficent ways;
interfered with, it becomes destructive. Only when we understand this
can we comprehend

{p. 11}

the efforts of the feminine spirit to liberate itself.

When the outworking of this force within her is hampered by the bearing
and the care of too many children, woman rebels. Hence it is that, from
time immemorial, she has sought some form of family limitation. When she
has not employed such measures consciously, she has done so
instinctively. Mere laws, customs and religious restrictions do not
prevent, she has recourse to contraceptives. Otherwise, she resorts to
child abandonment, abortion and infanticide, or resigns herself
hopelessly to enforced maternity.

These violent means of freeing herself from the chains of her own
reproductivity have been most in evidence where economic conditions have
made the care of children even more of a burden than it would otherwise
have been. But, whether in the luxurious home of the Athenian, the
poverty-ridden dwelling of the Chinese, or the crude hut of the
primitive Australian savage, the woman whose development has been
interfered with by the bearing and rearing of children has tried
desperately,

{p. 12}

frantically, too often in vain, to take and hold her freedom.

Individual men have sometimes acquiesced in these violent measures, but
in the mass they have opposed. By law, by religious canons, by public
opinion, by penalties ranging all the way from ostracism to beheading,
they have sought to crush this effort. Neither threat of hell nor the
infliction of physical punishment has availed. Women have deceived and
dared, resisted and defied the power of church and state. Quietly,
desperately, consciously, they have marched to the gates of death to
gain the liberty which the feminine spirit has desired.

In savage life as well as in barbarism and civilization has woman's
instinctive urge to freedom and a wider development asserted itself in
an effort, successful or otherwise, to curtail her family.

"The custom of infanticide prevails or has prevailed," says Westermark
in his monumental work, *The Origin and Development of the Moral Idea*,
"not only in the savage world but among the semi-civilized and civilized
races."

{p. 13}

With the savage mother, family limitation ran largely to infanticide,
although that practice was frequently accompanied by abortion as a
tribal means. As McLennan says in his "Studies in Ancient History,"
infanticide was formerly very common among the savages of New Zealand,
and "it was generally perpetrated by the mother." He notes much the same
state of affairs among the primitive Australians, except that abortion
was also frequently employed.. In numerous North American Indian tribes,
he says, infanticide and abortion were not uncommon, and the Indians of
Central America were found by him "to have gone to extremes in the use
of abortives."

'When a traveller reproached the women of one of the South American
Indian tribes for the practice of infanticide, McLennan says he was met
by the retort, "Men have no business to meddle with women's affairs."

McLennan ventures the opinion that the practice of abortion so widely
noted among Indians in the Western Hemisphere, "must have supervened on
a practice of infanticide."

Similar practices have been found to prevail

{p. 14}

wherever historians have dug deep into the life of savage people.
Infanticide, at least, was practiced by African tribes, by the primitive
peoples of Japan, India and Western Europe, as well as in China, and in
early Greece and Rome. The ancient Hebrews are sometimes pointed out as
the one possible exception to this practice, because the Mosaic law, as
it has come down to us, is silent upon the subject. Westermark is of the
opinion that it "hardly occurred among the Hebrews in historic times.
But we have reason to believe that at an earlier period, among them, as
among other branches of the Semitic race, child murder was frequently
practiced as a sacrificial rite."

Westermark found that "the murder of female infants, whether by the
direct employment of homicidal means, or exposure to privation and
neglect, has for ages been a common practice or even a genuine custom
among various Hindu castes."

Still further light is shed upon the real sources of the practice, as
well as upon the improvement of the status of woman through the
practice, by an English student of conditions

{p. 15}

in India. Captain S. Charles MacPherson, of the Madras Army, in the
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1852, said: "I can here but
very briefly advert to the customs and feelings which the practice of
infanticide (among the Khonds of Orissa) alternately springs from and
produces. The influence and privileges of women are exceedingly great
among the Khonds, and are, I believe, greatest among the tribes which
practice infanticide. Their opinions have great weight in all public an
private affairs; their participation is often considered essential in
the former."

If infanticide did not spring from a desire within the woman herself,
from a desire stronger than motherhood, would it prevail where women
enjoy an influence equal to that of men? And does not the fact that the
women in question do enjoy such influence, point unmistakably to the
motive behind the practice?

Infanticide did not go out of fashion with the advance from savagery to
barbarism and civilization. Rather, it became, as in Greece and Rome, a
recognized custom with advocates among leaders of thought and action.
{p. 16} So did abortion, which some authorities regard as a development
springing from infanticide and tending to supersede it as a means of
getting rid of undesired children.

As progress is made toward civilization, infanticide, then, actually
increased. This tendency was noted by Westermark, who also calls
attention to the conclusions of Fison and Howitt (in Kamilaroi and
Kurnai). "Mr. Fison who has lived for a long time among uncivilized
races," says Westermark, "thinks it will be found that infanticide is
far less common among the lower savages than among the more advanced
tribes."

Following this same tendency into civilized countries, we find
infanticide either advocated by philosophers and authorized by law, as
in Greece and Rome, or widely practiced in spite of the law, civil and
ecclesiastical.

The status of infanticide as an established, legalized custom in Greece,
is well summed up by Westermark, who says: "The exposure of deformed or
sickly infants was undoubtedly an ancient custom in Greece; in Sparta,
at least, it was enjoined by law. It was also approved of by the most
enlightened among

{p. 17}

the Greek philosophers. Plato condemns all those children who are
imperfect in limbs as well as those who are born of depraved citizens."

Aristotle, who believed that the state should fix the number of children
each married pair should have, has this to say in *Politics*, Book, VII,
Chapter V:

"With respect to the exposing and nurturing of children, let it be a law
that nothing mutilated shall be nurtured. And in order to avoid having
too great a number of children, if it be not permitted by the laws of
the country to expose them, it is then requisite to define how many a
man may have; and if any have more than the prescribed number, some
means must be adopted that the fruit be destroyed in the womb of the
mother before sense and life are generated in it."

Aristotle was a conscious advocate of family limitation even if attained
by violent means. "It is necessary," he says, "to take care that the
increase of the people should not exceed a certain number in order to
avoid poverty and its concomitants, sedition and other evils."

In Athens, while the citizen wives were

{p. 18}

unable to throw off the restrictions of the laws which kept them at
home, the great number of *hetera*, or stranger women, were the glory of
the "Golden Age." The homes of these women who were free from the burden
of too many children became the gathering places of philosophers, poets,
sculptors and statesmen. The *hetera* were their companions, their
inspiration and their teachers. Aspasia, one of the greatest women of
antiquity, was such an emancipated individuality. True to the urge of
the feminine spirit, she, like Sappho, the poetess of Lesbia, sought to
arouse the Greek wives to the expression of their individual selves. One
writer says of her efforts: "This woman determined to do her utmost to
elevate her sex. The one method of culture open to women at that time
was poetry. There was no other form of literature, and accordingly she
systematically trained her pupils; to be poets, and to weave into the
verse the noblest maxims of the intellect and the deepest emotions of
the heart. Young pupils with richly endowed minds flocked to her from
all countries and formed a kind of Woman's College.

{p. 19}

"There can be no doubt that these young women were impelled to seek the
society of Sappho from disgust with the low drudgery and monotonous
routine to which woman's life was sacrificed, and they were anxious to
rise to something nobler and better."

Can there be any doubt that the unfortunate "citizen wives" of Athens,
bound by law to their homes envied the brilliant careers of the
"stranger women," and sought all possible means of freedom? And can
there be any doubt that they acquiesced in the practice of infanticide
as a means to that end? Otherwise, how could the custom of destroying
infants have been so thoroughly embedded in the jurisprudence, the
thought and the very core of Athenian civilization?

As to the Spartan women, Aristotle says that they ruled their husbands
and owned two-fifths of the land. Surely, had they not approved of
infanticide for some very strong reasons of their own, they would have
abolished it.

Athens and Sparta must be regarded as giving every strong indications
that the Grecian women not only approved of family limitation

{p. 20}

by the destruction of unwanted children, but that at least part of their
motive was personal freedom.

In Rome, an avowedly militaristic nation, living by conquest of weaker
states, all sound children were saved. But the weakly, or deformed were
drowned. Says Seneca: "We destroy monstrous births, and we also drown
our children if they are born weakly or unnaturally formed." Wives of
Romans, however, were relieved of much of the drudgery of child rearing
by the slaves which Rome took by the thousands and brought home. Thus
they were free to attain an advanced position and to become the advisors
of their husbands in politics, making and unmaking political careers.

When we come to look into the proverbial infanticide of the Chinese, we
find the same positive indications that it grew out of the instinctive
purpose of woman to free herself from the bondage of too great
reproductivity.

"In the poorest districts of China," says Westermark, "female infants
are often destroyed by their parents immediately after their birth,
chiefly on account of poverty. {p. 21} Though disapproved of by educated
Chinese, the practice is treated with forebearance or indifference by
the man of the people and is acquiesced in by the mandarins."

"When seriously appealed to on the subject," says the Rev. J. Doolittle
in *Social Life of the Chinese*, "though all deprecate it as contrary to
the dictates of reason and the instincts of nature, many are ready
boldly to apologize for it and declare it to be necessary, especially in
the families of the excessively poor."

Here again the wide prevalence of the custom. is the first and best
proof that women are driven by some great pressure within themselves to
accede to it. If further proof were necessary, it is afforded by the
testimony of Occidentals who have lived in China, that Chinese midwives
are extremely skillful in producing early abortion. Abortions are not
performed without the consent and usually only at the demand of the
woman.

In China, as in India, the religions of the country condemned, even as
they to-day condemn, infanticide. Both foreign and native governments
have sought to make an end of

{p. 22}

the custom. But in both countries it still prevails. Nor are these
Eastern countries substantially different from their Western neighbors.

The record of Western Europe is summarized by Oscar Helmuth Werner,
Ph.D., in his book, "*The Unmarried Mother in German Literature*."
"Infanticide," says Dr. Werner, "was the most common crime in Western
Europe from the Middle Ages down to the end of the Eighteenth Century."
This fact, of course, means that it was even more largely practiced by
the married than the unmarried, the married mothers being far greater in
number.

"Another problem which confronted the church," he says in another place,
"was the practice of exposure and killing of children by legal parents."
A sort of final word from Dr. Werner is this: "Infanticide by legal
parents has practically ceased in civilized countries, but abortion, its
substitute, has not."

How desperately woman desired freedom to develop herself as an
individual, apart from motherhood, is indicated by the fact that
infanticide was "the most common crime of

{p. 23}

Western Europe," in spite of the fact that some of the most terrible
punishments ever inflicted by law were meted out to those women who
sought this means of escape from the burden of unwanted children. Dr.
Werner shows that in Germany, for instance, in the year 1532, it was the
law that those guilty of infanticide were "to be buried alive or
impaled. In order to prevent desperation, however, they shall be drowned
if it is possible to get to a stream or river, in which they shall be
torn with glowing tongs beforehand."

Notwithstanding the fact that at one time in Germany, the punishment was
that of drowning in a sack containing a serpent, a cat and a dog--in
order that the utmost agony might be inflicted--one sovereign alone
condemned 20,000 women to death for infanticide, without noticeably
reducing the practice.

To-day, in spite of the huge numbers of abortions and the multiplication
of foundlings' homes and orphans' asylums, infanticide is still an
occasional crime in all countries. As to woman's share in the practice,
let us add this word from Havelock Ellis, taken from the

{p. 24}

chapter on "Morbid Psychic Phenomena" in his book, *Man and Woman*:

"Infanticide is the crime in which women stand out in the greatest
contrast to men; in Italy, for example, for every 100 men guilty of
infanticide, there are 477 women." And he remarks later that when a man
commits this crime, "he usually does it at the instance of some woman."

Infanticide tends to disappear as skill in producing abortions is
developed or knowledge of contraceptives is spread, and only then. One
authority, as will be seen in a later chapter, estimates the number of
abortions performed annually in the United States at 1,000,000, and
another believes that double that number are produced.

"Among the Hindus and Mohammedans, artificial abortion is extremely
common," says Westermark. "In Persia every illegitimate pregnancy ends
with abortion. In Turkey, both among the rich and the poor, even married
women very commonly procure abortion after they have given birth to two
children, one of which is a boy."

The nations mentioned are typical of the

{p. 25}

world, except those countries where information concerning
contraceptives has enabled women to limit their families without
recourse to operations.

It is apparent that nothing short of contraceptives can put an end to
the horrors of abortion and infanticide. The Roman Catholic church,
which has fought these practices from the beginning, has been unable to
check them; and no more powerful agency could have been brought into
play. It took that church, even in the days of its unlimited power, many
centuries to come to its present sweeping condemnation of abortion. The
severity of the condemnation depended upon the time at which the
development of the fœtus was interfered with. An illuminating resume of
the church's efforts in this direction is given by Dr. William Burke
Ryan in his authoritative and exhaustive study entitled "*Infanticide;
Its Law, Prevalence, Prevention and History*." Dr. Ryan says:
"Theologians of the church of Rome made a distinction between the
inanimate and the animate fœtus to which the soul is added by the
creation of God, and adopted the opinions of some of the old
philosophers,

{p. 26}

more particularly those of Aristotle, as to animation in the male and
female, but the canon law altogether negatived the doctrine of the
Stoics, for Innocent II condemned the following proposition:

"'It seems probable that the fœtus does not possess a rational soul as
long as it is in the womb, and only begins to possess it when born, and
consequently in no abortion is homicide committed.' Sextus V inflicted
severe penalties for the crime of abortion at any period; these were in
some degree mitigated by Gregory XIV, who, however, still held that
those producing the abortion of an animated fœtus should be subject to
them, viz., and excommunication reserved to the bishop and also an
'irregularity' reserved to the Pope himself for absolution."

To-day, the Roman church stands firmly upon the proposition that
"directly intended, artificial abortion must be regarded as wrongful
killing, as murder."\[\*\] But it required a long time for it to reach
that point, in the face of the demand for relief from large families.

\[\* Pastoral Medicine.\]

{p. 27}

As it was with the fight of the church against abortion, so it is with
the effort to prevent abortion in the United States to-day. All efforts
to stop the practice are futile. Apparently, the numbers of these
illegal operations are increasing from year to year. From year to year
more women will undergo the humiliation, the danger and the horror of
them, and the terrible record, begun with the infanticide of the
primitive peoples, will go on piling up its volume of human misery and
racial damage, until society awakens to the fact that a fundamental
remedy must be applied.

To apply such a remedy, society must recognize the terrible lesson
taught by the innumerable centuries of infanticide and fœticide. If
these abhorrent practices could have been ended by punishment and
suppression, they would have ceased long ago. But to continue
suppression and punishment, and let the matter rest there, is only to
miss the lesson--only to permit conditions to go from bad to worse.

What is that lesson? It is this: woman's desire for freedom is born of
the feminine

{p. 28}

spirit, which is the absolute, elemental, inner urge of womanhood. It is
the strongest force in her nature; it cannot be destroyed; it can merely
be diverted from its natural expression into violent and destructive
channels.

The chief obstacles to the normal expression of this force are undesired
pregnancy and the burden of unwanted children. These obstacles have
always been and always will be swept aside by a considerable proportion
of women. Driven by the irresistible force within them, they will always
seek wider freedom and greater self-development, regardless of the cost.
The sole question that society has to answer is, how shall women be
permitted to attain this end?

Are you horrified at the record set down in this chapter? It is well
that you should be. You cannot help society to apply the fundamental
remedy unless you know these facts and are conscious of their fullest
significance. Society, in dealing with the feminine spirit, has its
choice of clearly defined alternatives. It can continue to resort to
violence in an effort to enslave the elemental urge of womanhood, making
of woman a mere instrument of reproduction

{p. 29}

and punishing her when she revolts. Or, it can permit her to choose
whether she shall become a mother and how many children she will have.
It can go on trying to crush that which is uncrushable, or it can
recognize woman's claim to freedom, and cease to impose diverting and
destructive barriers. If we choose the latter course, we must not only
remove all restrictions upon the use of scientific contraceptives, but
we must legalize and encourage their use.

This problem comes home with peculiar force to the people of America. Do
we want the millions of abortions performed annually to be multiplied?
Do we want the precious, tender qualities of womanhood, so much needed
for our racial development, to perish in these sordid, abnormal
experiences? Or, do we wish to permit woman to find her way to
fundamental freedom through safe, unobjectionable, scientific means? We
have our choice. Upon our answer to these questions depends in a
tremendous degree the character and the capabilities of the future
American race.

{p. 30}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Material Of The New Race](wnr05)
