[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr00)  [Next](wnr02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

THE modern Woman Movement, like the modern Labour Movement, may be said
to have begun in the Eighteenth century. The Labour movement arose out
of the Industrial Revolution with its resultant tendency to
over-population, to unrestricted competition, to social misery and
disorder. The Woman movement appeared as an at first neglected
by-product of the French Revolution with its impulses of general human
expansion, of freedom and of equality.

Since then, as we know, these two movements have each had a great and
vigorous career which is still far from completed. On the whole they
have moved independently along separate lines, and have at times seemed
indeed almost hostile to each other. That has ceased to be the case. Of
recent years it has been seen not only that these two movements

{p. viii}

are not hostile, but that they may work together harmoniously for
similar ends.

One final step remained to be taken--it had to be realised not only that
the Labour movement could give the secret of success to the woman
movement by its method and organization, but that on the other hand,
woman held the secret without which labour is impotent to reach its
ends. Woman, by virtue of motherhood is the regulator of the birthrate,
the sacred disposer of human production. It is in the deliberate
restraint and measurement of human production that the fundamental
problems of the family, the nation, the whole brotherhood of mankind
find their solution. The health and longevity of the individual, the
economic welfare of the workers, the general level of culture of the
community, the possibility of abolishing from the world the desolating
scourge of war--all these like great human needs, depend, primarily and
fundamentally, on the wise limitation of the human output. It does not
certainly make them inevitable, but it renders them possible of
accomplishment; without it they have been clearly and repeatedly proved
to be impossible.

{p. ix}

These facts have long been known to the few who view the world
realistically. But it is not the few who rule the world. It is the
masses--the ignorant, emotional, volatile, superstitious masses--who
rule the world. It is they who choose the few supreme persons who manage
or mismanage the world's affairs. Even the most stupid of us must be
able to see how it is done now, for during recent years the whole
process has been displayed before us on the very largest scale.

The lesson has not been altogether in vain. It is furnishing a new
stimulus to those who are working for the increase of knowledge, and of
practical action based on knowledge, among the masses, the masses who
alone possess the power to change the force of the world for good or for
evil, and by growth in wisdom to raise the human race on to a higher
level.

That is why the little book by Margaret Sanger, whose right to speak
with authority on these matters we all recognize, cannot be too widely
read. To the few who think, though they may here and there differ on
points of detail, it is all as familiar as A. B. C. But to the millions
who rule the world it is not

{p. x}

familiar, and still less to the handful of superior persons whom the
masses elect to supreme positions. Therefore, let this book be read; let
it be read by every man and woman who can read. And the sooner it is not
only read but acted on, the better for the world.

HAVELOCK ELLIS.

{p. xi}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](wnr02.md)
