[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr18)  [Next](wnr20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVII

### PROGRESS WE HAVE MADE

THE silence of the centuries has been broken. The wrongs of woman and
the rights of woman have found voices. These voices differ from all
others that have been raised in woman's behalf. They are not the
individual protests of great feminine minds, nor the masculine remedies
for masculine oppression suggested by the stricken consciences of a few
men. Great voices are heard, both of women and of men, but intermingled
with them are millions of voices demanding freedom.

Let it be repeated that movements mothered by emancipated women are
often deceptive in character. The demand for suffrage, the agitation
against child labor, the regulation of working hours for women, the
insistence upon mothers' pensions are palliatives all. Yet as woman's
understanding develops and she learns to think at the urgence of her own
inner nature, rather than at the dictates of men

{p. 211}

she moves on from these palliatives to fundamental remedies. So at the
crest of the wave of woman's revolt comes the movement for voluntary
motherhood--not a separate, isolated movement, but the manifestation of
a cosmic force--the force that moves the wave itself.

The walls of the cloister have fallen before the cries of a rising
womanhood. The barriers of prurient puritanism are being demolished.
Free woman has torn the veil of indecency from the secrets of life to
reveal them in their power and their purity. Womanhood yet bound has
beheld and understood. A public whose thoughts and opinions had been
governed by men and by women engulfed in the old order has been shocked
awake.

Sneers and jests at birth control are giving way to a reverent
understanding of the needs of woman. They who to-day deny the right of a
woman to control her own body speak with the hardihood of invincible
ignorance or with the folly of those blind ones who in all ages have
opposed the light of progress. Few there are to insist openly that woman
remain a passive instrument of reproduction. The subject

{p. 212}

of birth control is being lifted out of the mire into which it was cast
by puritanism and given its proper place among the sciences and the
ideals of this generation. With this effort has come an illumination of
all other social problems. Society is beginning to give ear to the
promise of modern womanhood: "When you have ceased to chain me, I shall
by the virtue of a free motherhood remake the world."

It would be miraculous indeed if that victory which has been won, had
been gained without great toil, insufferable anguish and sacrifice such
as all persons experience when they dare to brave the conventions of the
dead past or blaze a trail for a new order.

But where the vision is clear, the faith deep, forces unseen rally to
assist and carry one over barriers which would otherwise have been
insurmountable. No part of this wave of woman's emancipation has won its
way without such vision and faith.

This is the one movement in which pioneering was unnecessary. The cry
for deliverance always goes up. It is its own pioneer. The facts have
always stared us in the face. No one who has worked among women can be

{p. 213}

ignorant of them. I remember that ever since I was a child, the idea of
large families associated itself with poverty in my mind. As I grew to
womanhood, and found myself working in hospitals and in the homes of the
rich and the poor, the association between the two ideas grew stronger.

In every home of the poor, women asked me the same question. As far back
as 1900, 1 began to inquire of my associates among the nurses what one
could tell these worried women who asked constantly: "What can I do?" It
is the voice of the elemental urge of woman--it has always been there;
and whether we have heeded it or neglected it, we have always beard it.
Out of this cry came the birth control movement.

Economic conditions have naturally made this elemental need more plain;
sometimes they have lent a more desperate voice to woman's cry for
freedom. Men and women have arisen since Knowlton and Robert Dale Owen,
to advocate the use of contraceptives, but aside from these two none has
come forward to separate it from other issues of *sex* freedom. But the
birth control movement as

{p. 214}

a movement for woman's *basic* freedom was born of that unceasing cry of
the socially repressed, spiritually stifled woman who is constantly
demanding: "What can I do to avoid more children?"

When it came time to arouse new public interest in birth control and
organize a movement, it was found expedient to employ direct and drastic
methods to awaken a slumbering public. The Woman Rebel, a monthly
magazine, was established to proclaim the gospel of revolt. When its
mission was accomplished and the words "birth control" were on their way
to be a symbol of woman's freedom in all civilized tongues, it went out
of existence.

The deceptive "obscenity law," invoked oftener to repress womanhood and
smother scientific knowledge than to restrain the distribution of verbal
and pictorial pornography, was deliberately challenged. This course had
two purposes. It challenged the constitutionality of the law and thereby
brought knowledge of contraceptives to hundreds of thousands of women.

The first general, organized effort reached in various ways to all parts
of the United

{p. 215}

States. Particular attention was paid to the mining districts of West
Virginia and Montana, the mill towns of New England and the cotton
districts of the Southern states. Men and. women from all these
districts welcomed the movement. They sent letters pledging their
loyalty and their active assistance. They participated directly and
indirectly in the protest, which awakened the country.

As time went on, the work was extended to various foreign elements of
the population, this being made possible by the enthusiastic cooperation
of workers who speak the foreign languages.

Leagues were formed to organize those who favored changing the laws.
Lectures were delivered throughout the United States. Articles were
written by eminent physicians, scientists, reformers and revolutionists.
Debates were arranged. Newspapers and magazines of all kinds, classes
and languages gave the subject of birth control serious attention,
taking one side or the other of the discussion that was aroused. New
books on the subject began to appear. Books by foreign authors were
reprinted and distributed in the United States. {p. 216} The Birth
Control Review, edited by voluntary effort and supported by a stock
company of women who make contributions instead of taking dividends, was
founded and continues its work.

After a year's study in foreign countries for the purpose of
supplementing the knowledge gained in my fourteen years as a nurse, I
came back to the United States determined to open a clinic. I had
decided that there could be no better way of demonstrating to the public
the necessity of birth control and the welcome it would receive than by
taking the knowledge of contraceptive methods directly to those who most
needed it.

A clinic was opened in Brooklyn. There 480 women received information
before the police closed the consulting rooms and arrested Ethel Byrne,
a registered nurse, Fania Mindell, a translator, and myself. The purpose
of this clinic was to demonstrate to the public the practicability and
the necessity of such institutions. All women who came seeking
information were workingmen's wives. All had children. No unmarried
girls came at all. Men came whose wives had nursing children

{p. 217}

and could not come. Women came from the farther parts of Long island,
from cities in Massachusetts and Connecticut and even more distant
places. Mothers brought their married daughters. Some whose ages were
from 25 to 35 looked fifty, but the clinic gave them new hope to face
the years ahead. These women invariably expressed their love for
children, but voiced a common plea for means to avoid others, in order
that they might give sufficient care to those already born. They wanted
them "to grow up decent."

For ten days the two rooms of this clinic were crowded to their utmost.
Then came the police. We were hauled. off to jail and eventually
convicted of a "crime."

Ethel Byrne instituted a hunger strike for eleven days, which attracted
attention throughout the nation. It brought to public notice the fact
that women were ready to die for the principle of voluntary motherhood.
So strong was the sentiment evoked that Governor Whitman pardoned Mrs.
Byrne.

No single act of self-sacrifice in the history of the birth-control
movement has done more to awaken the conscience of the public or to

218 WOMAN AND THE NEW RACE

arouse the courage of women, than did Ethel Byrne's deed of
uncompromising resentment at the outrage of jailing women who were
attempting to disseminate knowledge which would emancipate the
motherhood of America.

Courage like hers and like that of others who have undergone arrest and
imprisonment, or who night after night and day after day have faced
street crowds to speak or to sell literature--the faith and the untiring
labors of still others who have not come into public notice--have given
the movement its dauntless character and assure the final victory.

One dismal fact had become clear long before the Brownsville clinic was
opened. The medical profession as a whole had ignored the tragic cry of
womanhood for relief from forced maternity. The private practitioners,
one after another, shook their heads and replied: "It cannot be done. It
is against the law," and the same answer came from clinics and public
hospitals.

The decision of the New York State Court of Appeals has disposed of that
objection, however, though as yet few physicians have cared to make
public the fact that they take

{p. 219}

advantage of the decision. While the decision of the lower courts in my
own case was upheld, partly because I was a nurse and not a physician,
the court incidentally held that under the laws as they now stand in New
York, any physician has a right to impart information concerning
contraceptives to women as a measure for curing or preventing disease.
The United States Supreme Court threw out my appeal without
consideration of the merits of the case. Therefore, the decision of the
New York State Court of Appeals stands. And under that decision, a
physician has a right, and it is therefore his duty, to prescribe
contraceptives in such cases, at least, as those involving disease.

It is true that Section 1142 of the Penal Code of New York State does
not except the medical man, and does not allow him to instruct his
patient in birth control methods, even though she is suffering from
tuberculosis, syphilis, kidney disorders or heart disease. Without
looking farther, the physicians had let that section go at its face
value. No doctor had questioned either its purpose or its legal scope.
The medical profession was

{p. 220}

content to let this apparent limitation upon its rights stand, and it
remained for a woman to go to jail to demonstrate the fact that under
another section of the same code--1145--the physician had the vital
right just described.

It is safe to say that many physicians do not even yet know of their
legal rights in this matter.

But here is what the New York State Court of Appeals said on Janury
{*sic*} 8, 1918, in an opinion thus far unquestioned and which is the
law of the state:

"Secondly, by section 1145 of the Penal Law, physicians are excepted
from the provisions of this act under circumstances therein mentioned.
This section reads: 'An article or instrument, used or applied by
physicians lawfully practicing, or by their direction or prescription,
for the cure or prevention of disease, is not an article of indecent or
immoral nature or use, within this article. The supplying of such
articles to such physicians or by their direction or prescription, is
not an offense under this article."

{p. 221}

"This exception in behalf of physicians does not permit advertisements
regarding such matters, nor promiscuous advice to patients irrespective
of their condition, but it is broad enough to protect the physician who
in good faith gives such advice to a married help person to cure or
prevent disease. 'Disease,' by Webster's International Dictionary, is
defined to be, 'an alteration in the state of the body, or of some of
its organs, interrupting or disturbing the performance of the vital
functions, and causing or threatening pain and sickness; illness,
disorder.'

"The protection thus afforded the physician would also extend to the
druggist, or vendor, acting upon the physician's prescription or order."

Section 1142, which shamelessly classes contraceptive information with
abortion and things obscene, still stands, but under the decision of the
Court of Appeals, it is the law of New York State that physicians have
the right which they were seemingly denied. Such is probably the fact,
also, in many other states, for the so-called "obscenity" laws are
modelled more or less, after the same pattern. {p. 222} One of the chief
results of the Brownsville clinic was that of establishing for
physicians a right which they neglected to establish for themselves, but
which they are bound, in the very nature of things, to exercise to an
increasing degree. Similar tests by women in other states would
doubtless establish the right elsewhere in America.

We know of some thirty-five arrests of women and men who have dared
entrenched prejudice and the law to further the cause of birth control.
The persistent work in behalf of the movement, attended as it was by
danger of fines and jail sentences, seemed to puzzle the authorities.
Sometimes they dismissed the arrested persons, sometimes they fined
them, somtimes {*sic*} they imprisoned them. But the protests went on,
and through these self-sacrifices, word of the movement went constantly
to more and more people.

Each of these arrests brought added publicity. Each became a center of
local agitation. Each brought a part of the public, at least, face to
face with the issue between the women of America and this barbarous law.

Many thousands of letters have been

{p. 233}

answered and thousands of women have been given personal consultations.
Each letter and each consultation means another center of influence from
which the gospel of voluntary motherhood spreads.

Forced thus to the front, the problems of birth control and the right of
voluntary motherhood have been brought more and more to the attention of
medical students, nurses, midwives, physicians, scientists and
sociologists. A new literature, ranging all the way from discussion of
the means of preventing conception to the social, political, ethical,
moral and spiritual possibilities of birth control, is coming into
being. Women's cry for liberty is infusing itself into the thoughts and
the consciences and the aspirations of the intellectual leaders as well
into the idealism of society.

It is but a few years since it was said of The Woman Rebel that it was
"the first unveiled head raised in America." It is but a few years since
men as well as women trembled at the temerity of a public discussion in
which the subject of sex was mentioned.

But, measured in progress, it is a far cry

{p. 224}

from those days. The public has read of birth control on the first page
of its newspapers. It has discussed it in meetings and in clubs. It has
been a favorite topic of discussion at correct teas. The scientist is
giving it reverent and profound attention. Even the minister, seeking to
keep abreast of the times, proclaims it from the pulpit. And everywhere,
serious-minded women and men, those with the vision, with a
comprehension of present and future needs of society, are working to
bring this message to those who have not yet realized its immense and
regenerating import.

The American public, in a word, has been permeated with the message of
birth control. Its reaction to that message has been exceedingly
encouraging. People by the thousands have flocked to the meetings. Only
the official mind, serving ancient prejudices under the cloak of "law
and order," has been in opposition.

It is plain that puritanism is in the throes of a lingering death. If
anyone doubts it, let it be remembered that the same people who, a few
years ago, formed the official opinion of puritanism have so far
forsaken puritanism as

{p. 225}

to flood the country with millions of pamphlets discussing sex matters
and venereal disease. This literature was distributed by the United
States Government, by state governments, by the Y.M.C.A, the Y.W.C.A,
and by similar organizations. It treated the physiology of sex far more
definitely than has birth-control literature. This official educational
barrage was at once a splendid salute to the right of women and men to
know their own bodies and the last heavy firing in the main battle
against ignorance in the field of sex. What remains now is but to take
advantage of the victories.

What does it all mean? It means that American womanhood is blasting its
way through the débris of crumbling moral and religious systems toward
freedom. It means that woman has but to press on, more courageously,
more confidently, with her face set more firmly toward the goal.

{p. 226}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. The Goal](wnr20.md)
