[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr10)  [Next](wnr12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX

### CONTINENCE--IS IT PRACTICABLE OR DESIRABLE?

THOUSANDS of well-intentioned people who agree that there are times and
conditions under which it is woman's highest duty to avoid having
children advocate continence as the one permissible means of birth
control. Few of these people agree with one another, however, as to what
continence is. Some have in mind absolute continence. Others urge
continence for periods varying from a few weeks to many years. Still
others are thinking of Karezza, or male continence, as it is sometimes
called.

The majority of physicians and sex psychologists hold that the practice
of absolute continence is, for the greater part of the human race, an
absurdity. Were such continence to be practiced, there is no doubt that
it would be a most effective check upon the birth rate. It is seldom
practiced, however, and when adhered

{p. 102}

to under compulsion the usual result is injury to the nervous system and
to the general health. Among healthy persons, this method is practicable
only with those who have a degree of mentally controlled development as
yet neither often experienced nor even imagined by the mass of humanity.

Absolute continence was the ideal of the early Christian church for all
of its communicants, as shall be seen in another chapter. We shall also
see how the church abandoned this standard and now confines the doctrine
of celibacy to the unmarried, to the priesthood and the nuns.

Celibacy has been practiced in all ages by a few artists, propagandists
and revolutionists in order that their minds may be single to the work
which has claimed their lives and all the forces of their beings may be
bent in one direction. Sometimes, too, such persons have remained
celibate to avoid the burden of caring for a family.

The Rev. Dr. Thomas Robert Malthus, who in 1798 issued the first of
those works which exemplified what is called the Malthusian doctrine,
also advocated celibacy or absolute continence

{p. 103}

until middle age. Malthus propounded the now widely recognized principle
that population tends to increase faster than the food supply and that
unlimited reproduction brings poverty and many other evils upon a
nation. His theological training naturally inclined him to favor
continence--not so much from its practicability, perhaps, as because he
believed that it was the only possible method.

We would be ignoring a vital truth if we failed to recognize the fact
that there are individuals who through absorption in religious zeal,
consecration to a cause, or devotion to creative work are able to live
for years or for a lifetime a celibate existence. It is doubtless true
that the number of those who are thus able to transmute their sex forces
into other creative forms is increasing. It is not with these, however,
that we are concerned. Rather it is with the mass of humanity, who
practice continence under some sort of compulsion.

What is the result of forcing continence upon those who are not fitted
or do not desire to practice it? The majority opinion of medical science
and the evidence of statistics are

{p. 104}

united on this point. Enforced continence is injurious--often highly so.

"Physiology," writes Dr. J. Rutgers in *Rassenverbesserung*, "teaches
that every function gains in power and efficiency through a certain
degree of control, but that the too extended suppression of a desire
gives rise to pathological disturbances and in time cripples the
function. Especially in the case of women may the damage entailed by too
long continued sexual abstinence bring about deep disturbances."

All this, be it understood, refers to persons of mature age. For young
men and women under certain ages, statistics and the preponderance of
medical opinion agree that continence is highly advisable, in many cases
seemingly altogether necessary to future happiness. The famous Dr.
Bertillon, of France, inventor of the Bertillon system of measurements
for the human body, has made, perhaps, the most exhaustive of all
studies in this direction. He demonstrates a large mortality for the boy
who marries before his twentieth year. When single, the mortality of
French youths averages only 14 per thousand; among married

{p. 105}

youths it rises to 100 per thousand. Which shows that it is six or eight
times more perilous for a youth to be incontinent than continent up to
that age. Dr. Bertillon's conclusions are that men should marry between
their twenty-fifth and thirtieth years, and that women should marry when
they have passed twenty. With the single exception of young men and
women below the ages noted, Dr. Bertillon's statistics tell a very
different story. And where it relates to celibates, it is a shocking
one.

"Dr. Bertillon shows that in France, Belgium and Holland married men
live considerably longer than single ones," writes Dr. Charles R.
Drysdale, in summing up the matter in "*The Population Question*," "and
are much less subject to becoming insane, criminal or vicious." From the
same studies we learn that the conjugal state is also more favorable to
the health of the woman over twenty years of age, in the three countries
covered.

An analysis of criminal records showed that more than twice as many
unmarried men and women had been held for crimes of all kinds than
married persons. Rates based upon 10,000 cases of insanity among men and

{p. 106}

women in the same countries showed 3.95 per thousand for male celibates
against 2.17 for married men. For single women the rate was 3.4 against
but 1.9 for married women. Insanity was reduced one-half among women by
marriage.

More startling still is the evidence of the mortality statistics.
Bertillon found that the death rates of bachelors and widowers averaged
from nearly two to nearly three times as high as those of married men of
the same ages. Dr. Mayer, in his *Rapports Conjugaux*, showed that the
death rates among the celibate religious orders studied were nearly
twice as high as those of the laity.

Can anyone knowing the facts ask that we recommend continence as a
birth-control measure?

Virtually all of the dangers to health involved in absolute continence
are involved also in the practice of continence broken only when it is
desired to bring a child into the world. In the opinion of some medical
authorities, it is even worse, because of the almost constant excitation
of unsatisfied sex desire by the presence of the mate. People who think
that they

{p. 107}

believe in this sort of family limitation have much to say about
"self-control." Usually they will admit that to abstain from all but a
single act of sexual intercourse each year is an indication of high
powers of self-restraint. Yet that one act, performed only once a year,
might be sufficient to "keep a woman with one child in her womb and
another at her breast" during her entire childbearing period. That would
mean from eighteen to twenty-four children for each mother, provided she
survived so many births and lactations. Contraceptives are quite as
necessary to these "self-controlled" ones who do not desire children
every year as to those who lead normal, happy love lives.

From the necessity of contraceptives and from the dangers of this
limited continence certain persons are, of course, relieved. They are
the ones whose mental and spiritual development is so high as to make
this practice natural to them. These individuals are so exceedingly
rare, however, that they need not be discussed here. Moreover, they are
capable of solving their own problems.

Few who advocate the doctrine of absolute

{p. 108}

continence live up to it strictly. I met one woman who assured me that
she had observed it faithfully in the thirteen years since her youngest
child was born. She had such a loathing for sexual union, however, that
it was doubtless the easiest and best thing for her to do.

Loathing, disgust or indifference to the sex relationship nearly always
lies behind the advocacy to continence except for the conscious purpose
of creating children. In other words, while one in ten thousand persons
may find full play for a diverted and transmuted sex force in other
creative functions, the rest avoid the sex union from repression. These
are two widely different situations--one may make for racial progress
and the happiness of the few individuals capable of it; the other
poisons the race at its fountain and brings nothing but the discontent,
unhappiness and misery which follow enforced continence. For all that,
an increasing number of persons, mostly women, are advocating continence
within marriage.

Sexual union is nearly always spoken of by such persons as something in
itself repugnant,

{p. 109}

disgusting, low and lustful. Consciously or unconsciously, they look
upon it as a hardship, to be endured only, to bring "God's image and,
likeness" into the world. Their very attitude precludes any great
probability that their progeny will possess an abundance of such
qualities.

Much of the responsibility for this feeling upon the part of many
thousands of women must be laid to two thousand years of Christian
teaching that all sex expression is unclean. Part of it, too, must be
laid to the dominant male's habit of violating the love rights of his
mate.

The habit referred to grows out of the assumed and legalized right of
the husband to have sexual satisfaction at any time he desires,
regardless of the woman's repugnance for it. The law of the state
upholds him in this regard. A husband need not support his wife if she
refuses to comply with his sexual demands.

Of the two groups of women who regard physical union either with disgust
and loathing, or with indifference, the former are the less numerous.
Nevertheless, there are many

{p. 110}

thousands of them. I have listened to their stories often, both as a
nurse in obstetrical cases and as a propagandist for birth control An
almost universal cause of their attitude is a sad lack of understanding
of the great beauties of the normal, idealistic love act. Neither do
they understand the uplifting power of such unions for both men and
women. Ignorance of life, ignorance of all but the sheer reproductive
function of mating, and especially a wrong training, are most largely
responsible for this tragic state of affairs. When this ignorance
extends to the man in such a degree as to permit him to have the all too
frequent coarse and brutal attitude toward sex matters, the tragedy is
only deepened.

Truly the church and those "moralists" who have been insisting upon
keeping sex matters in the dark have a huge list of concealed crimes to
answer for. The right kind of a book, a series of clear, scientific
lectures, or a common-sense talk with either the man or woman will often
do away with most of the repugnance to physical union. When the
repugnance is gone, the way is open to that

{p. 111}

upliftment through sex idealism which is the birthright of all women and
men.

When I have had the confidence of women indifferent to physical union, I
have found the fault usually lay with the husband. His idea of marriage
is too often that of providing a home for a female who would in turn
provide for his physical needs, including sexual satisfaction. Such a
husband usually excludes such satisfaction from the category of the
wife's needs, physical or spiritual.

This man is not concerned with his wife's sex urge, save as it responds
to his own at times of his choosing. Man's code has taught woman to be
quite ashamed of such desires. Usually she speaks of indifference
without regret; often proudly. She seems to regard herself as more
chaste and highly endowed in purity than other women who confess to
feeling physical attraction toward their husbands. She also secretly
considers herself far superior to the husband who makes no concealment
of his desire toward her. Nevertheless, because of this desire upon the
husband's part, she goes on "pretending" to mutual interest in the
relationship.

{p. 112}

Only the truth, plainly spoken, can help these people. The woman is
condemned to physical, mental and spiritual misery by the ignorance
which society has fixed upon her. She has her choice between an enforced
continence, with its health-wrecking consequences and its constant
aggravation of domestic discord, and the sort of prostitution legalized
by the marriage ceremony. The man may choose between enforced continence
and its effects, or he may resort to an unmarried relationship or to
prostitution. Neither of these people--the one schooled directly or
indirectly by the church and the other trained in the sex ethics of the
gutter--can hope to lift the other to the regenerating influences of a
pure, clean, happy love life. As long as we leave sex education to the
gutter and houses of prostitution, we shall have millions of just such
miserable marriage failures.

Such continence as is involved in dependence upon the so-called "safe
period" for family limitation will harm no one. The difficulty here is
that the method is not practical. It simply does not work. The woman who
employs this method finds herself in the same predicament

{p. 113}

as the one who believes that she is not in danger of pregnancy when she
does not respond passionately to her husband. That this woman is more
likely to conceive than the emotional one, is a well-known fact. The
woman who refuses to use contraceptives, but who rejects sex expression
except for a few days in the month, is likely to learn too soon the
fallacy of her theory as a birth-control method.

For a long time the "safe period" was suggested by physicians. It was
also the one method of birth control countenanced by the ecclesiastics.
Women are learning from experience and specialists are discovering by
investigation that the "safe period" is anything but safe for all women.
Some women are never free from the possibility of conception from
puberty to the menopause. Others seemingly have "safe periods" for a
time, only to become pregnant when they have begun to feel secure in
their theory. Here again, continence must give way, as a method of birth
control, to contraceptives.

In the same category as the "safe period," as a method of birth control,
must be placed

{p. 114}

so-called "male continence." The same practice is also variously known
as "Karezza," "Sedular Absorption" and "Zugassent's Discovery." Those
who regard it as a method of family limitation are likely to find
themselves disappointed.

As a form of continence, however, if it can be called continence, it is
asserted to bring none of the long course of evils which too often
follow the practice of lifelong abstinence, or abstinence broken only
when a child is desired Its devotees testify that they avoid ill effects
and achieve the highest possible results. These results are due,
probably, to two factors.

First, those who practice Karezza are usually of a high mental and
spiritual development and are, therefore, capable of an exalted degree
of self-control without actual repression. Second, they have the benefit
of that magnetic interchange between man and woman which makes for
physical, mental and spiritual wellbeing. This stimulation becomes
destructive irritation in ordinary forms of continence.

The Oneida Comunity, {*sic*} a religious group comprising about 130 men
and 150 women,

{p. 115}

which occupied a part of an old Indian reservation in the state of New
York, were the chief exponents of "male continence." The practice was a
religious requirement with them and they laid great stress upon three
different functions which they attributed to the sexual organs. They
held that these functions were urinary, reproductive and amative, each
seperate {*sic*} and distinct in its use from the others. Cases are
cited in which both men and women are said to have preserved their youth
and their sexual powers to a ripe old age, and to have prolonged their
honeymoons throughout married life. The theory, however, interesting as
it may be when considered as "continence," is not to be relied upon as a
method of birth control.

Summing it all up, then, continence may meet the needs of a few
natures., but it does not meet the needs of the masses. To enforce
continence upon those whose natures do not demand it, is an injustice,
the cruelty and the danger of which has been underestimated rather than
exaggerated. It matters not whether this wrong is committed by the
church, through some outworn dogma; by the state,

{p. 116}

through the laws prohibiting contraceptives, or by society, through the
conditions which prevent marriage when young men and women reach the age
at which they have need of marriage.

The world has been governed too long by repression. The more fundamental
the force that is repressed the more destructive its action. The
disastrous effects of repressing the sex force are written plainly in
the health rates, the mortality statistics, the records of crime and the
entry books of the hospitals for the insane. Yet this is not all the
tale, for there are still the little understood hosts of sexually
abnormal people and the monotonous misery of millions who do not die
early nor end violently, but who are, nevertheless, devoid of the joys
of a natural love life.

As a means of birth control, continence is as impracticable for most
people as it is undesirable. Celibate women doubtless have their place
in the regeneration of the world, but it is not they, after all, who
will, through experience and understanding recreate it. It is mainly
through fullness of expression and experience in life that the mass of
women, having

{p. 117}

attained freedom, will accomplish this unparalleled task.

The need of women's lives is not repression, but the greatest possible
expression and fulfillment of their desires upon the highest possible
plane. They cannot reach higher planes through ignorance and compulsion.
They can attain them only through knowledge and the cultivation of a
higher, happier attitude toward sex. Sex life must be stripped of its
fear. This is one of the great functions of contraceptives. That which
is enshrouded in fear becomes morbid. That which is morbid cannot be
really beautiful.

A true understanding of every phase of the love life, and such an
understanding alone, can reveal it in its purity--in its power of
upliftment. Force and fear have failed from the beginning of time. Their
fruits are wrecks and wretchedness. Knowledge and freedom to choose or
reject the sexual embrace, according as it is lovely or unlovely, and
these alone, can solve the problem. These alone make possible between
man and woman that indissoluble tie and mutual passion, and common
understanding, in which lies the hope of a higher race.

{p. 118}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. Contraceptives Or Abortion?](wnr12)
