[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr16)  [Next](wnr18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XV

### LEGISLATING WOMAN'S MORALS

ONE of the important duties before those women who are demanding birth
control as a means to a New Race is the changing of our so-called
obscenity laws. This will be no easy undertaking; it is usually much
easier to enact statutes than to revise them. Laws are seldom exactly
what they seem, rarely what their advocates claim for them. The
"obscenity" statutes are particularly deceptive.

Enacted, avowedly, to protect society against the obscene and the lewd,
they make no distinction between the scientific works of human
emancipators like Forel and Ellis and printed matter such as they are
ostensibly aimed at. Naturally enough, then, detectives and narow-minded
{*sic*} judges and prosecutors who would chuckle over pictures that
would make a clean-minded woman shudder, unite to

{p. 187}

suppress the scientific works and the birth-control treatises which
would enable men and women to attain higher physical, mental, moral and
spiritual standards.

Woman, bent upon her freedom and seeking to make a better world, will
not permit the indecent and unclean forces of reaction to mask
themselves forever behind the plea that it is necessary to keep her in
ignorance to preserve her purity. In the birth-control movement, she has
already begun to fight for her right to have, without legal
interference, all knowledge pertaining to her sex nature. This is the
third and most important of the epoch-making battles for general liberty
upon American soil. It is most important because it is to purify the
very fountain of the race and make the race completely free.

The first and most dramatic of the three great struggles for liberty
reached its apex, as we know, in the American Revolution. It had for its
object the right to hold such political beliefs as one might choose, and
to act in accordance with those beliefs. If this political freedom is
now lost to us, it is because we did not hold strongly enough to those
liberties

{p. 188}

fought for by our forefathers.

Nearly a hundred years after the Revolution the battle for religious
liberty came to a climax in the career of Robert G. Ingersoll. His
championship of the much vaunted and little exercised freedom of
religious opinion swept the blasphemy laws into the lumber room of
outworn tyrannies. Those yet remaining upon the statute books are
invoked but rarely, and then the effort to enforce them is ridiculous.

Within a few years the tragic combination of false moral standards and
infamous obscenity laws will be as ridiculous in the public mind as are
the now all but forgotten blasphemy laws. If the obscenity laws are not
radically revised or repealed, few reactionaries will dare to face the
public derision that will greet their attempts to use them to stay
woman's progress.

The French have a saying concerning "mort main"--the dead hand. This
hand of the past reaches up into the present to smother the rising flame
of modern ideals, to reforge our chains when we have broken them, to
arrest progress. It is the hand of such as have lived

{p. 189}

on earth but have not loved humanity. At the call of those who fear
progress and freedom, it rises from the gloom of forgotten things to
oppress the living.

It is the dead hand that holds imprisoned within the obscenity laws all
direct information concerning birth control. It is the dead hand that
thus compels millions of American women to remain in the bondage of
maternity.

Previous to the year 1868, the obscenity laws of the various states in
the Union contained no specific prohibition of information concerning
contraceptives. In that year, however, the General Assembly of New York
passed an act which specifically included the subject of contraceptives.
The act made it exactly as great an offense to give such information as
to exhibit the sort of pictures and writings at which the legislation
was ostensibly aimed.

In 1873, the late Anthony Comstock, who with a list of contributors,
most of whom did not realize the real effects of his work, constituted
the so-called Society for the Suppression of Vice, succeeded in
obtaining the passage of the federal obscenity act. This act was
presented

{p. 190}

as one to prevent the circulation of pornographic literature and
pictures among school children. As such, it was rushed through with two
hundred sixty other acts in the closing hours of the Congress. This act
made it a crime to use the mails to convey contraceptives or information
concerning contraceptives. Other acts later made the original law
applicable to express companies and other common carriers, as well as to
the mails.

With this precedent established--a precedent which a majority of the
congressmen could hardly have understood because of the hasty passage of
the act--Comstock secured the enactment of state laws to the same
effect. Meanwhile, the provisions regarding contraceptives had been
dropped from the amended New York State law of 1872. In 1873, however, a
new section, said to have been drafted by Comstock himself, was
substituted for the one enacted in 1872, and that section is essentially
the substance of the present law. None of these acts made it an offense
to prevent conception--all of them provided punishment for anyone
disseminating information concerning the prevention of conception. In
the

{p. 191}

federal statutes, the maximum penalties were fixed at a fine of $5,000
or five years imprisonment, or both. The usual maximum penalty under a
state law is a fine of $1,000 or one year's imprisonment, or both.

Comstock has passed out of public notice. His body has been entombed but
the evil that he did lives after him. His dead hand still reaches forth
to keep the subject of prevention of conception where he placed it--in
the same legal category with things unclean and vile. Forty years ago
the laws were changed and the chief work of Comstock's life
accomplished. Those laws still live, legal monuments to ignorance and to
oppression. Through those laws reaches the dead hand to bring to the
operating table each year hundreds of thousands of women who undergo the
agony of abortion. Each year this hand reaches out to compel the birth
of hundreds of thousands of infants who must die before they are twelve
months old.

Like many laws upon our statute books, these are being persistently and
intelligently violated. Few members of the well-to-do and wealthy
classes think for a single moment of

{p. 192}

obeying them. They limit their families to one, two or three
well-cared-for children. Usually the prosecutor who presents the case
against a birth-control advocate, trapped by a detective hired by the
Comstock Society, has no children at all or a small family. The family
of the judge who passes upon the case is likely to be smaller still. The
words "It is the law" sums it all up for these officials when they pass
sentence in court. But these words, so magical to the official mind,
have no weight when these same officials are adjusting their own private
lives. They then obey the higher laws of their own beings--they break
the obsolete statutes for themselves while enforcing them for others.

This is not the situation with the poorer people of the United States,
however. Millions of them know nothing of reliable contraceptives. When
women of the impoverished strata of society do not break these laws
against contraceptives, they violate those laws of their inner beings
which tell them not to bring children into the world to live in want,
disease and general misery. They break the first law of nature, which is
that of self preservation. {p. 193} Bound by false morals, enchained by
false conceptions of religion, hindered by false laws, they endure until
the pressure becomes so great that morals, religion and laws alike fail
to restrain them. Then they for a brief respite resort to the surgeon's
instruments.

For many years the semi-official witch hunting of the Comstock
organization had a remarkable and a deadly effect. Everyone, whether it
was novelist, essayist, publicist, propagandist or artist, who sought to
throw definite light upon the forbidden subject of sex, or upon family
limitation, was prosecuted if detected. Among the many books suppressed
were works by physicians designed to warn young men and women away from
the pitfalls of venereal diseases and sexual errors. The darkness that
surrounded the whole field of sex was made as complete as possible.

Since then the feeling of the awakened women of America has intensified.
The rapidity with which women are going into industry, the increasing
hardship and poverty of the lower strata of society, the arousing of
public conscience, have all operated to give force and volume to the
demand for woman's right to

{p. 194}

control her own body that she may work out her own salvation.

Those who believe in strictly legal measures, as well as those who
believe both in legal measures and in open defiance of these brutal and
unjust laws, are demanding amendments to the obscenity statutes, which
shall remove information concerning contraceptives from its present
classification among things filthy and obscene.

An amendment typical of those offered is that drawn up for the New York
statutes under the direction of Samuel McClure Lindsey, of Columbia
University. The words and sentences in italics are those which it
proposed to add:

(Section 1115.) Physicians' instruments *and information*. An article or
instrument used or applied by physicians lawfully practicing, or by
their direction or prescription, for the cure or prevention of disease,
is not an article of indecent or immoral nature or use, within this
article. The supplying of such articles to such physicians or by their
direction or prescription, is not an offense under this article.

The giving by a duly licensed physician or registered

{p. 195}

nurse lawfully practicing, of information or advice in regard to, or the
supplying to any person of any article or medicine for the prevention
of, conception is not a violation of any provision of this article."

This proposed amendment should without doubt include midwives as well as
nurses. There are thousands of women who never see a nurse or a
physician. Under this section, even as it now stands, physicians have a
right to prescribe contraceptives, but few of them have claimed that
right or have even known that it has existed. It does exist, however,
and was specifically declared by the New York State Court of Appeals, as
we shall see when we consider that court's opinion in the Sanger case,
farther on in the book. It can do no harm to make the intent of the law
as regards physicians plainer, and it would be an immense step forward
to include nurses and midwives in the section. With this addition it
would remove one of the most serious obstacles to the freedom and
advancement of American womanhood. Every woman interested in the welfare
of women in general should make it

{p. 196}

her business to agitate for such a change in the obscenity laws.

The above provision would take care of the case of the woman who is ill,
or who is plainly about to become ill, but it does not take care of the
vast body of women who have not yet ruined their health by childbearing
and who are not yet suffering from diseases complicated by pregnancy. If
this amendment had been attached to the laws in all the states, there
would still remain much to be done.

Shall we go on indefinitely driving the now healthy mother of two
children into the hands of the abortionist, where she goes in preference
to constant ill health, overwork and the witnessing of dying and
starving babies? It is each woman's duty to herself and to society to
hasten the repeal of all laws against the communication of birth-control
information. Now that she has the vote, she should use her political
influence to strike, first of all, at these restrictive statutes. It is
not to her credit that a district attorney, arguing against a birth
control advocate, is able to show that women have made no effort to wipe
out such laws in states where they have had the ballot for years.

{p. 197}

It is time that women assert themselves upon this fundamental right, and
the first and best use they can make of the ballot is in this direction.
These laws were made by men and have been instruments of martyrdom and
death for unnumbered thousands of women. Women now have the opportunity
to sweep them into the trash heap. They will do it at once unless, like
men, they use the ballot for those political honors which many years of
experience have taught men to be hollow.

It is only a question of how long it will take women to make up their
minds to this result. The law of woman's being is stronger than any
statute, and the man-made law must sooner or later give way to it. Man
has not protected woman in matters most vital to her--but she is awaking
and will sooner or later realize this and assert herself. If she acts in
mass now, it will be another cheering evidence that she is moving
consciously toward her goal.

{p. 198}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. Why Not Birth Control Clinics in America?](wnr18)
