[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr13)  [Next](wnr15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XII

### WILL BIRTH CONTROL HELP THE CAUSE OF LABOR?

LABOR seems instinctively to have recognized the fact that its servitude
springs from numbers. Seldom, however, has it applied its knowledge
logically and thoroughly. The basic principle of craft unionism is
limitation of the number of workers in a given trade. This has been
labor's most frequent expedient for righting its wrongs. Every unionist
knows, as a matter of course, that if that number is kept small enough,
his organization can compel increases of wages, steady employment and
decent working conditions. Craft unionism has succeeded in attaining
these insofar as it has been able to apply this principle. It has failed
insofar as it has been unable to apply it.

The weakness of craft unionism is that it does not carry its principle
far enough. It applies

{p. 139}

its policy of limitation of numbers only to the trade. In his home, the
worker, whether he is a unionist or non-unionist, goes on producing
large numbers of children to compete with him eventually in the labor
market.

"The history of labor," says Teresa Billington-Greig in the *Common
Sense of The Population Question*;" is the history of an ever
unsuccessful effort upon the part of man to bring his productive ability
as a worker up to his reproductive ability. It has been a losing battle
all the way."

The small percentage of highly skilled, organized workers lead in the
struggle for better conditions. Craft unions, by limiting the number of
men available for any one trade, manage to procure better pay, shorter
hours and other advantages for their members.

Disaster, in the form of famine, pestilence, tidal waves, earthquakes or
war, sometimes limits the number of available workers. Then those who
live in parts of the world that are not affected, or who stay at home
during wars, reap a temporary advantage. These advantages, however, are
quickly offset by increased

{p. 140}

prices, or by competition for jobs when soldiers return from war. This
form of limitation of numbers works to the advantage of labor as long as
it is available, but great disasters are not constantly in operation
while the worker's reproductive ability is. So in a few years they have
lost what nature's destructiveness won for them.

The great mass of the workers--including children and women--are
unskilled and unorganized. Not only that, they are for some considerable
part of the time seeking employment. They are, of course, poorly paid.
Thus, through their low wages and their seeking of employment, they
always come into direct competition with one another and with the
skilled and organized workmen. As their families live in want and are
often diseased, they create the chief social problems of the day. They
bring children into the world as fast as women can bear them. With each
child they increase their own misery and provide another worker to force
down wages and prolong hours, through competition for employment.

This has been the way of labor from the beginning. It is labor's way in
every country. {p. 141} Having discovered that there is no relief in
legislation, labor organizes to limit its numbers in certain trades.
Meanwhile the women of the working class go on breeding more workers to
wipe out in the future the advantages gained for the present. In Paris,
for instance, the proletarian quarters of the city show a birth rate
more than three times as high as the birth rate in the well-to-do
sections.

Dr. Jacques Bartillon furnishes us with statistics which prove that the
birth rate in any quarter of Paris is in inverse ratio to its degree of
affluence," says G. Hardy in *How to Prevent Pregnancy*. The rich
Champs-Elysees has a birth rate a third of that Bellerville or of the
Buttes-Chaumont. From 1,000 women from the age of fifteen to fifty,
Menimontant gives 116 births; the Champs-Elysees thirty-four births.

"It is the same in Berlin. For 1,000 women from the age of fifteen to
that of fifty, a very poor quarter gives 157 births; a rich quarter
gives 47 births."

And so it is the world over. The very word proletarian," as Hardy points
out, "means producer of children."

The children thus carelessly produced undermine the health of the
mother, deepen

{p. 142}

the family's poverty, destroy the happiness of the home, and dishearten
the father; all this in addition to being future competitors in the
labor market. Too often their increasing number drives the mother
herself into industry, where her beggarly wages tend to lower the level
of those of her husband.

The first sickening feature of this general situation is the high infant
mortality among the children of the workers. Many children come merely
to sap the strength of the mother, suffer and die, leaving to show for
their coming and going only an increased burden of sorrow and debt. The
lower the family income, the more of these babies die before they are a
year old.

A survey of infant mortality in Johnstown, Pa., by the federal
Children's Bureau, gave these typical results for the year 1911:

|                   |                       |
|-------------------|-----------------------|
| Father's Earnings | Infant Mortality Rate |
| Under $521        | 197.3                 |
| $521 to $624      | 193.1                 |
| $625 to $779      | 163.1                 |
| $780 to $899      | 168.1                 |
| $900 to $1,199    | 142.3                 |
| $1,200 or over    | 102\.                 |
| Ample             | 88\.                  |

 

{p. 143}

These figures do not represent the total income of all families. Neither
will money buy as much in 1920 as it did in 1911. Seventy per cent of
the people of the United States have incomes of less than $1,000. This
means that from 142 to 197 children born into such families die before
they are one year old. The births and deaths of these children represent
just so much useless burden of anguish and sorrow to the workers.

Despite this high infant death rate, the workers of the United States
still have more children than they can care for. There are enough of
them left over to provide 3,000,000 child laborers, who by working for a
pittance crowd their parents out of employment and force the families
deeper into poverty.

When all is said and done, the workers who produce large families have
themselves to blame for the hundreds of thousands of unemployed grasping
for jobs, for the strike breakers, for the policemen who beat up and
arrest strikers and for the soldiers who shoot strikers down. All these
come from the families of workingmen. Their fathers and mothers are
workers for wages. Out of the

{p. 144}

loins of labor they come into the world and compel surplus labor to
betray labor that is employed.

Nor is this all. When a workman of superior strength and skill,
protected by his union, manages to maintain a large or moderate sized
family in a degree of comfort, there always comes a time when he must
strike to preserve what he has won. If he is not beaten by unorganized
workers who seek his job, he still has to face the possibility of
listening to the cries of several hungry children. If the strike is a
long one, these cries often down the promptings of loyalty and class
interest--often they defeat him when nothing else could.

Is it any wonder that under handicaps like these labor becomes confused
and flounders? It has been offered a multitude of remedies--political
reforms, wage legislation, statutory regulation of hours, and so on. It
has been invited to embrace craft and industrial unionism, syndicalism,
anarchism, socialism as panaceas for its liberation. Except in a few
countries, it has not attained to aggressive power, but has been a tool
for unscrupulous politicians.

{p. 145}

Even with the temporary advantages gained by the wiping out of millions
of workers in the Great War, labor's problem remains unsolved. It has
now, as always, to contend with the crop of young laborers coming into
the market, and with the ever-present "labor-saving" machine which,
instead of relieving the worker's situation, makes it all the harder for
him to escape. Fewer laborers are needed to-day for a given amount of
production and distribution than before the invention of these machines.
Yet, owing to the increase in the number of the workers, labor finds
itself enslaved instead of liberated by the machine.

"Hitherto," says John Stuart Mill, "it is questionable if all the
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's toil of any
human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same
life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number of
manufacturers and others to make fortunes."

That, in a few words, sums up the greater part of labor's progress. We
blame capitalism and its wasteful, brutal industrial system for all our
social problems, but our numbers were

{p. 146}

vast and our bondage grievous before modern industry came into
existence. We may curse the trusts, but our subjection was accomplished
before the trusts had emerged from the brain of evolution. We may blame
public officials and individual employers, but our burdens were crushing
before these were born. We look now here, now there, for the cause of
our condition--everywhere but at the one to blame. We fight again and
again for our rights, only to be conquered by our own kind, our own
children, our brother's, our neighbor's

Let us carry to its logical conclusion the principle of limitation which
has been partially applied by labor unions. The way to get rid of labor
problems, unemployment, low wages, the surplus, unwanted population, is
to stop breeding. They come from our own ranks--from our own families.
The way to get better wages, shorter hours, a new system for the
advancement of labor, is to make labor's numbers fewer. Let us not wait
for war, famine and plague to do it. Let us cease bringing unwanted
children into the world to suffer a while, add to our burdens and die.
Let us cease bringing others into the world to compete

{p. 147}

with us for a living. Let the women workers practice birth control.

What are the concrete things which the worker can gain at once through
birth control? First, a small family can live much better than a large
one upon the wages now received. Workers could be better fed, clothed
and educated. Again, fewer children in the families of the workers would
tend to check the rise in the prices of food, which are forced up as the
demand increases. Within a few years it would reduce the number of
workers competing for jobs. The worker could the more easily force
society to give him more of the product of his labor--or all of it. And
while these things are taking place, the slums, with their disease,
their moral degradation and all their sordid accompaniments, would
automatically disappear. No worker would need to live in such
tenements--hence they would be modernized or torn down. At the same
time, the few children that were being born to the workers would be
stronger, healthier, more courageous. They would be fit human
beings--not miserable victims of murderous conditions.

{p. 148}

Birth control does not propose to replace any of the idealistic
movements and philosophies of the workers. It is not a substitute, it
precedes. It is of itself a principle that lifts the heaviest of the
burdens that afflict labor. It can and it must be the foundation upon
which any permanently successful improvement in conditions is attained.
It is, therefore, a necessary prelude in all effective propaganda.

A few years of systematic agitation for birth control would put labor in
a position to solve all its problems. Labor, organized or unorganized,
must take heed of this fact. Groups and parties working for a new social
order must include it in their programmes. No social system, no workers'
democracy, no Socialist republic can operate successfully and maintain
its ideals unless the practice of birth control is encouraged to a
marked and efficient degree.

In Spain I saw a bull fight. It was in the great arena at Barcelona. As
bull after bull went down, his magnificent, defeated strength bleeding
away through wounds inflicted by his weak but skillful assailant, I
thought of the world of workers and their oppressors.

{p. 149}

As each bull was sent into the arena, he was confronted by one assailant
and twenty confusers. There was but one enemy for him to face, but there
were twenty brilliant flags, each of a different color, to distract his
attention from the man who held the weapon. No sooner was his real
antagonist in danger, than one of the confusers fluttered a flag before
his anger-maddened eyes. With one toss of his horns he could have ripped
the life from the toreador, but his confusers were always there with the
flags. One after another he charged them, only to spend the force of his
lunges in the empty air. He found that as he was about to toss one of
his confusers into the air, he was confronted by another flag, which he
charged with equal futility.

Finally, utterly bewildered and exhausted, too spiritless to meet the
attack, he falls under the sword thrust of the toreador. And the sun
shines in the deep blue overhead, the band plays, the ten thousand
gayly-clad spectators shout, while the victim is dragged out to make
room for another.

It is the drama of labor.

It will be the drama of labor until labor

{p. 150}

finds its real enemy. That enemy is the reproductive ability of the
working class which gluts the channels of progress with the helpless and
weak, and stimulates the tyrants of the world in their oppression of
mankind.

{p. 151}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Battalions Of Unwanted Babies The Cause Of War](wnr15.md)
