[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wnr19)  [Next](wnr21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVIII

### THE GOAL

WHAT is the goal of woman's upward struggle? Is it voluntary motherhood?
Is it general freedom? Or is it the birth of a new race? For freedom is
not fruitless, but prolific of higher things. Being the most sacred
aspect of woman's freedom, voluntary motherhood is motherhood in its
highest and holiest form. It is motherhood unchained--motherhood ready
to obey its own urge to remake the world.

Voluntary motherhood implies a new morality--a vigorous, constructive,
liberated morality. That morality will, first of all, prevent the
submergence of womanhood into motherhood. It will set its face against
the conversion of women into mechanical maternity and toward the
creation of a new race.

Woman's rôle has been that of an incubator and little more. She has
given birth to an incubated

{p. 227}

race. She has given to her children what little she was permitted to
give, but of herself, of her personality, almost nothing. In the mass,
she has brought forth quantity, not quality. The requirement of a male
dominated civilization has been numbers. She has met that requirement.

It is the essential function of voluntary motherhood to choose its own
mate, to determine the time of childbearing and to regulate strictly the
number of offspring. Natural affection upon her part, instead of
selection dictated by social or economic advantage, will give her a
better fatherhood for her children. The exercise of her right to decide
how many children she will have and when she shall have them will
procure for her the time necessary to the development of other faculties
than that of reproduction. She will give play to her tastes, her talents
and her ambitions. She will become a full-rounded human being.

Thus and only thus will woman be able to transmit to her offspring those
qualities which make for a greater race.

The importance of developing these qualities in the mothers for
transmission to the children

{p. 228}

is apparent when we recall certain well-established principles of
biology. In all of the animal species below the human, motherhood has a
clearly discernible superiority over fatherhood. It is the first pulse
of organic life. Fatherhood is the fertilizing element. Its development,
compared to that of the mother cell, is comparatively new. Likewise, its
influence upon the progeny is comparatively small. There are weighty
authorities who assert that through the female alone comes those
modifications of form, capacity and ability which constitute
evolutionary progress. It was the mothers who first developed cunning in
chase, ingenuity in escaping enemies, skill in obtaining food, and
adaptability. It was they also who attained unfailing discretion in
leadership, adaptation to environment and boldness in attack. When the
animal kingdom as a whole is surveyed, these stand out as distinctly
feminine traits. They stand out also as the characteristics by which the
progress of species is measured.

Why is all this true of the lower species yet not true of human beings?
The secret is revealed by one significant fact--the female's

{p. 229}

functions in these animal species are not limited to motherhood alone.
Every organ and faculty is fully employed and perfected. Through the
development of the individual mother, better and higher types of animals
are produced and carried forward. In a word, natural law makes the
female the expression and the conveyor of racial efficiency.

Birth control itself, often denounced as a violation of natural law, is
nothing more or less than the facilitation of the process of weeding out
the unfit, of preventing the birth of defectives or of those who will
become defectives. So, in compliance with nature's working plan, we must
permit womanhood its full development before we can expect of it
efficient motherhood. If we are to make racial progress, this
development of womanhood must precede motherhood in every individual
woman. Then and then only can the mother cease to be an incubator and be
a mother indeed. Then only can she transmit to her sons and daughters
the, qualities which make strong individuals and,, collectively, a
strong race.

Voluntary motherhood also implies the right of marriage without
maternity. Two utterly

{p. 230}

different functions are developed in the two relationships. In order to
give the mate relationship its full and free play, it is necessary that
no woman should be a mother against her, will. There are other reasons,
of course--reasons more frequently emphasized--but the reason just
mentioned should never be overlooked. It is as important to the race as
to the woman, for through it is developed that high love impulse which,
conveyed to the child, attunes and perfects its being.

Marriage, quite aside from parentage, also gives two people invaluable
experience. When parentage follows in its proper time, it is a better
parentage because of the mutual adjustment and development--because of
the knowledge thus gained. Few couples are fitted to understand the
sacred mystery of child life until they have solved some of the problems
arising out of their own love lives.

Maternal love, which usually follows upon a happy, satisfying mate love,
becomes a strong and urgent craving. It then exists for two powerful,
creative functions. First, for its own sake, and then for the sake of
further enriching the conjugal relationship. It is from

THE GOAL 281

such soil that the new life should spring. It is the inherent right of
the new life to have its inception in such physical ground, in such in
spiritual atmosphere. The child thus born is indeed a flower of love and
tremendous joy. It has within it the seeds of courage and of power. This
child will have the greatest strength to surmount hardships, to
withstand tyrannies, to set still higher the mark of human achievement.

Shall we pause here to speak again of the rights of womanhood, in itself
and of itself, to be absolutely free? We have talked of this right so
much in these pages, only to learn that in the end, a free womanhood
turns of its own desire to a free and happy motherhood, a motherhood
which does not submerge the woman, but which is enriched because she is
unsubmerged. When we voice, then, the necessity of setting the feminine
spirit utterly and absolutely free, thought turns naturally not to
rights of the woman, nor indeed of the mother, but to the rights of the
child--of all children in the world. For this is the miracle of free
womanhood, that in its freedom it becomes

{p. 232}

the race mother and opens its heart in fruitful affection for humanity.

How narrow, how pitifully puny has become motherhood in its chains! The
modern motherhood enfolds one or two adoring children of its own blood,
and cherishes, protects and loves them. It does not reach out to all
children. When motherhood is a high privilege, not a sordid, slavish
requirement, it will encircle all. Its deep, passionate intensity will
overflow the limits of blood relationship. Its beauty will shine upon
all, for its beauty is of the soul, whose power of enfoldment is
unbounded.

When motherhood becomes the fruit of a deep yearning, not the result of
ignorance or accident, its children will become the foundation of a new
race. There will be no killing of babies in the womb by abortion, nor
through neglect in foundling homes, nor will there be infanticide.
Neither will children die by inches in mills and factories. No man will
dare to break a child's life upon the wheel of toil.

Voluntary motherhood will not be passive, resigned, or weak. Out of its
craving will

{p. 233}

come forth a fierceness of love for its fruits that will make such men
as remain unawakened stand aghast at its fury when offended. The tigress
is less terrible in defense of her offspring than will be the human
mother. The daughters of such women will not be given over to injustice
and to prostitution; the sons will not perish in industry nor upon the
battle field. Nor could they meet these all too common fates if an
undaunted motherhood were there to defend. Childhood and youth will be
too valuable in the eyes of society to waste them in the murderous mills
of blind greed and hate.

This is the dawn. Womanhood shakes off its bondage. It asserts its right
to be free. In its freedom, its thoughts turn to the race. Like begets
like. We gather perfect fruit from perfect trees. The race is but the
amplification of its mother body, the multiplication of flesh
habitations--beautified and perfected for souls akin to the mother soul.

The relentless efforts of reactionary authority to suppress the message
of birth control and of voluntary motherhood are futile. The powers of
reaction cannot now prevent the

{p. 234}

feminine spirit from breaking its bonds. When the last fetter falls the
evils that have resulted from the suppression of woman's will to freedom
will pass. Child slavery, prostitution, feeblemindedness, physical
deterioration, hunger, oppression and war will disappear from the earth.

In their subjection women have not been brave enough, strong enough,
pure enough to bring forth great sons and daughters. Abused soil brings
forth stunted growths. An abused motherhood has brought forth a low
order of humanity. Great beings come forth at the call of high desire.
Fearless motherhood goes out in love and passion for justice to all
mankind. It brings forth fruits after its own kind. When the womb
becomes fruitful through the desire of an aspiring love, another Newton
will come forth to unlock further the secrets of the earth and the
stars. There will come a Plato who will be understood, a Socrates who
will drink no hemlock, and a Jesus who will not die upon the cross.
These and the race that is to be in America await upon a motherhood that
is to be sacred because it is free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements from first edition](wnr21.md)
