[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub06.md) 
[Next](jub08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AUTHORSHIP AND DATE

According to Charles, the author was not only a priest but a Pharisee
"of the straitest sect." We have already seen that many of the positions
advocated in the Book are essentially un-Pharisaic in character. Such a
fundamentally Pharisaic doctrine as the resurrection of the body, is not
accepted, and it is more than doubtful whether the author looked for the
advent of a Davidic Messiah. Moreover, it is difficult to conceive any
Pharisee at any time advocating the adoption of a solar calendar. Then,
again, though there were, of course, Pharisaic priests in later times,
when the influence of Pharisaism had become all-powerful, it would
certainly be remarkable to find in the second century B.C. so priestly a
writer as our author a member of the Pharisaic party. For that party
arose from the ranks of the people. It was essentially a lay movement,
and it championed popular religious, as opposed to priestly, tradition.
All this has been instinctively felt by the Jewish scholars <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) who have discussed the problems connected
with the authorship and general character of our Book. By these scholars
our Book has been variously ascribed to Essene (Jellinek, 1855),
Samaritan (Beer, 1856-7), Hellenist (Frankel, 1856), and
Jewish-Christian (Singer, 1898) authorship. None of these views is
entirely satisfactory. None can be said for the view that the author
belonged to the party--if party it can be called--of the Hasidim
("Assideans" or "Hasideans") who are referred to in I Maccabees. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27.md)

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

\[paragraph continues\] These "pious" members of the Jewish community
were devoted adherents of the Law, and banded themselves together to
resist the Hellenizers even unto death. They must not be confounded with
the Pharisees, who may, however, have been influenced by them. There is
nothing to show that the earlier Hasidim accepted popular religious
tradition which had no basis in the written Law. Indeed, the reverse is
probable. We know that, in spite of their anti-Hellenism, they scrupled
to oppose the legitimate High Priest, even when he was on the Greek
side. On the other hand, it is doubtful whether they would have
countenanced the claim that the priests should exercise civil rule,
while, as we have seen, the author of *Jubilees* distinctly takes up
this position, and appears to have been an admirer of the Maccabean
Priest-Princes--at any rate, of John Hyrcanus <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md) and Simon Maccabæus. Still there is a
certain affinity between our author and the Hasidim, and if he was not
actually a "Hasid," he may very well have been in sympathy with members
of that party in fundamental religious positions. Recently
Leszyrisky, <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md) has maintained the
thesis that *Jubilees* was written by a Sadducean author, and, it must
be admitted, makes out a strong case. Unfortunately, scholars are not
yet agreed as to the real character and position of the Sadducean party,
but of recent years there has been a growing consensus of opinion that
the party had a real religious basis. It was not, as it is sometimes
represented to have been, a mere political party of worldly opportunists
who used religious questions as a stick to beat the Pharisees, who
represented true religion, while the real interests

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

of their opponents were to safeguard their privileged position and
wealth. If such books as Sirach are really, in any sense, Sadducean, and
if we weigh the evidence of Josephus impartially, we may conclude that
the real Sadducees represented the conservative tradition of the old
scribal schools which grew up under priestly influence. The Sadducees
stood for the written Law of Moses against the oral tradition, derived
from popular religious elements, represented by the Pharisees. What
could not be proved from the Law they refused to accept. Their essential
objection to the new doctrine of the resurrection of the body was that
it could not be proved from the Law. They stood for priestly privilege
against the democratic tendencies of the Pharisees, who wished to bring
in the laity as much as possible. It was natural that this party should
be strong among the priests, and especially among families connected
with the High Priesthood. The best members of it were, no doubt, pious
devotees of the Law. This is not to say that worldly-minded members of
the party did not exist. No doubt there were such, and some such men may
have found it convenient to attach themselves to the Sadducean party.
There were also worldly and hypocritical adherents in the ranks of the
Pharisees. But in neither case is it just to estimate the essential
character of the party from such elements. The persistence of the
Sadducean party for so long a time within Judaism suggests that it
possessed elements of real vitality and vigour. No doubt, also, it was
divided into sections--one such is known to us as the sect of the
Bœthusians. In view of its long continuance as an active party, and its
significance in the history of Judaism, it must have stood for something
more than mere negations. While it rejected the resurrection doctrine,
the hope of a Davidic Messiah, and the Pharisaic oral tradition, it
upheld the sole binding force of the written Torah, and emphasized
priestly privilege.

Judged by these criteria, our author may well have

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

been a pious Sadducean priest. It is not necessary, of course, to
suppose that all the positions upheld in our Book were commonly accepted
by the Sadducean party. Our author had views of his own, particularly
regarding the calendar--which at the time when he wrote seems to have
been a burning subject of debate--which would not necessarily have
commended themselves to the party generally. It is to be noted that the
positions he upholds on other matters often agree with those of the
Samaritans and Falashas and Ḳaraite Jews, who are well-known to
represent old Sadducean views on various points.

On one point of detail the Ethiopic text of our Book does uphold a
specifically Pharisaic view. In xvi. 18, Israel is spoken of as destined
to become *a kingdom and Priests and a holy nation*. This is an echo of
Exod. xix. 6, but there the Hebrew text has *a kingdom of priests* ("And
ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests and an holy nation"). Now the
alteration yielded by the text of our Book here reflects the Pharisaic
exegesis of this passage; the same alteration appears also in Rev. v. 10
(cf. i. 6). The Pharisees were anxious to separate the kingdom from the
priesthood, and expounded Exod. xix. 6 in this way, as the Jewish
Targums attest. But the original text of our Book can hardly have been
under any such influence. Such an exegesis would contradict the express
claims made for the priesthood elsewhere in the Book. The Latin version,
which has "a kingdom of priests" (as in the original Hebrew text in
Exod. xix. 6), is no doubt right. Probably the Ethiopic scribe was
influenced by the form of the text in Rev. v. 10, and introduced it
here.

We may sum up by saying that the author was undoubtedly a pious priest,
a devoted adherent of the Law, and an upholder of priestly tradition; he
was certainly not a Pharisee, but has affinities with the Hasidim or
"pious" of early Maccabean times; not improbably he was a Sadducean
priest. The exact date of the composition of *Jubilees* cannot be

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

fixed with absolute certainty, but no doubt, as Charles has argued, it
falls some time within the reigns of Simon Maccabæus or John Hyrcanus,
the flourishing period of the Hasmonean rule. This, at any rate, may be
inferred from the historical sketch embodied in the apocalyptic passage,
xxiii. 12-31, and is reinforced by a number of other considerations. The
date to which the various phenomena point is some time in the last half
of the second century B.C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxix:1](jub07.htm#fr_26.md) With the distinguished
exception of Dr. K. Kohler (in *JE*, s.v. *Jubilees*), who accepts
Charles's view, though he suggests that the book may reflect early
Hasidæan practice.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxix:2](jub07.htm#fr_27.md) Cf. 1 Macc. vii.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxx:1](jub07.htm#fr_28.md) It is true that John
Hyrcanus favoured the Pharisees, according to Josephus (*Ant.*, xiii.
10, 5), who even speaks of him as their "disciple." But this probably
means no more than that he adopted a conciliatory attitude towards them.
He also had intimate friends among the Sadducees (Josephus, Ant., xiii.
10, 6).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxx:2](jub07.htm#fr_29) *Die Sadduzäer* (1912.md),
pp. 179-236.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](jub08.md)
