[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub03.md) 
[Next](jub05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VERSIONS AND ORIGINAL LANGUAGE

The complete text of the Book is extant in an Ethiopic Version, which is
also the most accurate that has survived. Four MSS. of it are known, and
are preserved in European Libraries, the two most important in the
National Library in Paris and in the British Museum respectively. A
critical edition of the text, based on all the known MSS., has been
published by Dr. Charles (Oxford, 1895), which was preceded by an
important one by Dillmann (published 1859). Fragments of a Greek, Latin
and (possibly) a Syriac version are also extant. The fragments of the
Greek version are contained in numerous citations in Justin Martyr,
Origen, Diodorus of Antioch, Isidore of Alexandria, Epiphanius,
Syncellus and other writers. The Latin version, of -which about
one-fourth has been preserved, is very valuable for the criticism of the
text. The fragments that have survived were first published by Ceriani
(in his *Monumenta Sacra el Profana*, 1861), and have been edited by
Rönsch (1874), and more recently by Charles (in his edition of the
Ethiopic text referred to above). What may possibly be a fragment of a
Syriac Version of our Book is contained in a British Museum MS. (Add.
12154, fol. 180) entitled "Names of the Wives of the Patriarchs
according to the Hebrew Book called Jubilees." But whether this

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

is really part of a complete version is very doubtful (see Charles, *op.
cit.*, Appendix iii.).

It is generally agreed that both the Ethiopic and Latin versions were
translated from the Greek which, it may be inferred from the large
number of quotations scattered about in different writers over a wide
period, must have been widely diffused. The fact that a Greek text
underlies these versions is clear from such phenomena as the presence,
in the Ethiopic, of transliterations of Greek words (*e. g.* ἡλίου, "of
the sun," in xxxiv. 11); proper names are transliterated as they appear
in Greek, not in Hebrew; and certain textual corruptions can only be
explained by reference to an underlying Greek text. Similar phenomena
characterize the Latin version. Thus in xxxviii. 12, "timoris" =
δειλίας, which is corrupt for δουλείας; and sometimes the Greek has been
misunderstood, as *e. g.* in xxxviii. 13, "honorem" = τιμήν, which
should have been rendered by "tributum."

It is more difficult to determine whether a Semitic original underlies
the Greek, and, if that be the case, whether the original Semitic text
was Hebrew or Aramaic. It must be admitted that in a number of passages
where the text of the canonical Genesis is cited the Ethiopic agrees
with the LXX against all other authorities (see Charles' *Jubilees*, p.
xxxiv). But these cases are not, on the whole, either numerous or
important. <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) On the other hand, the
Ethiopic often agrees with the LXX, supported by other authorities
(especially the Samaritan text and version) against the Masoretic Hebrew
text, and there are other variations in the textual phenomena. From a
survey of these phenomena Charles deduces the conclusion, no doubt
rightly, that "our book attests an independent form of the Hebrew text
of the Pentateuch. . . . Our book represents *some form of the Hebrew
text of the Pentateuch midway between the forms presupposed by the LXX
and the Syriac*." <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3.md)

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It agrees with the LXX, or with combinations
into which the LXX enters, more often than with any other authority or
group of authorities. On the other hand, it is often independent of the
LXX, and in a considerable number of cases attests readings, with the
support of MT and Sam., against the LXX, and manifestly superior to the
latter. It is noteworthy that it never agrees with M against all the
other authorities. These phenomena suggest that the composition of
*Jubilees* is to be assigned to "some period between 250 B.C. (LXX
version of the Pentateuch) and A.D. 100 \[when M was finally fixed\],
and at a time nearer the earlier date than the latter." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

A number of considerations may be adduced which suggest that the
original language of *Jubilees* was Hebrew. Thus mistranslations of
Hebrew words occur, *e. g.* in xliii. 11, the word rendered (as
corrected) "I pray thee," is, in the Ethiopic, "in me"--a confusion of
the Hebrew *bî* = δέομαι (Gen. xliv. 18) with the Hebrew word (spelt in
exactly the same way) which = "in me;" there are also numerous Hebraisms
surviving in the Ethiopic and Latin versions, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md) as well as paronomasiae based upon Hebrew
words. <span id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6.md) It is noteworthy, also, that
the author lays special stress upon the sacred character of Hebrew,
which was originally the language of creation (cf. xii. 25-26; xliii.
15). Moreover, he represents his work as having emanated from Moses, and
a genuinely Mosaic work would naturally be written in Hebrew. Finally,
certain parts of *Jubilees*, or of something remarkably like *Jubilees*,
have survived in Hebrew form in certain Hebrew books, especially the
*Chronicles of Jerahmeel*, and the Midrash Tadshe. It is not improbable,
also, that a Hebrew form of *Jubilees* was known to the compiler of the
*Pirḳe de R. Eliezer* (see Friedlander's Introduction to the latter
book, p. xxii). The only ground for suggesting that the Semitic

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

original may have been Aramaic rather than Hebrew is the presence of
certain Aramaizing forms of proper names (*e. g.* *Filistin*, with the
termination *n* instead of *m*) in the Latin version. But in all these
cases the Ethiopic transliteration has *m* (not *n*), and it seems
probable that the Aramaizing forms in these cases are due to the Latin
translator, who there is other ground for supposing was a Palestinian
Jew. We may, therefore, safely conclude that the original language of
our Book was Hebrew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xi:1](jub04.htm#fr_2.md) They *may* be due to
assimilation in the Greek Version with the LXX.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:2](jub04.htm#fr_3.md) *Jubilees*, p. xxxviii.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xii:1](jub04.htm#fr_4.md) *Op. cit.*, p. xxxix.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xii:2](jub04.htm#fr_5.md) Cf. *e. g.* xxii. 10,
"eligere in te" = Heb. *bāhar bĕ*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xii:3](jub04.htm#fr_6.md) See Charles, *op. cit.*,
p. xxxiii for details.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Affinities with Other Literature](jub05.md)
