[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub53) 
[Next](jub55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Isaac's Sojourn in Gerar and Dealings with Abimelech (xxiv. 8-27; cf. Gen. xxvi.).

8\. And the famine was over the land, and Isaac departed to go down into
Egypt in the second year of this week, and went to the king of the
Philistines to Gerar, unto Abimelech. 9. <span
id="fr_643"></span>[5](#fn_641) And the Lord appeared unto him and said
unto him: "Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land that I shall tell
thee of, and sojourn in this land, and I shall be

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

with thee and bless thee. 10. For to thee and to thy seed shall I give
all this land, and I shall establish My oath which I sware unto Abraham
thy father, and I shall multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and
shall give unto thy seed all this land. 11. And in thy seed will all the
nations of the earth be blessed, because thy father obeyed My voice, and
kept My charge and My commandments, and My laws, and My ordinances, and
My covenant; and now obey My voice and dwell in this land."

|                |
|----------------|
| 2080-2101 A.M. |

12\. And he dwelt in Gerar three weeks of years. 13. And Abimelech
charged concerning him, and concerning all that was his, saying: "Any
man that shall touch him or aught that is his shall surely die." <span
id="fr_644"></span>[1](#fn_642) 14. And Isaac waxed strong among the
Philistines, and he got many possessions, oxen and sheep and camels and
asses and a great household. 15. And he sowed in the land of the
Philistines and brought in a hundred-fold, and Isaac became exceedingly
great, and the Philistines envied him. 16. Now all the wells which the
servants of Abraham had dug during the life of Abraham, the Philistines
had stopped them after the death of Abraham, and filled them with earth.
17. And Abimelech said unto Isaac: "Go from us, for thou art much
mightier than we"; and Isaac departed thence in

|           |
|-----------|
| 2101 A.M. |

the first year of the seventh week, and sojourned in the valleys of
Gerar. 18. And they digged again the wells of water which the servants
of Abraham, his father, had digged, and which the Philistines had closed
after the death of Abraham his father, and he called their names as
Abraham his father had named them. 19. And the servants of Isaac dug a
well in the valley, and found living water, and the shepherds of Gerar
strove with the shepherds of Isaac, saying: "The water is ours "; and
Isaac called the name of the well "Perversity," <span
id="fr_645"></span>[2](#fn_643) because

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

they had been perverse with us. 20. And they dug a second well, and they
strove for that also, and he called its name "Enmity." <span
id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_644) And he arose from thence and they digged
another well, and for that they strove not, and he called the name of it
"Room," <span id="fr_647"></span>[2](#fn_645) and Isaac said: "Now the
Lord hath made room for us, and we have increased in the land." 21. And
he went up from thence to the Well of the Oath <span
id="fr_648"></span>[3](#fn_646) in the first year of the first week in
the forty-fourth

|           |
|-----------|
| 2108 A.M. |

jubilee. 22. And the Lord appeared to him that night, on the new moon of
the first month, and said unto him: "I am the God of Abraham thy father;
fear not, for I am with thee, and shall bless thee and shall surely
multiply thy seed as the sand of the earth, for the sake of Abraham my
servant." 23. And he built an altar there, which Abraham his father had
first built, and he called upon the name of the Lord, and he offered
sacrifice to the God of Abraham his father. 24. And they digged a well
and they found living water. 25. And the servants of Isaac digged
another well and did not <span id="fr_649"></span>[4](#fn_647) find
water, and they went and told Isaac that they had not found water, and
Isaac said: "I have sworn this day to the Philistines and this thing
hath been announced to us." 26. And he called the name of that place the
"Well of the Oath"; for there he had sworn to Abimelech and Ahuzzath his
friend and Phicol the prefect of his host. <span
id="fr_650"></span>[5](#fn_648) 27. And Isaac knew that day that under
constraint he had sworn to them to make peace with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_641"></span>[133:5](jub54.htm#fr_643) For 9-12 cf. Gen.
xxvi. 2-6.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[134:1](jub54.htm#fr_644) Cf. Gen. xxvi. ii.
Notice that no reference is made in our text to Isaac's deception about
Rebecca.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[134:2](jub54.htm#fr_645) = Esek; cf. Gen.
xxvi. 20.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[135:1](jub54.htm#fr_646) = Sinai; cf. Gen.
xxvi. 21.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[135:2](jub54.htm#fr_647) = Rehoboth; cf. Gen.
xxvi. 22.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[135:3](jub54.htm#fr_648) *i. e.* Beersheba.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[135:4](jub54.htm#fr_649) In Gen. xxvi. 32 the
MT does not read *not*; but LXX agrees with our text in so reading. It
is implied here that their failure to find water was due to the covenant
made with Abimelech.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[135:5](jub54.htm#fr_650) Cf. Geri. xxvi. 31,
33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaac curses the Philistines (xxiv. 28-33)](jub55)
