[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub57.md) 
[Next](jub59.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Rebecca induces Isaac to send Jacob to Mesopotamia. Jacob's Dream and View at Bethel (xxvii. 1-27; cf. Gen. xxviii.).

XXVII\. And the words of Esau, her elder son, were told to Rebecca in a
dream, and Rebecca sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto
him: 2. "Behold Esau thy brother will take vengeance on thee so as to
kill thee. 3. Now, therefore, my son, obey my voice, and arise and flee
thou to Laban, my brother, to Haran, and tarry with him a few days until
thy brother's anger turneth away, and he remove his anger from thee, and
forget all that thou hast done; then I will send and fetch thee from
thence." 4. And Jacob said: "I am not afraid; if he wisheth to kill me,
I will kill him." 5. But she said unto him: "Let me not be bereft of
both my sons on one day." 6. And Jacob said to Rebecca his mother:
"Behold, thou knowest that my father hath become old, and doth not see
because his eyes are dull, and if I leave him it will be evil in his
eyes, because I leave him and go away from you, and my father will be
angry, and will curse me. I will not go; <span
id="fr_674"></span>[1](#fn_672.md) when he sendeth me, then only will I
go." 7. And Rebecca said to Jacob: "I will go in and speak to him, and
he will send thee away." 8. And Rebecca went in and said to Isaac: "I
loathe my life because of the two daughters of Heth, whom Esau hath
taken him as wives; and if Jacob take a wife from among the daughters of
the land such as these, for what purpose

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

do I further live; for the daughters of Canaan are evil." <span
id="fr_675"></span>[1](#fn_673.md) 9. And Isaac called Jacob and blessed
him, and admonished him and said unto him: 10. "Do not take thee a wife
of any of the daughters of Canaan; arise and go to Mesopotamia, to the
house of Bethuel, thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from thence
of the daughters of Laban, thy mother's brother. 11. And God Almighty
bless thee and increase and multiply thee that thou mayest become a
company of nations, and give thee the blessings of my father Abraham, to
thee and to thy seed after thee, that thou mayest inherit the land of
thy sojournings and all the land which God gave to Abraham: go, my son,
in peace." 12. And Isaac sent Jacob away, and he went to Mesopotamia, to
Laban the son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebecca, Jacob's
mother. 13. And it came to pass after Jacob had arisen to go to
Mesopotamia that the spirit of Rebecca was grieved after her son, and
she wept. 14. And Isaac said to Rebecca: "My sister, <span
id="fr_676"></span>[2](#fn_674.md) weep not on account of Jacob, my son;
for he goeth in peace, and in peace will he return. 15. The Most High
God will preserve him from all evil, and will be with him; for He will
not forsake him all his days; 16. For I know that his ways will be
prospered in all things wherever he goeth, until he return in peace to
us, and we see him in peace. 17. Fear not on his [account](errata.htm#1.md)
my sister, for he is on the upright path and he is a perfect man: and he
is faithful and will not perish. Weep not." 18. And Isaac comforted
Rebecca on account of her son Jacob, and blessed him. 19. And Jacob went
from the Well of the Oath to go to Haran on the first year of the second
week in the forty-fourth Jubilee, and he came to Luz on the mountains,
that is, Bethel, on the new moon of the first month of this

|           |
|-----------|
| 2115 A.M. |

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

week, and he came to the place at even and turned from the way to the
west of the road that night: and he slept there; for the sun had set.
20. And he took one of the stones of that place and laid it (at his
head) under the tree, <span id="fr_677"></span>[1](#fn_675.md) and he was
journeying alone, and he slept. 21. And he dreamt that night, and behold
a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven, and
behold, the angels of the Lord ascended and descended on it: and behold,
the Lord stood upon it. 22. And He spake to Jacob and said: "I am the
Lord God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land whereon
thou art sleeping, to thee shall I give it, and to thy-seed after thee.
23. And thy seed will be as the dust of the earth, and thou wilt
increase to the west and to the east, to the north and the south, and in
thee and in thy seed will all the families of the nations be blessed.
24. And behold, I shall be with thee, and shall keep thee whithersoever
thou goest, and I shall bring thee again into this land in peace; for I
shall not leave thee until I do everything that I told thee of." 25. And
Jacob awoke from his sleep, and said, "Truly this place is the house of
the Lord, and I knew it not." And he was afraid and said:" Dreadful is
this place which is none other than the house of God, and this is the
gate of heaven." 26. And Jacob arose early in the morning, and took the
stone which he had put under his head and set it up as a pillar for a
sign, and he poured oil upon the top of it. And he called the name of
that place Bethel; but the name of the place was Luz at the first. 27.
And Jacob vowed a vow unto the Lord, saying: "If the Lord will be with
me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and give me bread to eat and
raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father's house in peace,
then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set up as a
pillar for a sign in this place, shall be the Lord's house, and of all
that thou givest me, I shall give the tenth to thee, my God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_672"></span>[144:1](jub58.htm#fr_674.md) The author desires to
relieve Jacob of the reproach of leaving his father in his old age.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[145:1](jub58.htm#fr_675.md) Cf. Gen. xxvii. 46.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[145:2](jub58.htm#fr_676.md) The use of "sister"
as a term of endearment (to a wife) may be illustrated from Tobit V. 20,
vii. 16; Canticles iv. 9, etc., but appears to be unknown to Rabbinic
literature. Its use here may be designed to justify Isaac's having
called Rebecca his sister at Abimelech's court.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[146:1](jub58.htm#fr_677.md) ? which marked a
shrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jacob's Marriage to Leah and Rachel; his Children and Riches
(xxviii. i-30)](jub59.md)
