[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub64) 
[Next](jub66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### Levi's Dream at Bethel; he is appointed to the Priesthood. Jacob celebrates the Feast of Tabernacles and offers Tithes. The Institution of Tithes (xxxii. 1-15; cf. Gen. xxxv.),

XXXII\. And he abode that night at Bethel, and Levi dreamed <span
id="fr_737"></span>[1](#fn_734) that they had ordained and made him the
priest of the Most High God, <span id="fr_738"></span>[2](#fn_735) him
and his sons for ever; and he awoke from his sleep and blessed the Lord.
2. And Jacob rose early in the morning, on the fourteenth of this month,
and he gave a tithe of all that came with him, both of men and cattle,
both of gold and every vessel and garment, yea, he gave tithes of all.
3. And in those days Rachel became pregnant with her son Benjamin. And
Jacob counted his sons from him <span id="fr_739"></span>[3](#fn_736)
upwards and Levi fell to the portion of the Lord, <span
id="fr_740"></span>[4](#fn_737) and his father clothed him in the
garments of the priesthood and filled his hands. <span
id="fr_741"></span>[5](#fn_738) 4. And on the fifteenth of this month,
he brought to the altar fourteen oxen from amongst the cattle, and
twenty-eight rams, and forty-nine sheep, and seven lambs, and twenty-one
kids of the goats as a burnt-offering on the altar of sacrifice, well
pleasing for a sweet savour before God. <span
id="fr_742"></span>[6](#fn_739) 5. This was his offering,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

in consequence of the vow which he had vowed that he would give a
tenth, <span id="fr_743"></span>[1](#fn_740) with their fruit-offerings
and their drink-offerings. 6. And when the fire had consumed it, he
burnt incense on the fire over the fire, and for a thank-offering two
oxen and four rams and four sheep, four he-goats, and two sheep of a
year old, and two kids of the goats; and thus he did daily for seven
days. 7. And he and all his sons and his men were eating (this) with joy
there during seven days and blessing and thanking the Lord, who had
delivered him out of all his tribulation and had given him his vow. 8.
And he tithed all the clean animals, and made a burnt sacrifice, but the
unclean animals he gave (not) to Levi his son, and he gave him all the
souls of the men. <span id="fr_744"></span>[2](#fn_741) 9. And Levi
discharged the priestly office at Bethel before Jacob his father in
preference to his ten brothers, and he was a priest there, and Jacob
gave his vow: thus he tithed again the tithe <span
id="fr_745"></span>[3](#fn_742) to the Lord and sanctified it, and it
became holy unto Him. 10. And for this reason it is ordained on the
heavenly tables as a law for the tithing again the tithe to eat before
the Lord from year to year, <span id="fr_746"></span>[4](#fn_743) in the
place where it is chosen that His name should dwell, and to this law
there is no limit of days for ever. 11. This ordinance is written that
it may be fulfilled from year to year in eating the second tithe before
the Lord in the place where it hath been chosen, and nothing shall
remain over from it from this year to the year following. 12. For in its
year shall the seed be eaten till the days of the gathering of the seed
of the year, and the wine till the days of the wine, and the oil till
the days of its season. 13. And all that is left thereof and becometh
old, let it be regarded as polluted: let it be burnt with fire, for it
is unclean. 14. And thus let them eat it together in the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

sanctuary, and let them not suffer it to become old. 15. And all the
tithes of the oxen and sheep shall be holy unto the Lord, <span
id="fr_747"></span>[1](#fn_744) and shall belong to His priests, which
they will eat before Him from year to year; for thus is it ordained and
engraven regarding the tithe on the heavenly tables.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_734"></span>[162:1](jub65.htm#fr_737) Cf. *Test. Levi*
viii. (which describes Levi's dream-vision of seven men in white as
having taken place at Bethel); also v. of the same work (in ix. 3 Jacob
has this dream also).

<span id="fn_735"></span>[162:2](jub65.htm#fr_738) Cf. Gen. xiv. 18-20
(Melchizedek). The title, "Priest of the Most High God," was
appropriated by the Maccabean priest-kings. Apparently it was expected
in certain quarters that the Messiah would spring from this priestly
ruling house; cf. Ps. cx., especially ver. 4.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[162:3](jub65.htm#fr_739) *i.e.* from Benjamin.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[162:4](jub65.htm#fr_740) Levi, as the tenth
son (counting backwards from Benjamin), fell, under the law of tithe, to
the Lord, and was consecrated to the priesthood; cf. also *Pirḳe de R.
Eliezer* xxxvii., where Levi is counted (by a different method) as tenth
"and was reckoned as the tithe, holy to God" (cf. Lev. xxvii. 32).

<span id="fn_738"></span>[162:5](jub65.htm#fr_741) A technical
expression meaning appointment to the priesthood; cf. Exod. xxviii. 41
(R.V. marg.); xxix. 9.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[162:6](jub65.htm#fr_742) The number of victims
does not agree with the prescriptions of the Mosaic Law regarding the
Feast of Tabernacles; cf. Num. xxix. 12-40; Lev. xxiii. 34-36, 39-44.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[163:1](jub65.htm#fr_743) Cf. Gen. xxviii. 22.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[163:2](jub65.htm#fr_744) Cf. *Test. Levi* ix.
3 ("And he \[Jacob\] paid tithes of all to the Lord through me").

<span id="fn_742"></span>[163:3](jub65.htm#fr_745) *i. e.* the second
tithe; cf. Num. xviii. 26.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[163:4](jub65.htm#fr_746) Cf. Deut. xiv. 23
(Tobit i. 7).

<span id="fn_744"></span>[164:1](jub65.htm#fr_747) Cf. Lev. xxvii. 32; 2
Chron. xxxi. 6. These tithes are not otherwise attested in the O.T.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jacob's Visions. He celebrates the eighth day of Tabernacles. The
Birth of Benjamin and Death of Rachel (xxxii. 16-34)](jub66)
