[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub70) 
[Next](jub72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Isaac's Last Words and Admonitions: his Death. The Death of Leah (xxxvi. 1-24).

|           |
|-----------|
| 2162 A.M. |

XXXVI\. And in the sixth year of this week Isaac called his two sons,
Esau and Jacob, and they came to him, and he said unto them: "My sons, I
am going the way of my fathers, to the eternal house <span
id="fr_807"></span>[2](#fn_799) where my fathers are. 2. Wherefore bury
me near Abraham my father, in the double cave in the field of Ephron the
Hittite, where Abraham purchased a sepulchre to bury in; in the
sepulchre which I digged for myself, there bury me. 3. And this I
command you, my sons, that ye practise righteousness and uprightness on
the earth, so that the Lord may bring upon you all that the Lord said
that he would do to Abraham and to his seed. 4. And love one another, my
sons, your brothers <span id="fr_808"></span>[3](#fn_800) as a man who
loveth his own soul, and let each seek in what he may benefit his
brother, and act together on the earth; and let them love each other as
their own souls. 5. And concerning the question of idols, I command and
admonish you to reject them and hate them, and love them not; for they
are full of deception for those that worship them and for those that bow
down to them. 6. Remember ye, my sons, the Lord God of Abraham your
father, and how I too worshipped Him and served Him in righteousness and
in joy, that He might multiply you and increase your seed as the stars
of heaven in multitude, and establish you on the earth as the plant of
righteousness <span id="fr_809"></span>[4](#fn_801) which will not be
rooted out unto all the generations for ever. 7. And now I shall make
you swear a great oath--for there is no oath which is greater than it by
the name glorious and honoured

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

and great and splendid and wonderful and mighty, which created the
heavens and the earth and all things together--that ye will fear Him and
worship Him. 8. And that each will love his brother with affection and
righteousness, and that neither will desire evil against his brother
from henceforth for ever all the days of your life, so that ye may
prosper in all your deeds and not be destroyed. 9. And if either of you
deviseth evil against his brother, know that from henceforth every one
that deviseth evil against his brother will fall into his hand, and will
be rooted out of the land of the living, and his seed will be destroyed
from under heaven. 10. But on the day of turbulence and execration and
indignation and anger, with flaming devouring fire as He burnt Sodom, so
likewise will He burn his land and his city and all that is his, and he
will be blotted out of the book of the discipline of the children of
men, and not be recorded in the book of life, <span
id="fr_810"></span>[1](#fn_802) but in that which is appointed to
destruction, and he will depart into eternal execration; so that their
condemnation may be always renewed in hate and in execration and in
wrath and in torment and in indignation and in plagues and in disease
for ever. 11. I say and testify to you, my sons, according to the
judgment which will come upon the man who wisheth to injure his
brother." 12. And he divided all his possessions between the two on that
day, and he gave the larger portion to him that was the first-born, and
the tower and all that was about it, and all that Abraham possessed at
the Well of the Oath. 13. And he said, "This larger portion I shall give
to the first-born." 14. And Esau said, "I have sold to Jacob and given
my birthright to Jacob; to him let it be given, and I have not a single
word to say regarding it, for it is his." 15. And Isaac said, "May a
blessing rest upon you, my sons, and upon your seed this day, for ye
have given me rest, and my heart is not pained concerning the
birthright, lest thou shouldest work wickedness on account

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

of it. 16. May the Most High God <span id="fr_811"></span>[1](#fn_803)
bless the man that worketh righteousness, him and his seed for ever."
17. And he ended commanding them and blessing them, and they ate and
drank together before him, and he rejoiced because there was one mind
between them, and they went forth from him and rested that day and
slept. 18. And Isaac slept on his bed that day rejoicing; and he slept
the eternal sleep, and died one hundred and eighty years old. He
completed twenty-five weeks and five years; and his two sons Esau and
Jacob buried him. <span id="fr_812"></span>[2](#fn_804) 19. And Esau
went to the land of Edom, to the mountains of Seir, and dwelt there. 20.
And Jacob dwelt in the mountains of Hebron, in the tower of the land of
the sojournings of his father Abraham, and he worshipped the Lord with
all his heart and according to the visible commands according as He had
divided the days of his generations. <span
id="fr_813"></span>[3](#fn_805) 21. And Leah his wife died

|           |
|-----------|
| 2167 A.M. |

in the fourth year of the second week of the forty-fifth jubilee, and he
buried her in the double cave near Rebecca his mother, to the left of
the grave of Sarah, his father's mother. 22. And all her sons and his
sons came to mourn over Leah his wife with him, and to comfort him
regarding her, for he was lamenting her. 23. For he loved her
exceedingly after Rachel her sister died; for she was perfect and
upright in all her ways and honoured Jacob, and all the days that she
lived with him he did not hear from her mouth a harsh word, for she was
gentle and peaceable and upright and honourable. 24. And he remembered
all her deeds which she had done during her life, and he lamented her
exceedingly; for he loved her with all his heart and with all his soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_799"></span>[176:2](jub71.htm#fr_807) Cf. Eccles. xii. 5
("man goeth to his long home," lit. "to his eternal house").

<span id="fn_800"></span>[176:3](jub71.htm#fr_808) "Your brothers"
probably a gloss.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[176:4](jub71.htm#fr_809) Cf. i. 16, xvi. 26,
xxi. 24.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[177:1](jub71.htm#fr_810) Cf. XXX. 22.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[178:1](jub71.htm#fr_811) This divine title
occurs frequently in our Book, and in Ecclus. (48 times), and Daniel (13
times). In the Pentateuch, outside Gen. xiv. (where it occurs four
times), it is only found twice. Its use was revived in *Ap. Bar.* (23
times), and in 4 Ezra.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[178:2](jub71.htm#fr_812) Cf. Gen. xxxv. 29.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[178:3](jub71.htm#fr_813) These commands had
been made visible to Jacob on the seven tables which the angel had shown
him in a vision; Cf. xxxii. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esau and his Sons wage War with Jacob (xxxvii. 1-25)](jub72)
