[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jub81) 
[Next](jub83) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Joseph receives Jacob. The Land of Egypt is acquired for Pharaoh. Jacob's Death and Burial (xlv. 1-16; cf. Gen. xlvi. 28 ff., xlvii. 11 ff.).

XLV\. And Israel went into the country of Egypt,

|           |
|-----------|
| 2172 A M. |

into the land of Goshen, on the new moon of the fourth month, in the
second year of the third week of the forty-fifth jubilee. 2. And Joseph
went to meet his father Jacob, to the land of Goshen, and he fell on his
father's neck and wept. 3. And Israel said unto Joseph: "Now let me die
since I have seen thee, and now may the Lord God of Israel be blessed,
the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac who hath not withheld His mercy
and His grace from His servant Jacob. 4. It is enough for me that I have
seen thy face whilst †I am† <span id="fr_883"></span>[3](#fn_875) yet
alive; yea, true is the vision which I saw at Bethel. Blessed be the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lord my God for ever and ever, and blessed be
His name." 5. And Joseph and his brothers ate bread before their father
and drank wine, and Jacob rejoiced with exceeding great joy because he
saw Joseph eating with his brothers and drinking before him, and he
blessed the Creator of all things who had preserved him, and had
preserved for him his twelve sons. 6.  <span
id="fr_884"></span>[1](#fn_876)And Joseph had given to his father and to
his brothers as a gift the right of dwelling in the land of Goshen and
in Rameses and all the region round about, which he ruled over before
Pharaoh. And Israel and his sons dwelt in the land of Goshen, the best
part of the land of Egypt; and Israel was one hundred and thirty years
old when he came into Egypt, 7. And Joseph nourished his father and his
brethren and also their possessions with bread as much as sufficed
them <span id="fr_885"></span>[2](#fn_877) for the seven years of the
famine. 8. And the land of Egypt suffered by reason of the famine, and
Joseph acquired all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh in return for food,
and he got possession of the people and their cattle and everything for
Pharaoh. 9. And the years of the famine were accomplished, and Joseph
gave to the people in the land seed and food that they might sow (the
land) in the eighth year, for the river had overflowed all the land of
Egypt. 10. For in the seven years of the famine it had not overflowed
and had irrigated only a few places on the banks of the river, but now
it overflowed and the Egyptians sowed the land, and it bore much corn
that year. 11. And this was the

|           |
|-----------|
| 2178 A.M. |

first year of the fourth week of the forty-fifth jubilee. 12. And Joseph
took of the corn of the harvest the fifth part for the king and left
four parts for them for food and for seed, and Joseph made it an
ordinance for the land of Egypt until this day. 13. And Israel lived in
the land of Egypt seventeen years, and all the days which he lived were
three jubilees, one hundred and forty-seven years, and he died in the

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

fourth year of the fifth week of the forty-fifth jubilee.

|           |
|-----------|
| 2188 A.M. |

14\. And Israel blessed his sons before he died and told them
everything <span id="fr_886"></span>[1](jub83.htm#fn_878) that would
befall them in the land of Egypt; and he made known to them what would
come upon them in the last days, and blessed them and gave to Joseph two
portions <span id="fr_887"></span>[2](jub83.htm#fn_879) in the land. 15.
And he slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the double cave in
the land of Canaan, near Abraham his father in the grave which he dug
for himself in the double cave in the land of Hebron. <span
id="fr_888"></span>[3](jub83.htm#fn_880) 16. And he gave all his books
and the books of his fathers to Levi his son that he might preserve them
and renew them for his children until this day. <span
id="fr_889"></span>[4](jub83.htm#fn_881)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_875"></span>[199:3](jub82.htm#fr_883) MT (Gen. xlvi. 30)
"that thou art."

<span id="fn_876"></span>[200:1](jub82.htm#fr_884) Cf. Gen. xlvii. 11.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[200:2](jub82.htm#fr_885) MT (Gen. xlvii. 12)
"\`according to their families."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Joseph. The Bones of Jacob's Sons (except Joseph)
interred at Hebron. The Oppression of Israel by Egypt (xlvi.
1-16)](jub83)
