[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m01176) 
[Next](m01178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# [Section CLXXVI](errata.htm#22)

(Chaitraratha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing this, Arjuna said, 'O Gandharva,
whence arose the hostility between Viswamitra and Vasishtha both of whom
dwelt in a celestial hermitage? O, tell us all about it.'

"The Gandharva replied, 'O Partha, the story of Vasishtha is regarded as
a Purana (legend) in all the three worlds. Listen to me as I recite it
fully. There was, in Kanyakuvja, O bull of Bharata's race, a great king
of worldwide fame named Gadhi, the son of Kusika. The virtuous Gadhi had
a son named Viswamitra, that grinder of foes, possessing a large army
and many animals and vehicles. And Viswamitra, accompanied by his
ministers, used to roam in quest of deer through the deep woods and over
picturesque marascetic

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

penances the propitious lord Vivaswat, by the help of Vasishtha's
(ascetic power). And Samvarana, that bull among men with due rites took
Tapati's hand on that mountain-breast which was resorted to by the
celestials and the Gandharvas. The royal sage, with the permission of
Vasishtha, desired to sport with his wife on that mountain. And the king
caused Vasishtha, to be proclaimed his regent in his capital and
kingdom, in the woods and gardens. And bidding farewell unto the
monarch, Vasishtha left him and went away. Samvarana, who sported on
that mountain like a celestial, sported with his wife in the woods and
the under-woods on that mountain for twelve full years. And, O best of
the Bharatas, the god of a thousand eyes poured no rain for twelve years
on the capital and on the kingdom of that monarch. Then, O chastiser of
enemies, when that season of drought broke out, the people of that
kingdom, as also the trees and lower animals began to die fast. And
during the continuance of that dreadful drought, not even a drop of dew
fell from the skies and no corn grew. And the inhabitants in despair,
and afflicted with the fear of hunger, left their homes and fled away in
all directions. And the famished people of the capital and the country
began to abandon their wives and children and grew reckless of one
another. The people being afflicted with hunger, without a morsel of
food and reduced to skeletons, the capital looked very much like the
city of the king of the dead, full of only ghostly beings. On beholding
the capital reduced to such a state, the illustrious and virtuous and
best of Rishis, Vasishtha was resolved upon applying a remedy and
brought back unto the city that tiger among kings, Samvarana, along with
his wife, after the latter had passed so long a period in solitude and
seclusion. After the king had entered his capital, things became as
before, for, when that tiger among kings came back to his own, the god
of a thousand eyes, the slayer of *Asuras*, poured rain in abundance and
caused corn to grow. Revivified by the foremost of virtuous souls the
capital and the country became animated with extreme joy. The monarch,
with his wife, Tapati, once more performed sacrifices for twelve years,
like the lord Indra (god of rain) performing sacrifices with his wife,
Sachi.'

"The Gandharva continued, 'This, O Partha, is the history of Tapati of
old, the daughter of Vivaswat. It is for her that thou art (called)
*Tapatya*. King Samvarana begot upon Tapati a son named Kuru, who was
the foremost of ascetics. Born in the race of Kuru, thou art, O Arjuna,
to be called *Tapatya*.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CLXXVII](m01178)
