[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sot09) 
[Next](sot11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### CARD V.

# THE CHARIOT.

I saw a chariot drawn [dy](errata.htm#3) two sphinxes, one white, the
other black. Four pillars supported a blue canopy, on which were
scattered five-pointed stars. The Conqueror, clad in steel armour, stood
under this canopy guiding the sphinxes. He held a sceptre, on the end of
which were a globe, a triangle and a square. A golden pentagram sparkled
in his crown. On the front of the chariot there was represented a winged
sphere and beneath that the symbol of the mystical lingam, signifying
the union of two principles.

"Everything in this picture has a significance. Look and try to
understand", said the voice.

"This is Will armed with Knowledge. We see here, however, the wish to
achieve, rather than achievement itself. The man in the chariot thought
himself a conqueror before he had really conquered, and he believes that
victory must come to the conqueror. There are true possibilities in this
beautiful conception, but also many false ones. Illusory fires and
numerous dangers are hidden here.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

He controls the sphinxes by the power of a magic word, but the tension
of his Will may fail and then the magic word will lose its power and he
may be devoured by the sphinxes.

This is indeed the Conqueror, but only for the moment; he has not yet
conquered Time, and the succeeding moment is unknown to him.

This is the Conqueror, not by love, but by fire and the sword,--a
conqueror against whom the conquered may arise. Do you see behind him
the towers of the conquered city? Perhaps the flame of uprising burns
already there.

And he is unaware that the city vanquished by means of fire and the
sword is the city within his own consciousness, that the magic chariot
is in himself and that the blood-thirsty sphynxes, also a state of
consciousness within, watch his every movement. He has externalized all
these phases of his mind and sees them only outside himself. This is his
fundamental error. He entered the outer court of the Temple of
knowledge, but thinks he has been in the Temple itself. He regarded the
rituals of the first tests as initiation, and he mistook for the
goddess, the priestess who guarded the threshold. Because of this
misconception great perils await him.

Nevertheless it may be that even in his errors and perils the Great
Conception lies concealed. He seeks to know and, perhaps, in order to
attain, mistakes, dangers and even failures are necessary.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

Understand that this is the same man whom you saw uniting Heaven and
Earth, and again walking across a hot desert to a precipice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Card XVIII. The Moon](sot11)
