[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sot12) 
[Next](sot14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### CARD XVII.

# THE STAR.

A strange emotion [seized](errata.htm#4) me. A fiery trembling ran in
waves through all my body. My heart quickened its beating, tumult
agitated my mind.

I felt that I was surrounded by portentous mysteries. And presently
shafts of Light penetrated my being and illuminated many things before
in darkness, whose existence even I had never suspected. Veils vanished
of which I had been before unaware. Voices spoke to me. And suddenly all
my former knowledge took a new and different meaning.

I discovered unexpected correlations in things which hitherto I had
thought foreign to each other. Objects distant and different from one
another appeared near and similar. The facts of the world arranged
themselves before my eyes according to a new pattern.

In the sky there appeared an [enormous](errata.htm#5) star surrounded by
seven smaller stars. Their rays intermingled, filling space with
immeasurable radiance and splendour. Then I knew I saw that Heaven of
which Plotinus speaks:

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

"Where . . . all things are diaphanous; and nothing is dark and
resisting, but everything is apparent to every one internally and
throughout. For light everywhere meets with light, since everything
contains all things in itself, and again sees all things in another. So
that all things are everywhere, and all is all. Each thing likewise is
everything. And the splendour there is infinite. For everything there is
great, since even that which is small is great.

"The sun too, which is there, is all the stars; and again each star is
the sun and all the stars. In each however, a different property
predominates, but at the same time all things are visible in each.
Motion likewise there is pure; for motion is not
[confounded](errata.htm#6) by a mover different from it. Permanency also
suffers no change of its nature, because it is not mingled with the
unstable. And the beautiful there is beautiful, because it does not
subsist in beauty. Each thing, too, is there established, not as in a
foreign land, but the seat of each thing is that which each thing is. .
. . . Nor is the thing itself different from the place in which it
subsists. For the subject of it is intellect, and it is itself
intellect. . . . In this sensible region, therefore, one part is not
produced by another, but each part is alone a part. But there each part
always proceeds from the whole, and is at the same each time part and
the whole. For it appears indeed as a part; but by him whose sight is
acute, it will be seen as a whole.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

"Where . . . is likewise no weariness of the vision which Is there, not
any plenitude of perception which can bring [intuition](errata.htm#7) to
an end.

"For neither was there any vacuity which when filled might cause the
visible energy to cease; nor is this one thing, but that another, so as
to occasion a part of one thing not to be amicable with that of another.

"Where . . . the life is wisdom; a wisdom not obtained by a reasoning
process, because the whole of it always was, and is not in any respect
deficient, so as to be in want of investigation. But it is the first
wisdom, and is not derived from another".

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I understood that all the radiance here is thought; and the changing
colours are emotions. And each ray, if we look into it, turns into
images, symbols, voices and moods. And I saw that there is nothing
inanimate, but all is soul, all is life, all is emotion and imagination.

And beneath the radiant stars beside the blue river I saw a naked
maiden, young and beautiful. She stooped on one knee and poured water
from two vessels, one of gold and one of silver. A little bird in a near
by bush lifted its wings and was poised ready to fly away.

For a moment I understood that I beheld the Soul of Nature.

"This is Nature's Imagination," said the voice gently. "Nature dreams,
improvises, creates worlds. Learn to unite your imagination with Her
Imagination

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and nothing will ever be impossible for you. Lose the external world and
seek it in yourself. Then you will find Light. "But remember, unless you
have lost the Earth, you will not find Heaven. It is impossible to see
both wrongly and rightly at the same time."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chad VII. The Hierophant](sot14)
