[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](dg07)  [Next](dg09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DPU0PK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Dancing Gods*, by Erna Fergusson, \[1931\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

# VI: The Navajos

### "DINNE," THE PEOPLE

A nurse, new to the Navajo reservation, was traveling to her station,
almost two hundred miles from the railroad. Sitting beside the mail-man
in his Ford, she watched the broken country unfold. First they passed
through a patch of pines on a high upland. Then for miles came the weird
pale colors of the Painted Desert; then miles of strange tortured rock
shapes where even scrub cedar could not grow. They halted at a
trading-post and she saw her first Navajos.

Two men sat on the steps of the store, chatting. One wore a dirty red
sweater, a Stetson hat, and brown moccasins. The other had no hat; his
long hair was held under a red silk handkerchief, and a blanket fell
from his shoulders. A slim pretty girl passed, her very full skirts
almost touching the ground in front and bobbing high behind. Beside her
trotted a tiny child, also in a long, full skirt and a dirty velvet
jacket; her hair, like that of the women, was tied with cotton string
into a heavy chignon.

They delivered mail at two such posts before they stopped for lunch at
Red Lake, where a flat pond lay in a hollow of the desert. The store,
which is one of the oldest

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

on the reservation, was obviously built for protection as well as for
business. An octagonal stone building with high windows, it would still
make a very worthy fort. In the one living-room upstairs two New England
women in fresh gingham served lunch and gossiped about their neighbors
fifty miles away as easily as though they lived in the next house.

They drove on between the great stone "Elephant's Feet" and off over
miles of stony roads along the brink of canyons where no water ran. They
saw a few irregular fields of stunted corn. Once they passed an empty
hogan. It was the typical Navajo home, built of logs laid lengthwise and
rising gradually into a low dome. The one door faced east, as rigid
convention prescribes, and the only other opening was the hole at the
top to let out the smoke from the fire in the middle of the floor. Near
by was a brush shelter, which the mail-man said was the Navajo summer
home.

The road bumped and scraped and struggled along. Once they stopped to
speak to a small girl herding a bunch of sheep, but she spun her long
skirts out into a fan and ran for cover like a wild thing. Once two men
crossed the road on ponies, their slim shanks riding close as though a
part of their horses. They accepted cigarettes, but had no English. Once
a wagon pulled elaborately out of the road to let the car pass. The
driver beamed, the woman seated on the bed of the wagon smiled demurely
over her striped blanket, children stared with amazed black eyes. These
were the only people they saw on that long drive.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

The nurse was silent. Then she said:

"This is magnificent country, and there seems to be more than enough of
it. But why do they need a nurse? Where are the people?"

Yet on that reservation there are more than forty-two thousand Navajos,
supporting themselves by marketing their sheep, their blankets, and
their silverware. They come into the trading-posts to exchange these
things for what they need, and disappear again into their mysterious
desert. One sees them in numbers only when they meet for their great
"sings." Then often more than a thousand will gather in response to that
strange underground summons which travels faster than the white man's
telegraph.

Navajos are marked by mystery, by arrogance, by a strange sardonic humor
which no white man has ever analyzed or even much noted. In appearance
they are very different from the other southwestern Indians. One would
say, offhand, that Navajos are a tall people, slim-waisted, both men and
women, with high cheek-bones, narrow hands and feet. Yet on closer
acquaintance they are seen to represent every human type. They are short
and fat as well as long and lean; high aquiline noses and narrow faces
are varied by flat faces and almost Negroid features. Probably Jewish
traders could contribute little to the Navajo's gift as a hard and close
dealer, but Jewish features are not infrequent. A stunning sheik of the
desert may have gray eyes; they are probably due to the fact that the
American Army passed that way. Whatever his physical appearance, the
Navajo's outstanding characteristic is his hauteur. He is dignified to
the point of superciliousness; and he looks

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

upon the white man as upon a strange interloper whom he tolerates
because it is his own high pleasure to do so, and not because he has to.

That the Navajos consider themselves the aristocrats of the southwest
they tactily admit by calling themselves "*Dinne*," *the* People. They
are of Athapascan stock, and ethnologists are generally agreed that they
came from the north, drifting into the area they now occupy less than a
thousand years ago. In earliest historical times they were found
wandering over what is now western New Mexico, eastern Arizona, and
southern Utah and Colorado. Their present reservation, while much
smaller than their original range, is in the same region. Navajo legends
in general bear out the supposition that they came from the north,
except one very picturesque one which tells that the People came from
the south, bringing their four sacred plants: tobacco, corn, squash, and
beans. They occupied all the country, but, finding the Pueblo people
better fitted for agriculture, they generously gave them the valley
lands and kept the high grassy uplands for themselves. This legend has
the great advantage of justifying the Navajo habit of appropriating the
crops raised by the Pueblo people.

The Navajo also appropriated women when it suited him to do so, with the
result that his race is probably a compound of all the southwestern
Indian stocks, with accretions of Spanish blood, whatever racial amalgam
the Spaniards had acquired in Mexico, and later additions from the
American Army and American traders. What was most vigorous, most
alluring, most enduring of all races the Navajo has apparently taken and
made his own.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

The name "Navajo" was first "Apaches de Navaju," a designation first
used by Alonzo de Benavides in 1630 to distinguish these people from
other related bands of Apaches. "Navajo" is a Tewa word meaning "broad
cultivated fields." Not that the Navajos condescended to cultivate the
fields, but that they were found living near and preying upon those who
did.

### NAVAJOS AND SPAIN

The Navajos whom the Spanish explorers knew were a nomadic fighting
race, clever, acquisitive, keen to take whatever appealed to them. They
wandered in small bands, probably related groups; they dressed in skins,
and their legends mention garments woven of cedar fiber. They probably
made shelters of brush or logs as they do today; they fought, hunted,
sang, and danced. They made baskets, often very fine ones, but as time
went on, they learned the Piutes could make as good or better baskets,
so the aristocratic Navajo let the Piute do it. They made woven
water-bottles covered with pitch, and a crude pottery for cooking. As
soon as they found a weaker people from whom they could acquire pottery,
however, they abandoned that craft also.

The Spanish never conquered the Navajos, and they remained a constant
menace to the little settlements widely scattered over the province of
Nuevo Mexico. But the Spaniards probably saved the Pueblo people from
complete extinction at the hands of the Navajos. The Navajos claim that
they conquered the people who lived in the Canyon de

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chelly, and in
Chaco Canyon; and there is sufficient record of how their encroachments
caused the abandonment, within historical times, of the Piros villages
in the Manzano Mountains, of Pecos, of villages near Socorro.

Though the Spaniards never conquered the Navajos, they gave them,
perforce, certain arts and other gifts. Captured horses multiplied
rapidly until a horse was almost a part of every Navajo. Every man's
wealth was estimated by the number of horses he owned; he bought his
wives with horses; children rode as soon as they could walk. With the
horse went the sheep, and with the sheep went the art of weaving. Before
the Spanish conquest all the Pueblos wove cotton. They learned
wool-weaving rapidly, and probably passed it on almost as rapidly to the
Navajos, who knew how to make good use of their captives. Navajo women
now became sheepherders, owning their own flocks and bringing the wool
through all the processes to the final blanket. They had the natural
white and black, which combined to make gray; *bayeta*, which is the red
raveled from Spanish uniforms; certain yellows made from vegetable dyes;
cochineal, which they got from the Yaquis; indigo from Mexico. Many of
these old blankets, treasures for collectors, have marvelous fineness of
texture and beauty of soft faded color and definite, balanced design.
Blankets must have made a great difference in Navajo life. Every man,
still in fringed leggings and no shirt, now wrapped himself nobly in the
comforting folds of a blanket; every woman now wore, instead of a skin
tunic, which must be chilling to the body, a woven squaw dress, such as
Pueblo women still wear on feast-days.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

By the end of the eighteenth century Spain's glory was past, and the
distant province of Nuevo Mexico was left to the mercy of its enemies.
Navajos, Apaches, and Comanches grew ever more aggressive. There are
records of bands of Navajos advancing to within twenty miles of Santa
Fe, pillaging little ranches, taking what they wanted, including the
likely women, locking the rest of the family into the house, and setting
fire to it before they rode away.

The Mexican Republic proved even weaker than Spain, and it is no wonder
that whites and Pueblo Indians were equally glad to welcome the American
Army when it came promising protection.

### THE AMERICAN CONQUEST OF THE NAVAJOS

Kearny, before he passed on to California, appointed Colonel Doniphan to
give the Navajos a sharp lesson, which he promptly did. The chiefs
readily entered into a treaty with the United States, but they could see
no reason why they should not go on fighting Mexicans as usual. The fact
that the United States, having fought Mexicans itself, now claimed and
protected them did not seem reasonable to the Indian mind. So Colonel
Doniphan's treaty was the first of many. The Navajo continued his
ancient policy of maintaining a friendship with the Mexicans and the
Pueblos during the growing-season and of inaugurating a war when crops
were ripe. Over and over governors of the province, which was now called
New Mexico, appealed for aid against the "blood-thirsty Navajos."

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

Mexicans, for their part, soberly advocated a state of continuous war
with Navajos, who, they pointed out, had many sheep and horses and many
children. Mexican gallants liked the sport of capturing Navajos for
slaves, and the ease of having them. It was estimated in the sixties
that from two to four thousand slaves were held in New Mexico. Even one
governor was said to own them, though ownership was legally vested in
his wife. Prices varied, but a promising girl of eight sold for as much
as four hundred dollars.

So whites were probably quite as much to blame as Indians for the
constant fighting. It was the period in which "the only good Indian was
a dead Indian," an assumption which would hardly make for friendly
feeling. Kit Carson, the little, wizened, almost illiterate mountain-man
who finally conquered the Navajos, understood this very well. He said
once:

"I think, as a general thing, the difficulties arise from aggressions on
the part of the whites. From what I have heard, the whites are always
cursing the Indians, and are not willing to do them justice."

He also said: "I believe if Colonel Bent and myself were authorized, we
could make a solid and lasting peace with those Indians."

A distant and warlike government, however, could not be expected to
listen to such moderate words, nor to turn the conduct of its affairs
over to a simple mountaineer and an Indian trader. So the wars went
merrily on, and they proved to be a tedious business. For eighteen years
an army of over three thousand men was constantly in the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

field; every general who later came to fame served an apprenticeship
fighting Navajos or Apaches; the expense became appalling. Treaties
multiplied, until in 1863 Brigadier-General James H. Carleton, in
command of New Mexico, put an end to that farce. After a skirmish he
made the unexpected move of refusing to make a treaty with a deputation
of Navajo chiefs. He told them that they could have peace at once and
without the bother of a treaty by simply ceasing to molest the Mexicans.
He said that they had always been more apt at promise than at
performance, and that he was giving them a chance to perform. The
bewildered Navajo statesmen retired, promising to do their best, but
cannily reminding the General that their young men were hot-blooded and
hard to hold.

Depredations began again within a few months. Carleton was ready for
this. He sent word that he had no desire to fight friendly Navajos, and
that any of them could show their friendly feeling by reporting at once
at Fort Wingate. He agreed to move them to the Bosque Redondo, where
they would be given land, including six thousand arable acres on the
Pecos River. The Navajos, always invincible, could not believe that they
had at last met their match, and practically none responded. The Navajos
have a tradition that a removal east of the Rio Grande would ruin them.
If as wise a man as General Carleton had known and respected this
ancient belief, might he not have been more successful?

Carson, known to the Navajos as "the Man Who Talked One Way," met the
chiefs in council and told them what they were up against. He explained
that the American

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Army was
invincible; that however clumsily and helplessly they lurched about over
the desert with heavy equipment and unseeing eyes, white men would never
stop coming, because they were inexhaustible. But the chiefs would not
listen.

A venerable Navajo told his white friend one day how his band eluded the
great Carson. There was a faint gleam in his watery old eye as he
recalled the trick they played. Then he stopped and meditated. "If we
had listened to Carson," he said, "we'd have been all right. As it was,
*do-so, do paizh*; it was just too bad."

It was, indeed. Carson was a soldier, and, both sides having refused his
excellent advice, he had no choice but to go out and get them. Knowing
the country and with an uncanny ability to get about over it in a short
time, Carson was not long in penning most of the tribe in the Canyon de
Chelly, which the Navajos considered sacred ground. But that thirty
miles of twisted sandy canyon, with thousand-foot walls of colored
sandstone, proved to be not a haven for them, but a trap.

Carson reported: "In the main Canyon de Chelly they had some two
thousand peach trees which were mostly destroyed by my troops.

"When I first captured the Navajos, I first destroyed their crops, and
harassed them until the snow fell very deep in their canyons, taking
some prisoners occasionally.

"I took twelve hundred sheep from them at one time, and smaller lots at
different times."

One does not like to think of what months of such warfare meant to women
and children. Strange, wild, hunted

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

creatures they must have been, facing starvation or the even worse
horrors of surrender to an unknown and relentless power. In the end,
trusting the word of "the Man Who Talked One Way," about two hundred
men, women, and children surrendered in the canyon. Other bands came in
so rapidly that by February of 1864 several thousand had been moved to
the Bosque Redondo. They could not know that the man who promised them
food and protection and fair treatment was not powerful enough at
Washington to make a great civilized government talk one way also.

### THE BOSQUE REDONDO

At the end of February 1864 general Carleton reported the surrender of
over three thousand Navajos, more than half the tribe. He demanded food
and clothing for them all, and while waiting for Washington to act, he
put his troops on half rations and ordered that no grain be fed to
cavalry horses until the Navajos were fed. In appeal after appeal he
pointed out that it was cheaper to feed Navajos than to fight them, and
that the lands captured from them were worth more than any cost the
captives could be.

"For pity's sake," he urged in one report, "if not moved by any other
consideration, let us, as a great nation, for once treat the Indian as
he deserves. Otherwise," he prophesied, "this interesting and
intelligent race will diminish and disappear." The People had friends,
even at court.

The whole tribe was never captured: a few old men still

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

boast that their bands never surrendered. Still, enough of them were
exiled to the Bosque Redondo to make an effective object-lesson. Many
died on their way there. The first winter, when food came slowly and
there was a shortage of firewood, killed many more. Many contracted
diseases, especially children. Near-by tribes of unconquered Indians
attacked them, and the government gave inadequate protection. Agents
paid government money for good flour and fresh meat, accepted wormy
flour and tainted meat, split the difference with the traders--and did
not increase Navajo respect for government.

Worst of all, the Navajo could not farm. He had, during the Spanish era,
made the dizzy leap from wild marauding savages to a pastoral people. He
could not compress an equal development into three years and become, on
demand, a farmer. When the Navajos first reached the Bosque Redondo,
they had no idea what to do with the spades and hoes issued to them.
They knew nothing of irrigation. Naturally, their crops failed.

So it became apparent, even in Washington, that the noble experiment of
the Bosque Redondo was a failure, a commission was appointed, and in
1867 a new treaty was signed with the Navajos.

### THE RESERVATION AND THE GOVERNMENT

This treaty persisted in the determination to make the Navajos skip a
few centuries of normal development and become at once peaceable
Christian farmers.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To this end every
man was to be given land, seeds, agricultural implements, flocks and
cattle, and even a hundred dollars with which to get started. A school
was to be established for every thirty children, and attendance made
compulsory.

Most of the terms of the treaty were never carried out, the government,
like the Indian, being more apt at promise than at performance. The
Navajo returned to his gorgeous deserts, resumed his pastoral and
nomadic life, and hid his children as well as he could from government
agents who came to take them to distant schools. His next advance into a
sedentary group was going to take at least another century, and he could
not be hurried. The Navajo had learned that the United States was
stronger; whether it was smarter, time would tell.

With their usual quick adaptability, the People had made good use of
their captivity. Women, deprived of their sheep, got Germantown wool
from the traders and learned to make a new blanket, smoother than the
old. Owing to lack of wool and the influence of white women, they gave
up their short wool dresses and went into calico bodices and skirts
fifteen yards round, as the mode prescribed. Men went into calico too:
shirts, and straight drawers slit up the sides. Velvet did not take its
important place in the Navajo wardrobe until Mormon traders introduced
it, years later. Silver not being available, smiths made jewelry and
horse-trappings out of sheet copper which the government gave them.

\*   \*  
\*

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

The original reservation was twelve thousand square miles, roughly
between the San Juan River in New Mexico and the Little Colorado River
in Arizona. It offered scanty grazing for flocks, and almost no water
for agriculture; yet the adaptable Navajo has increased his flocks and
developed herds fast enough to keep up with his own amazing increase.
More land has been granted from time to time by executive order, and
slowly the government is developing water for irrigation. The lordly
Navajo is working with pick and shovel, helping government engineers to
make dams and ditches and reservoirs; he is even bending his proud back
to force a plow through his deserts. They say he is a natural mechanic
and can do anything, once he is satisfied that he wants to. Through it
all he manages to maintain his dignified aloofness. He is not yet a
white man's Indian.

Government is administered by the agent, who appoints Indian judges and
policemen to assist him. If he is wise, he chooses medicine-men or clan
or district headmen, and he gives them as much latitude as possible. The
Indian judge holds a court somewhat like a justice court; he gets at the
facts in his own way, and he hands down judgments often as penetrating
as Solomon's.

Within the last fifteen years oil has been scented, and some has been
discovered, on the Navajo reservation. Oil-companies leased land from
the Indians, and a couple of new problems appeared. Old men were afraid
that drilling might offend the gods. Fortunately, several of the early
structures produced water instead of oil, so the shamans were assured of
divine favor, and advised their people to

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

lease lands to strangers who, whatever their purpose, produced
ever-useful water. How to use the prospective oil-money without
corrupting the Indian was the other problem.

About this time, providentially, there came into the government service
a man who understood the Navajos, and who met them as one gentleman may
meet another to discuss their problems. As United States Commissioner to
the Navajos, Herbert J. Hagerman called a council of twelve men, with
twelve alternates. They met in 1923--a very significant meeting, for it
was the first elective group among the Navajos, the first time that the
tribe had acted as a unit. The United States was represented by Mr.
Hagerman, the presiding officer was Henry Chee Dodge, a gray-eyed Navajo
headman, and hundreds of Navajos attended as intelligent and attentive
listeners.

The council has now become an annual affair. The Navajos amaze visitors
by showing themselves straight and able thinkers, well aware of their
rights under the treaty, quick to distinguish between the valuable and
the meretricious, and wise in their insistence that the oil-money be
used for the benefit of the whole tribe. They have consistently opposed
individual allotments. They realize that the greatest need of the tribe
is for more land, and they are working toward that end.

In 1928 a new president of the council was elected: Dashne-Chis-Chiligi,
who is a school graduate and speaks English well. He is about
thirty-five years old--young enough to understand changing times--but he
is

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

conservative in his attitude toward the old ways; so he is pleasing to
the old men.

### NAVAJO LIFE

In spite of all these changes the Navajo with few exceptions is born in
the hogan; his mother is assisted by a tribal midwife, and a
medicine-man chants suitable prayers. The baby nurses a long time,
sometimes a couple of years, and is weaned on beans and coffee, or
whatever the family has. Infant mortality is high and children beyond
the nursing age often look undernourished. Yet the Navajo child who
survives has the boon of a serene and happy home, with much less nagging
and fussing than the ordinary white child is subjected to. Navajo
parents are accused of over-indulgence, but their children greet
visitors politely, proudly sing their little songs when asked, and speak
only when spoken to. They belong to the mother's clan and she is the
dominant parent, but the bond with both parents is very close. As a
consequence old people are tenderly cared for and family feeling is
strong.

As they grow, Navajo children share in the family work. Both boys and
girls herd sheep, going out first with older children; but even when as
young as ten, they are responsible for good-sized flocks. Life is
largely conditioned by the needs of the sheep. The family drifts with
them from water-hole to water-hole; in summer they follow good grazing
into the high mountain pastures, in winter they seek sheltered spots in
the lowlands. It is a nomadic life, but the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

ordinary family probably moves in an area of not more than ten miles.

Wherever they are, the woman is the head of the family. She owns her
sheep as well as her home and her children, and if she tires of her
husband he must go. No woman in the world occupies a more dignified
position, and probably no woman in the world works harder. She is a
wonderful shepherd; she shelters orphaned lambs under her wide skirts
and even suckles them at her own breast. Her husband assists with
dipping and marketing the sheep, but she handles the wool from shearing
to the final blanket, and she is never far from her loom, hung in the
hogan or between two cedar-trees.

The man may make silver, squatting on a sheepskin before his low
charcoal fire, and chanting softly as he hammers Mexican dollars into
adornment for all the tribes, including the tribe of westward-minded
whites. His tools are simple, but as a craftsman and designer he can
hardly be surpassed. He works without haste, as an artist must work, and
he has the artist's quiet assurance of the value of his own work. There
is much other business for the Navajo man. He buys, sells, trades, and
races horses, in spite of the fact that the rapid increase in the herds
has made them a liability instead of an asset. He, rather than the
woman, is meeting changing conditions. He must make the necessary great
adjustment to the modern world, and, in his own good time, he is taking
over what suits him from the mechanical civilization of the whites.

Life in the hogan is as simple as a coffee-pot, a pile of blankets, a
loom, and an anvil. Yet the Navajo child must

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

from his earliest years be aware of great natural forces moving in color
and rhythm across his desert, and caught now and then in the movement
and cadence of the dance. Both boys and girls learn the tribal legends
and are taken to the great religious ceremonies where songs are sung and
prayers are danced to bring close whatever gods there are.

This life is interrupted by the business of schooling. At the age of
six, children are taken from the hogans to the great barracks-like
structures which are the government schools. There they are deloused,
scrubbed, cropped, issued blue calico and blue jeans, and held sternly
to an education designed primarily for white children. True to his
aristocratic heritage, the Navajo child has not let this training affect
him very deeply, even yet. He is secretive and aloof, he leaves the
school as soon as possible, and he reverts with amazing suddenness to
the life of the hogan and the clan.

The tribe is divided into about fifty clans, related groups which are
loosely organized under a headman. Marriage within the clan is
prohibited, so the young man, back from school, roves widely, looking at
the girls. They meet at the great ceremonies and arrange their own
affair, though marriage formalities are conducted by the families. The
wedding is a ceremony. It takes place in the girl's hogan, a
medicine-man presides, and the principal rite is eating corn-meal mush
from a wedding-basket. Gifts are exchanged, everybody feasts, and the
young couple move into a new hogan which has been built for them.

Wherever Navajos meet, for work or religion or play,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

there is sport. Young men gamble, race, afoot or a-horseback, dance, or
sing. Always they sing, sing for hours, sing all night. They rehearse
all the regular chants, being careful not to commit a profanity by
singing winter ceremonial chants out of season; they sing love-songs,
running-songs, and songs learned from other tribes. Sometimes a quick
white ear will catch, in the midst of resounding Navajo phrases: "Hello,
John! Hello, John!" This is a song to celebrate the big potatoes which
the white man brought to replace the little wild ones.

Such a song brings laughter, and there are many others which cause the
Navajos to rock with mirth, and which they refuse to translate. No doubt
they would not pass any board of censorship. Neither would much of the
burlesque which crops up impromptu. Their humor is caustic and keen, and
it finds endless inspiration in the white people who cross the
reservation. Names given to white people nearly always hit with cruel
aptness upon some physical or mental peculiarity. "Old Parrot-feathers"
was a woman who tried to feather her way into favor. "Big Mouth" is a
man who talks too much.

Altogether, the Navajo is amused rather than respectful in his attitude
toward white people. After he leaves school, he knows them mostly as
traders, doctors, and missionaries. He does business with the trader,
and he usually finds him and his family the sort of friends who are
willing to help without undertaking radical alterations in one's ways.

Doctors and nurses try, sometimes cleverly, sometimes clumsily, to
supplement the work of the medicine-man and to teach better ways of
healing. A clever doctor was once

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

called by a trader's wife to attend a pitifully undernourished baby.
Medicine-men, who had been singing over the child for days, were
naturally resentful. The doctor quietly waited on the conference, and
the trader's wife, with quick understanding, made the convincing speech.

Said she: "You have been working hard here, calling upon the powers to
help. So you have saved this baby. It is living, the doctor says it will
live. Now it needs only good food, and its mother cannot nurse it. May
we not take it to the doctor's hospital, where it will have good food,
so your work will not be in vain?"

That was satisfactory, and the child was saved.

Among missionaries, too, there are many kinds. The government policy is
to welcome any Christian missionary, coming to bring light to the
heathen. Indians are usually persuaded to give them land, and then they
are let alone to convert whom they can.

Once a Navajo headman came into a trading-post filled with anger. He
thundered, his arms working like flails, his eyes flashing. He was a
stormy man of wrath calling upon the gods of vengeance. He spoke in
Navajo, but the trader afterwards gave me the burden of his oration.

"Why," he raged, "don't these missionaries go home? Why do they come
here? Why do they bother us? We have a good religion. It is a religion
of good. It teaches good. It tells us not to bother anyone. It is the
same religion for all the People. Now come these missionaries with seven
religions. They all talk different. They divide our people. They make
trouble among us. Why don't these missionaries go home?"

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

Missionaries, on their part, point out that the tribal religion
tolerates all sorts of superstitions, even sorcery.

Several years ago a medicine-man was accused of witchcraft. His wife's
son had died of tuberculosis, that mysterious white man's disease which
medicine-men are loath to treat. Another young man in the neighborhood
sickened. Then a third. Clearly it was a case of bad medicine, for the
victims grew weak and thin, lost appetite, and finally lost blood. There
was a trial for witchcraft; and it took all the quick enterprise and
daring of a trader to get his friend the medicine-man away before Navajo
justice took a fatal turn. That medicine-man still lives far from his
own people.

Among the superstitious fears with which even educated Navajos are
filled is the fear of a hogan in which anyone has died. It is considered
haunted and must be burned. Consequently a dying person is moved outside
if possible. After he dies, the family, for four days, sit outside the
hogan, facing east and chanting prayers to help the departing soul on
its way. Friends wait on them and dispose of the body. Then the family
undergoes a purification, which ends, as all Navajo prayers end:

"In beauty, it is finished.  
In beauty, it is finished.  
In beauty, it is finished.  
In beauty, it is finished."

### CEREMONIES

Most Navajo ceremonies are "medicine sings or chants." These are curing
ceremonies given for one

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

individual, but they have power to bring good to all who attend. The
most important, Mountain Chant and Night Chant, occur during the winter.

There are two ceremonies which are not cures. A "prayer night" is held
before grass comes in the spring. People bring seeds of corn, melons,
beans, and squash to be blessed before planting. The rites take place in
a hogan, with a medicine-man presiding. There are prayers for rain in
dry years, which most years are. In both of these ceremonies the
influence of the Pueblo people is evident. Neither includes a dance.

Other danceless "sings" are the Eagle Chant, which is a cure for sores;
the Big Star Chant, which stops bad dreams or insanity; the Red Ant
Chant, which used to be more important than it is now, for it is a cure
for wounds received in war; the Feather Chant, for bad blood. There are
special chants for child-birth and for farewell, and one called
*In-dah*, a purification.

When I asked Clyde how In-dah was used, he said:

"Well, if my father was to suicide a Ute, they would have In-dah."

Staggered at the idea of so calmly and naturally "suiciding a Ute"--even
a Ute--I failed to ask Clyde whether purification was for the crime of
murder or to rid one of the contamination of the Ute. I learned
afterwards that its purpose is to lay the ghost of the enemy, whose
scalp used to figure in the proceedings. Now any trophy will do, whether
it bears directly on the case or not.

Individual obligation in religious matters is apparently slight, though
prayers indicate that everyone is expected

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "to keep his heart
pure," which is perhaps not so slight an obligation after all. Everyone,
both man and woman, carries a personal fetish-bag, a small buckskin
pouch. It contains a turquoise matrix, the blue typifying the sky, the
matrix the rain and clouds. Small sticks and stones symbolize the male
and the female, and fresh pollen, renewed each year, keeps the spirit
alive.

Before taking part in any ceremony, at all important times in his life,
or if he is ill, the Navajo takes a sweat bath. He chants while he
bathes, and his heart must be pure.

Recently a Navajo came back from town drunk. He took a sweat bath,
evidently too soon after the debauch, and in the close heated hut, he
died. Traders who told me the story said that his neighbors were not at
all concerned. They said he had not chanted properly, that his heart was
not pure; altogether they showed no regret at his loss, and they refused
to touch his body.

The bath is a low wattled hut, into which hot stones and wet grass or
weeds are put to make steam. The patient sits inside, chanting, while
someone heats more stones, brings more wet grass, and occasionally lifts
the blanket over the doorway to let in air. After fifteen minutes or so
the Indian, dripping dirty sweat, emerges, rubs his body briskly with
sand, and returns for a shorter steaming. On the second emergence he is
perfectly clean, glistening, smooth, bronze-gold. In winter he finishes
with a roll in the snow. In summer the kindly friend dashes a bucket of
cold water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII: Navajo Dances](dg09.md)
