[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ts14)  [Next](ts16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RAYS OF TRUTH.

<span id="08400.jpg">![](img/08400.jpg)</span>

A COPY of the *T'ai-Shang Kan-Ying P'ien* had been handed down in the
family of Wan Teh-Hsü from one of his ancestors as a very precious
heirloom. Four successive generations had reverently read and recited
it, and now when it came into the possession of Wan Teh-Hsü, he kept it
in a place of honor in the Middle Hall; and he, and all the members of
his family, had many merits recorded in their favor, for they vied with
one another in living up to the moral principles laid down in the sacred
document.

One day a Taoist priest visited the home of the pious man and was
cordially received. Wan Teh-Hsü presented his guest with gifts and
requested him to discourse on the mystery of religion, whereupon the
stranger expounded the Tao, that divine rationality which pervades all
things.

{p. 84}

"The soul," he said. "is Tao, and the Tao is soul. The soul and the Tao
are not different in essence. If the Tao is separated from the soul, you
will transmigrate through the six domains and keep on the three
paths,<sup>\[1\]</sup> but if the soul and the Tao are united, you will
finally reach paradise and the land of immortals. Hell and heaven are in
your own heart. Unless heaven reside within you, the mere reading or
reciting of sacred books profiteth nothing." Then looking around in the
Middle Hall he added: "You have a rare gem in your house; for when I
entered I saw the radiance of a holy light. Where do you keep your
treasure?"

The host answered: "In this poor dwelling there is nothing worthy the
name of a treasure."

The priest then took Wan Teh-Hsü by the hand and led him to the place
where the *Kan Ying P'ien* lay, saying: "This holy book is the treasure.
All the holy men of the three religions selected and compiled it to
point out the way of virtue on which every one should walk. If a man
disciplines himself according to its instructions, the truth will shine
forth in all

\[1. The six domains are those of (1) the gods, (2) human beings, (3)
animals, (4) *asuras* or fighting demons, (5) hungry ghosts, and (6)
denizens of hell. The three paths are lust, wrath, and greed. The three
paths and the six domains constitute the wheel of Samsara.\]

{p. 85}

its glory, and every letter in the sacred writing will emit rays of
divine light. But if you recite the sacred text with a secret desire for
profit or reward, selfishness will darken its native glory, and the
writing will show no illumination. To my vision the glorification of the
holy book is perfect. Its saintly atmosphere has ascended to heaven,
resulting in an harmonious blending of your heart with the will of the
Lord on High. Your immortality is assured and I bless you. But keeping
in sight the heavenly station that awaits you, you must continue to
exercise still more self-control in your dealings with your fellow men.
Be diligent and fail not to fulfil the work so auspiciously begun."

In accordance with the words of the Taoist priest, Teh-Hsü practiced the
teachings of the *Kan-Ying P'ien* with even greater zeal. For thirty
more years, he did everything in his power to benefit others and to
promote general welfare. One day his neighbors heard heavenly music
resound from above, and saw the entire family of Wan ascend to heaven in
broad daylight, surrounded by a host of celestial beings.

Later the villagers built a monument to Wan on his own homestead, where
they paid

{p. 86}

him homage and offered prayers which were answered and granted.

\[Our illustration shows Ti Chün, the Lord Superior (also called Wen
Chang, the patron god of the Taoist religion) accompanied by two
attendants, welcoming the good man and his family as they are carried up
to heaven. Below we see the neighbors, some of them on their knees,
witnessing the scene.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pious Scholar's Good Fortune](ts16)
