[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ts21)  [Next](ts23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A VISIT TO HELL.

<span id="09800.jpg">![](img/09800.jpg)</span>

Ch'üan Ju-Yü of Pu-Hai was a poor man, but he was never tired of doing
every good and charitable work in his power. He also employed himself
indefatigably, although he was often in poor health, in copying many
good books to be distributed among his neighbors. When he was asked why
he exerted himself so much in spite of his physical weakness, he replied
that he was not trying to seek any reward, but simply wanted to give
relief to his mind, which could not be kept idle for one moment.

One day he went to sea, and encountering a strong gale, found himself
stranded on a

{p. 99}

lonely island. The scenery was very beautiful and he was full of joy,
when suddenly there appeared to him a Taoist scholar who said: "The
world delights in hypocrisy, but the Lord on High praises sincerity. You
have hitherto done good work in distributing sound moral tractates, and
this not for the sake of courting a good opinion of yourself from
others, but simply from pure unaffected good-will., So much the more
praiseworthy are your deeds in the eyes of our Lord. Many scholars are
clever enough, yet they do not employ their talents for the true cause;
they abuse them in writing immoral, seditious books; but they are now
suffering in the infernal regions the consequences brought on them by
their own acts. I shall take you there and let you see by way of
contrast how much better your fate is."

Then they went through space to that strangest of lands. The Taoist
explained everything they saw there. All kinds of torture were being
applied to those immoral writers, who, while in the world, stirred up
man's beastly nature and allured many good people to an early downfall.
The stranger also showed him a stately-looking man in the palace, who
had been a good, upright officer when on earth, punishing every crime
that tended to disturb social and political peace,

{p. 100}

and was now superintending this department in the world below.

When the visit was over, the Taoist scholar brought Ch'üan back to the
same island, where he secured a sailboat and finally succeeded in
reaching his home. Ever since, he is wont to tell his neighbors how
horrible the scene was which he had seen on his visit to hell.

\[The peculiar attraction of this story is in its parallelism to Dante's
Inferno. The Chinese characters over the entrance of hell are, *Feng Tu
Cheng*, which means verbatim "The Inferno's Fortified Castle." The last
two characters, taken as one word, form the common term for capital, and
so we might translate it briefly by "The Capital of Hell."

In the upper right hand corner we see King Yama, the sovereign of the
under world, seated on a throne with one of his attendants.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Misuse of Books](ts23)
