<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf27)  [Next](sunf29) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f26"></span>

Chapter XXVI. They Bring the Baron into Eastcheaping

So on the morrow just before midnight came Osberne and Stephen and the
four others to the postern above-said. Osberne and the four were clad,
over their armour, in frocks and hoods of up-country fashion; but
Stephen was in his minstrel's raiment, save that he bore no fiddle, and
had a heavy short-sword girt to him under his cotehardy. The night was
moonless, but there was little cloud, so that there was a glimmer of
starlight. As they opened the door, came forth from the ingle a tall
man, unarmed as it seemed, and clad as a gangrel carle, and Stephen
without more ado stretched out his long arm and caught him by the breast
of his coat. The man stirred not nor strove, but said softly: "Dost thou
not know me, Stephen the Eater? I come to see the child of Wethermel; he
shall know me by the token of the Imposition of Hands. And I am come to
help him and all you." That heard Osberne and spake softly to the
others: "This is a friend and a stout-heart; he shall be of all avail to
us."

"Speak not," said Stephen, "but hold we on, and go crouching till we be
under the lee of the dyke." Even so did they, and Stephen led the way,
but Osberne came next and Steelhead with him; they spake not together,
but Osberne felt the stronger for having him beside him, and his heart
was full of joy.

So they clomb the dyke, and as they topped it they saw a weaponed man on
his feet betwixt them and the sky. Stephen stood up straightway and fell
a-whistling a merry tune, but softly enough, while he made a sign to the
others to fetch a compass and go creeping past this man. So they did,
while Stephen and the warder walked toward one another; but so soon as
they met, the warder knew his friend, and hailed him and said: "Well,
minstrel, thou art back again pretty soon; what is toward, man?" Said
Stephen: "Sooth to say, I went not all the way home; for it came into my
mind that maybe the Baron might call for me again; and when it rains
florins I am fain to have my hat under the spout." Said the warder:
"Thou art come in time, for the Baron is somewhat ailing, and whiles he
sleeps not well a-nights; it was but last night when it was so, and he
sends for me and asks me of thee, and biddeth me fetch thee; and St.
Peter! the uproar when I told him that thou wert gone; and it was hardly
that I escaped a whipcord supper. Howsoever, his wrath ran off him in a
little, and then he bade me look out for thee, and if I find thee I am
to bring thee to him at any hour of day or night wherein the armour is
off him: wherefore, see thou, in happy hour art thou come. So abide me
till I go and fetch a fellow to keep my watch, and then will I go on
with thee to my lord."

"Wait a while," said Stephen; "to say sooth I have hereby an old carle,
my uncle, and his son, a young swain, and both they are good at song,
and the older man a very poke stuffed full of old tales: how were it if
I brought them along?"

"It were good," said the warder, "for it shall, see thou, make a change
of disport for our lord, and that will please him the more. So go now,
bring up hither thy kinsmen, and I will see to my watch and we will meet
here straightway."

So then Stephen went to his folk, who were creeping nigher and nigher
the Great Bastide, and were as now in broken ground somewhat bushed, a
good lurking-place to wit. There he finds them, and bids the four abide
their coming back with their prey, which now he nowise doubted of, and
takes Steelhead and Osberne along with him, and brings them to the
warder; who laughed when he saw Steelhead, for he went for that time all
bent and bowed, and, as he deemed by what he could see under the dim
sky, ragged and wretched. Said he: "Minstrel, thou wert scarce in luck
to happen on this rag of a kinsman of thine. Hast thou no better, man?"
Said Stephen, grinning in the dark: "Abide till ye have proved him.
Trust me, he hath something better than sour curds in his belly."
"Well," said the warder, "let-a-be! As for the young man, he seems like
enough. Now then, fellow, for a pull at the florin-tree."

So they went, the four of them, toward the Great Bastide, and none
hindered them, deeming that they were of the service of the Baron. Even
at the door of the Baron's lodging the warder (there was but one and a
chamberlain) nodded friendly to the soldier and let them pass
unquestioned. They entered the chamber, wherein now was no man, as the
Baron would have it whenas he listed to sleep. The soldier went forward
on tip-toe, but Stephen trod heavily, and Steelhead laughed aloud, and
went straight up to the great man's bedhead, and fared to pass his hand
over his face from his forehead to his chin, just touching him, but the
sleeping man waked not. As for Osberne, he stood betwixt the door and
the soldier, and drew his sword forth from under his carter's frock, but
it was not Boardcleaver, for he had left him at home. The soldier looked
from one to another, and stared astonished at their demeanour.
Straightway then he had both Stephen and Osberne on him at once: nor had
he any senses nor might to strive with them, who stripped his coat off
over his head, gagged him, and tied him hand and foot. By then they had
done this, Steelhead had taken up the naked Baron and set some of the
warder's raiment on him, and done on him the said warder's coat and
sallet over all; and there stood the man of worship, waked up now, as it
seemed, but looked before him as if he saw naught, even as a man who
walks in sleep. Stephen the meantime unstrung his fiddle and began to
play a slow sweet tune thereon, and let his big but melodious voice go
with it, and thus they brought the lordship of Deepdale to the door, and
still he seemed of no avail, save to walk on as Steelhead would have
him.

So out they fared, and none hindered them any more than when they went
in; and they came to the bushed ground where lay the four townsmen and
stirred them, and so went on all seven with their new fellow the Baron,
who still walked on like a man in his sleep.

They made a compass about the warder who had taken the place of
Stephen's friend, so that he might not challenge them, and came fair and
softly to the dyke, and thereafter to the postern. There Stephen knocked
after the manner appointed, and the door opened and showed the passage
all full of armed men. But Stephen cried out: "All's well, friend
Dickon, and there shall be no sally out tonight, only take us in, and
bring me and Captain Osberne to Sir Medard, for we have somewhat to show
him."

So they gat them into the town, they and their new guest; but ere the
door was shut, Steelhead took Osberne by the skirt and drew him a little
aside and said: "Lad of Wethermel, in all ways thou hast shown thy
valiance, and I am glad of thee. Now I have come from the hill-sides and
the crannies of the rocks to look upon thee, and I must get me back at
once; for within a builded town I may not be. But I can see that it will
not be long till we meet in the mountains. So I tell thee, when thou
deemest thy need and thy grief to be as great as it may be, hie thee to
the little dale where first we met, and call on me by the token of the
bow I gave thee then, and presently thou shalt have tidings: now
farewell."

"Yea, but hold," said Osberne, "wilt thou not enter, even if it be to go
forth at once by another gate with much company? Else wilt thou be
tangled amongst all these foemen."

"Trouble not thyself about me," said Steelhead; "it shall not be hard
for me to go where I will in despite of any foeman."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. They Parley from the Walls](sunf29)

</div>
