<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf32)  [Next](sunf34) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f31"></span>

Chapter XXXI. They Meet Through Autumn and Winter

So many a time they met that autumn, and Elfhild would ever be asking
him some boon; as the next time after this, it was the gifts which he
had brought for her from the Cheaping; for in thinking of her he had
clean forgotten them. So then was the merry time in talking of them, and
shooting and hurling of them over, and the donning of them, and the
talking of them again. Another time she prayed him to come clad in that
goodly armour of the spoils of Deepdale, and he could no less than
yeasay her, and there he was on the trysting-day, striding by the
river-bank in the sun, like an heap of glittering ice hurrying before
the river when the thaw is warm and the sun shining bright at Candlemas.
And over that also went many pretty plays, as taking the pieces off, and
naming them, and doing them on again, and the like.

So wore the days into winter, and yet the two saw each other full often
even through the frost and snow and ill weather. And when the spring
came, then it was dear to them indeed. And by that time had Osberne's
fears about the stealing of Elfhild much worn off; though it is to be
said that exceeding oft his heart was weary and sore with the longing to
hold her in his arms. Yet the most of these times he kept his grief in
his own heart; so much as Elfhild was moved when it brake forth from
him, and she might, so to say, see the torments of him before her very
eyes. Indeed on one time, when for a long while she might not comfort
him, she told him that this was almost as bad as seeing him laid a-dying
before her.

But kind and dear they were to each other, and there was nought in them
that was not lovely in those first days of their manhood.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII. Foemen Among the West Dalers](sunf34)

</div>
