<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf24)  [Next](sunf26) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f23"></span>

Chapter XXIII. Osberne Is Chosen Captain of the Dalesmen

So when he was come anigh the stead he saw the gathered folk and the
glittering of weapons about a knoll a bowshot without the garth, and
made the best of his way toward the Mote. And as he was drawing near,
there ran toward him divers men from the skirts of the throng, and cried
out for him to hasten, "For now," cried one of them, "the Mote is
dealing with thee." So he ran on with them; and when he entered the
throng, which for those parts was no small one, there went up a great
shout, and they shoved him along up to the foot of the knoll, on the top
whereof stood three of the best men of estate, and the Lawman of the
Dale, and the captain of the men of Eastcheaping. These called him to
come amongst them, and then the Lawman fell to speaking: "Osberne
Wulfgrimsson," said he, "thou art late to the Mote, and it is well-nigh
done, but this is the heart of the matter, that we have ten score and
six of good men pledged them to ride with these friends of of
Eastcheaping; but they have craved to have a captain to them chosen from
us Dalesmen. But whereas there hath been but little war or strife in the
Dale since the riding of the White Champion, which is a thirty years
ago, we be for the most part little skilled in battle; and we all wot
that thou hast a man's heart in thy lad's body, and that thou hast slain
a mighty man of war, a man deft in all prowess. Wherefore some of the
folk have spoken of thee to be the captain of our company; and I tell
thee that I shall presently call for the word of the whole Mote, and if
they yeasay it, then must thou needs go as captain of these, will thou
nill thou."

Osberne was as red as fire in the face by then the Lawman was done, and
he said: "Master, I pray thee consider my youth, and how I have had no
schooling herein, and know nought of ordering men or arraying a battle.
All this is nought like defending life and livelihood against a robber
when there was none to serve at a pinch, and using one's mother-wit in
dealing with it." The captain of the Eastcheapers smiled upon him kindly
and said: "My son, he who can use his mother-wit to any purpose when the
edges be aloft hath learned the more part of battle-craft. Withal it is
but a few hours agone that I saw thee handling the men of thine
household like to a ripe man. Fear not, my son, but that thou shalt do
well enough; and moreover I promise that I will learn thee the craft all
I may. And know that if thou deny this, then shalt thou take the heart
out of these good fellows, who be eager enough to help the good town and
be no mannikins, I warrant them. Naysay it not, my lad, naysay it not."

Now was Osberne's heart thumping against his ribs, what for sudden
wonder, what for the hope of renown that flashed upon him as a sudden
flame of strange light. But withal he thought in himself, and that all
suddenly also: If the Sundering Flood is to be encompassed here is
indeed the beginning of it, if this good Knight shall be my friend and
shall learn me the craft of war, and thereby I become a man of might, to
be desired and waged by them who have not had either the craft or the
courage to fight for themselves face to face with their foemen.

Wherefore now he turned to the Lawman and said: "Master, it is enough;
if the Mote of the neighbours will have me captain I may not naysay it:
and may my luck be enough to overcome my childish years: and if not, may
I lie on the field and not come back again to hear the mothers and maids
curse me for having cast away the lives of their sons and their dears."

Then spake the Lawman, after he had smiled on Osberne and laid his hand
on the lad's shoulder: "Men of the East Dale, ye be met together to see
if ye can in any wise help our friends and neighbours of Eastcheaping,
and ye have told off certain men to go in arms for their avail, and will
have a captain over them. Now it hath been said to me that he who seems
likeliest for the said captain is the young man Osberne Wulfgrimsson of
Wethermel, and if this be so, let me hear your voices saying Yea. But
even then there will be time for any man of you to name another, if it
seem good to him, and that name will also be put to the Mote, and a
dozen others if such there be. Now first, what say ye to Osberne
Wulfgrimsson?"

Straightway arose a great cheer and the clashing of weapons, and
well-nigh every man as it seemed cried out Yea. But when the noise and
cry was abated, the Lawman bade any man who would put forth another
name. No man spake for a little while, till at last Surly John pushes
forth to the front and says: "I name Erling Thomasson, a good man and
true!" Brake forth then great laughter and whooping, for the said Erling
was a manifest niggard, a dastard who sweated in his bed when the mouse
squeaked in the wall a nighttime. But one man sang out: "Yea, Lawman,
and I name Surly John." Thereat was great laughter, and men shoved John
to and fro till they had hustled him out to the skirts of the throng,
and there bid him go a wolf-hunting.

But now the Lawman takes Osberne by the hand and leads him to the edge
of the knoll, and stands there and says: "Men of the Dale, ye would go
to the war; ye would take a captain to you; ye would have Osberne
Wulfgrimsson for your captain. All this ye have done uncompelled, of
your own will; therefore take not the rue if it not turn out so well as
ye looked for. But now I bid all them that be going on this journey to
lift up their right hands and swear to be leal and true to your captain,
Osberne Wulfgrimsson, in all things for life or for death."

Even so they did with a hearty good will: thereupon Osberne spake and
said, after he had a word with \[the Knight\] Sir Medard, apart: "All ye
my men, I have but this to say to you: I hold you trusty and valiant,
and men unlike to fight soft. But this I know of you, as of all other of
us Dalesmen, that ye are most wont to go each after his own will, and it
is well-nigh enough to put a man off from doing a thing if another man
say to him, Do it. Now this manner ye must change, since ye are become
men-at-arms, and if I bid you go to the right or the left, ye need think
of nought but which is your right hand and which the left; though
forsooth I wot well that some of ye be so perverse that even that debate
may lead you into trouble and contention. Now look to it that ye may not
all be captains, and they that try it, so long as I be over you, are
like to wend into wild weather. Now stouthearts, and my friends, it is
now a little past high noon; and we shall abide here no longer than
tomorrow morn, and at daybreak we shall be on our way to Eastcheaping,
wherefore that time have yet got to see to your weapons and array, and
to say farewell, such of you as be not too far off, to your kindred and
wives and sweethearts. And now let all we do our best when we come among
the edges, so that hereafter one man may say to another: Thou art as
valiant as the Dalesmen when they fought in the war of Eastcheaping."

Then all men gave a great shout, and were well-nigh weeping-ripe for
high heart and for love of him, though a minute before their faces were
all agrin, so wise and valiant and kind they deemed his words and the
manner of his speaking.

Therewith the Mote brake up, and the men were busy arraying them for
departure: and as for Osberne, he had his hands full of work, in giving
and taking commandments, and in learning from Sir Medard the beginnings
of the lore of battle; so that what hopes he had of making his way to
the trysting-place once more were speedily swept aside. And the next
morning betimes they set out together, the Dalesmen and the
Eastcheapers, in all good fellowship, and in two days' time came to
Eastcheaping; and they were lodged full well by the crafts-masters of
the good town. But Sir Medard took Osberne with him up into the Castle
and guested him there, that he might the closer teach him his new craft,
and an apt scholar he found. Also from the morrow after their coming,
the captain, by bidding of the Porte, furnished and arrayed the Dalesmen
with weapons, as long spears and good swords and bows and arrows, and
jacks and sallets and shields, and they went out into the mead under the
Castle to be better assured thereby, and fell to learning how best to
handle their weapons. And both their captains and they themselves deemed
it best that they should fight a-foot; for though they were good
horsemen after their fashion, they would have to learn all in the craft
of fighting a-horseback.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. A Skirmish with the Baron of Deepdale in the
Marshes](sunf26)

</div>
