<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf60)  [Next](sunf62) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f59"></span>

Chapter LIX. Tidings of Longshaw and of the Hosting of the Barons'
League

But when the aforesaid Michaelmas market was, great recourse was there
of far-travelled and wise men, and the Carline set herself diligently to
learn all she might of such-like folk. And she had wherewithal to buy
wares of likely chapmen, and to treat men-at-arms and others to wine and
banquet. For she had brought away with her a marvellous collar of gems,
which the Maiden owned, and which, as she said, was the gift of the
Dwarfs; and the Maiden consenting thereto, the Carline had sold three
gems from the said collar, so that they lacked not money.

Now as to the tidings the Carline heard of, they had for the most part
to do with the deeds and uprising of Sir Godrick of Longshaw, and how
that the Barons of the lands that lay about would not endure his ways
and his pride, and were levying war against him; and they said they knew
for certain that, when spring came next year, they would be on him, and
that they had made a League into which they looked to draw the King of
the City of the Sundering Flood, and that meanwhile the League was
already most mightily manned, and so far-reaching that it was a sure
thing that the Lord of Brookside had come into it, yea and even others
further west and north than he. Now all were in one tale about this; but
one man there was with whom the Carline spoke, and he neither the
youngest nor least wise, who said: "And yet, dame, I look for it that
the Knight of Longshaw will yet give this league a troublous hank to
unwind, so wise a man as he is, and so well accompanies by wise and
lucky men; and now hath he gotten a new captain, a young man from far
away up-country; and though there has since his coming been no great war
afoot, yet hath this newcomer been one of certain adventures, wherein he
hath proved himself. And by all I could see and hear, for I was dwelling
seven days at Longshaw, he will be the right hand of Sir Godrick, and
that means that the Knight deems of him as no mere man-at-arms, but a
wise man also. Moreover, I myself have seen the young man, and this I
seem to see in him, that he has the lucky look in his eyes; and I am
deemed cunning in the judging of men." All this and more did the Carline
hear tell of, and she weighed it heedfully, and thought that a change of
days was coming.

A month after this, and ere the winter had set in, came riding to
Brookside a knight and two squires, and had a special message to the
Blue Knight, who received them with all honour and kindness and heard
what they had to say, and prayed them to abide with him a while, since
they had ridden far from the south and the east; but they would not
tarry but one night, for they had further to go. When they were departed
Sir Mark made no secret of their message, which was that the hosting of
the Barons' League would be in such place, east of the water and far to
the south, a month before Marymass of next year; and they prayed him to
be leal and true to the League, and gather to him what force he might,
as well armed and formed in all ways as could be done. But he answered
that he was all ready thereto, and should do his devoir to the uttermost
of his power.

When the Maiden heard this she was troubled, and asked him what he
deemed of the chances of the war, and he said: "Lady, this is what we
were talking of with the Lord of Warding Knowe that other day; and I
must tell thee, though I shall go to the hosting merrily and expend me
there to the utmost, yet I deem that they be the luckiest who may keep
them out of this strife, as I may not." "Yet," said she, "be they not
mighty men, these Barons? and all men say that their League is well knit
together; so that at the worst, they overwhelm not the Knight of
Longshaw, they may hold them well against him."

"Lady," said he, "by my deeming, if we crush not this valiant man
utterly he will scatter us; he is not such a man as, if he have any
force left, may be held aloof, as a man will hold a fierce sheep-dog
with a staff till the shepherd come. To end it, since I am saying this
to none but thee, I see myself so bestead that I shall deem me a lucky
man if I bring back a whole skin from this war."

"It will be evil days for all of us," said she, "if thou come not back
hale and sound."

"It gladdens my heart that thou shouldst say so," quoth he; "and yet I
would have thee look to it, that if we overthrow this wise man and good
knight, and I say again that must be utterly or not at all, there will
be more moan made over him than over a dozen such as I; and that is no
otherwise than it should be." Said she: "I would thou wert with him and
not against him." The Knight said kindly: "Dear maiden, thou must not
say such words to me, for thou knowest that my part is chosen by my own
will."

She said nought, but nodded and looked at him as one who understood and
thought well of him; and he began again: "So it is that yonder
knight-messenger told me, amidst of his talk, that he had been but the
other day to Longshaw under safe-conduct, and that there it was told him
by one of the loose-tongued and grudging kind, as I deem, that Sir
Godrick of Longshaw had gotten to him these latter days a new captain, a
man very young, and as it were a David to look on in the days before he
slew the Philistine. Furthermore, said this grudger, that though the
said youth was a tall lad of his inches, and strong and well-knit, he
was all untried, and yet was he shoving aside older and well-proven men
in the favour of the Knight of Longshaw. In short, the said grudger went
on with his tale as though there were some big grievance against his
master brewing in Longshaw, and our knight deemed that so it was, and
that they would hold together the looser, and that thereby we should
have the cheaper bargain of them. All of which I trow nowise, but deem,
on the contrary, that I see in this glorious young man even the one sent
from heaven for the helping of our enemy, of whom I dreaded that he
would come ere long time was worn. But now let all things be as they
will that be not under my hand."

The Maiden still kept silence, but she flushed very red and her eyes
glittered; for her heart was smitten by this tale of the young champion,
and the thought sprang up suddenly, Who then can this be save mine own
beloved? But the talk between them fell.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX. The Blue Knight Gathers Men and Departs from
Brookside](sunf62)

</div>
