<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf45)  [Next](sunf47) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f44"></span>

Chapter XLIV. They Reach Longshaw and Osberne Gets Him a New Name

But the seven days over, they departed on their ways to the house of
Longshaw, which well they knew; and they rode first for two days through
rough land pretty much as it had been before Woodneb, and they saw all
that way but three little houses of hunters or fowlers; and this, they
told Osberne, right on from Woodneb was the beginning of the Wood
Masterless. Thereafter they came amongst great timber-trees with wood
lawns betwixt, and but little underwood, and a goodly piece of the world
that seemed unto Osberne. Three days it held so, and then came broken
ground, whiles with much tangled thicket and whiles treeless, and this
was a two days' ride; and many were the wild deer therein, so that their
cheer was greatly amended. Thereafter was the wood thinner and more
plain, and there was a clear road through it; and on the first day of
their riding this way they came upon a sort of folk who were sitting on
the greensward eating their dinner. They were fifteen all told, all of
them with weapons, but Sir Godrick and his came upon them so suddenly
that they had no time to rise and flee, so sat still abiding haps. They
had a good few of sumpter-horses with them, and it as soon clear to see
that, though they were weaponed, they were not men-at-arms, but chapmen.
Sir Godrick entreated them courteously, and asked them whence and
whither, and prayed them of tidings. They said they were come from the
City of the Sundering Flood, and had ridden the Wood instead of taking
ship on the river, which was far safer, because they were bound for some
of the cheaping towns to which Sir Godrick and his had given the go-by.
They said that all was at peace in the City and the Frank thereof, and
there was little of strife anywhere anigh. In the end they bade the
Knight and his men sit with them and share their feast under the
green-wood tree. Sir Godrick yeasaid that with a good will, and they
were presently all very merry. Sooth to say, though they made as if they
knew him not, and never named his name, they knew him well enough, and
were a little afeard of him, and only too well content if he named
himself not, for they were of the gilds who were scarce good friends
with Longshaw: so that it had been little more than a fair deed of war
if he had made them unbuckle and open.

When dinner was over and they were drinking a cup, he called three of
the wisest of them apart along with Osberne, and asked them straightway
if they knew of any fair maid who had been bought of late by any chapman
from the Red Skinners, and he bade Osberne tell closely what like was
Elfhild: even so he did, sore abashed the while. But when he was done,
the chapmen laid their heads together, and asked one or two others of
their company, but could give no tidings of any such.

So therewith they parted, and Sir Godrick and his rode the wood, which
was diverse of kind, for six days more; and at last, on a bright sunny
afternoon, when after riding a plain not much be-timbered they had made
their way through a thick and close wood for some five hours, they came
out of the said wood on to a plain of greensward cleft by a fair river,
which winded about the foot of a long low ridge where were orchards and
gardens a many, and all above them so many buildings and towers and
walls of stone, that to Osberne it seemed as if they had before them a
very fair town. But even therewith all the company by Sir Godrick's
bidding stayed, and drew up in a line, and the banner of the Hart
impaled was displayed; and Sir Godrick spake to Osberne and said: "Lo,
Red Lad, my House of Longshaw, and this is the Shaw which we have come
through: now how likest thou the house?"

"Well, and exceeding well," said Osberne; "it is as a town."

"Yea," said Sir Godrick; "and therefore if I can but keep it well
victualled, and have with me a host big enough of stout men, it shall
never be taken."

Now Osberne looked again, and he saw that midmost of the towers and
walls was a very great hall exceeding fair, with lovely pinnacles and
spires and windows like to carven ivory, and beside it a church fairer
yet; and then before it and lower down the hill and on either side were
huge towers, stern and stout, all without fretwork or ornament; and
there were many of these and one to help the other, all about the hill,
and down by the river-side a baily such as never was a stronger or a
wiser. And Sir Godrick said: "See thou, lad, those fair and beauteous
buildings were the work of peace, when we sat well beloved on our own
lands: it is an hundred of years ago since they were done. Then came the
beginning of strife, and needs must we build yonder stark and grim
towers and walls in little leisure by the labour of many hands. Now may
peace come again, and give us time to cast wreaths and garlands of
fretwork round the sternness of the war-walls, or let them abide and
crumble in their due time. But little avails to talk of peace as now.
Come thou, Red Lad, and join the host of war that dwelleth within those
walls even as peaceful craftsmen and chapmen dwell in a good town. Lo
thou, they fling abroad the White Hart from the topmost tower: Blow,
music, and salute it."

Then all their horns blew up, and they set forward toward the baily of
the castle. And it is said indeed that five thousand men-at-arms,
besides the women and other folk that waited on them, dwelt for the most
part in the House of Longshaw.

So that even was high feast holden in the great hall of Longshaw, where
by Osberne's deeming all was fairer and daintier within even than
without. There was the Red Lad shown to a good place and all honour done
to him, and his lord looked to it that the tales of his valiancy should
be known, so that all thought well of him.

There was but little doing in those months which followed the
home-coming of Sir Godrick, as he was at peace with his neighbours so to
say. But he made Osberne captain over a band of good men, and sent him
on divers errands wherein was some little peril; and in all of these he
did wisely and sped well. Amongst others he went down with ten tens of
men through the Wood and right down to a certain haven on the Sundering
Flood, with the errand of warding chapmen and others who were bringing
many loads of wares for the service of the house. There then he beheld
the great water for the first time since he had left the Dale, and
wondered at its hugeness and majesty; and the sorrow of his heart
stirred within him when he thought how far they two had come from the
Bight of the Cloven Knoll, he and the Sundering Flood. But he had no
leisure to grieve overmuch, and his grief was but as the pain of a hurt
which a man feels even amidst of his deep sleep. Of those chapmen and
others he asked much concerning Elfhild; and they could tell him many
tales of the Red Skinners and their misdeeds, but nought that seemed to
have aught to do with his love. On the way back with the train of goods,
which was great and long-spun-out, a band of the waylayers laid an
ambushment against it, hearing that the leader of its guard was but a
young man new to war. But they were best to have left it alone, for
Osberne was well aware of them; and to be short, he so ambushed the
ambushers that he had them in the trap, and slew them every one: small
harm it was of the death of them. Now this was the first time in his
warfare that his men fell on with the name of him in their mouths, and
cried, The Red Lad! the Red Lad! Terrible indeed became that cry in no
very long time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. The Red Lad Scatters the Host of the Barons](sunf47)

</div>
