<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf39)  [Next](sunf41) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f38"></span>

Chapter XXXVIII. Osberne Parts from Stephen the Eater

The next morning Osberne went his way riding on a good horse, and not
without treasure in his scrip. He was girt to Boardcleaver and had the
wonder-bow and shafts with him; but the byrny, Hardcastle's Loom, he
left behind, and had but a white basnet on his head, for he deemed that
his friend Sir Medard would purvey him of armour. All the household were
without in the garth to see him off, but none went further with him save
Stephen the Eater, who rode with him as far as the bent, and closely and
lovingly they spake together on the way. But when they were come to the
crown of the bent Osberne drew rein and said: "Now, my friend, shalt
thou turn about and let me go my ways." And they turned about both and
looked down on Wethermel, and Stephen cast his arm abroad and spake:
"Best-beloved of all men, how long deemest thou it shall be ere thou
seest this again?"

"I wot not," said Osberne; "I am in the hands of Weird, to wend as she
will have me: but I will tell thee that I have hoped and prayed that it
might be in no longer space than five years; then shall I be of twenty
years and three, and she but a few weeks younger, and manhood and
womanhood and due service of the kindred shall lie before us both if I
find her alive; but if I find her dead, or have sure witness that so she
is, that moment shall I turn my face and come back to you, to live and
die with you as I may. There is the third thing left, to wit, that I may
wander about the world and find her not till I am exceeding old; but
even then shall I come back with her, or the memory of her. Now I will
not say Remember me, for therein I trust thee, but I will bid thee live
hale and merry, that when I see thee again thy face may be as little
changed as may be."

Therewith they parted, and Osberne looked not back again.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX. Osberne Gets Him a New Master](sunf41)

</div>
