<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf35)  [Next](sunf37) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f34"></span>

Chapter XXXIV. Osberne Sorrows for the Loss of Elfhild

Now some while before men were boun to depart to their own homes, the
sound of fresh battle was borne to them on the south-west; so, saving
those who must needs go tend the hurt on their way home, they might not
tear themselves away from that field of deed; and in special Osberne,
who had been busy enough in kenning the dead and wounded of his folk
while need was, came back to the verge of the Flood, where so oft he had
stood in love and joy, and stood there a long while, scarce moving, with
a shaft in his fingers and his bended bow in his fist, his brows knit,
his eyes staring out over the western field. It was two hours after noon
when the Westdalers turned to stir up the battle again. And then was an
hour ere the clamour of the fight came down thither, and two hours yet
it endured and was in all men's ears; and then it died away, and the
East men began to wander off from the watching-place, wending this way
and that, and the autumn day fell to wane, and soon there were none left
save Osberne and a half dozen of the men of Wethermel. And one or
another of them plucked him by the sleeve and bade him come home with
them, since the day was done, and the battle would not quicken again,
and the Westdalers had overmuch on their hands to bear them any tidings
till the morrow was a new day. At first he heeded them nought, but in
the end he turned on them with an angry eye, yet spake mildly, and bade
them get them home and eat and sleep. "But leave me here," quoth he,
"that I may watch a while lest aught of new befalleth; and I will come
to Wethermel when my heart will suffer me." So they departed and left
him; and there he stood, till himseemed he had been there a long, long
time. Night grew black about him, and silence fell on the cloven plain
of the Dale, save that below him the speech of the eddies seemed to grow
greater as other voices failed. Then arose the wind, and went through
the long grass and talked in the crannies of the rock-wall of the Flood
as the waters spake below; and none came anear, nor might he hearken any
foot of man, only far-off voices from the steads of a barking dog or
crowing cock or lowing cow.

At last, when the night was beginning to change amidst the depth of the
darkness, himseemed he heard somewhat drawing anigh and coming up the
bent on the western side, and he wotted not but it might be the unshod
feed of men, and he lightly asked himself if the ghosts of the dead made
any sound with their feet as they trod the puddled earth where a many
had trodden before them; and so wild was his heart grown now, that he
thought it no great marvel if those that they had laid to earth there
should stand up and come before him in the night watches. Then he nocked
an arrow on his bow-string and handled his weapon, but could not make up
his mind to shoot lest the bow-draft should pierce the quiet and rouse
up inextinguishable shrieks and moans; and even therewith, over those
paddling feet, he seemed to hear a voice beginning to cry, and he
thought within himself: Now, now it is on the way, and presently the air
shall be full of it; and will it kindle fire in the air?

But at that point of time the voice sounded louder and was in two or
three places, and even amidst its wildness the familiar sound smote to
his heart, for it was but the bleating of sheep, and now all the bent
over against him was alive with it. And of a sudden he was come to
himself and wotted what it was, that it was Elfhild's sheep, and that
they had been loosed or thrust out from their folds and had wandered up
there in the dark where so oft she had led them before. And now the mere
bitterness of grief took the place of his wildness, and he let his bow
and arrow drop to earth, and cast himself down on to the trodden ground
& buried his face in his hands and moaned, and speedily the images of
his life to come and the sorrow he must face passed through his soul,
for he knew that she was gone, and either slain or carried away to where
he should never hear of her or see her again.

At last, that his grief and wanhope might not rend his heart and slay
him then and there, and lest all the deeds whereto he was fated should
be spoiled and undone, self-pity fell upon him with the sweet
remembrance of his love, and loosed the well of his tears, and he wept
and wept, and might not be satiated of his mourning a long while. But
when the night was yet dark and no sign of dawn in the sky, and, might
he have seen it, the south-west was driving the rack low adown along the
earth, he rose up slowly and gat his bow and arrows into his hands, and
weakly and stiffly, like a man who hath been long sick, he fell to going
along the riverside toward Wethermel, and his feet knew the way though
his eyes might see it not. And as he went, with the wind whistling about
his ears and the picture of Wethermel before his eyes, he found that
life was come again to him, and he was beginning to think about what he
should be doing to win some way back to the love that had been rent from
him. Ever and anon, forsooth, as he was amidst such thoughts, the tears
brake out from his eyes again, but still now he could refrain them
better and better after each outburst, and he had no more wildness as
erst, as if he were out of the world and drifting he knew not whither or
why; but now he knew which was himself, and which was grief and pain.

It was but just the grey of the morning when he crept into the hall at
Wethermel, and found his bed and cast himself thereon, and, all undone
by weariness, fell asleep at once.

He awoke with the house astir about him, and arose and sat down to eat
with the others, and was no harsher of speech than his wont, albeit he
looked stark and stern; and to some it seemed as if he had aged ten
years since yestermorn, and they deemed that the death of the folk lay
heavy on him, as was like to be, and they said as few words to him as
might be, for his grief seemed aweful to them. But when they had eaten
he bade three of his men come with him down the water to seek tidings of
the Westdalers. So they went together, and a little below the Bight of
the Cloven Knoll, out of earshot of the Dwarf-folk, they met with others
from the lower steads come upon the same errand; and the Westdalers were
just come to the water-side with Wulfstan for their spokesman, who
forsooth had gotten some scratches from the war-beast, so that his head
and his arm were bandaged. Now he spake: "Hail to you, stout-hearts of
the East! Ye may deem that we prevailed in the second battle yesterday,
or ye would scarce have seen us here this morn. Now the battle was
foughten all about the garth and the house of Longryggs, which the
strong-thieves had fallen on to waste, but the women-folk of the stead
had saved their lives by flight, and the carles thereof were in our
company fighting valiantly. So whatever is lost was lost in open battle,
wherein two score and six of our best men have changed their lives; but
as for the strong-thieves, besides them who fell in your shot-stour, we
have buried over seven-score; and the rest are fled away, many of them
grievously hurt. Wherefore, friends, we have won a great victory: God
and his hallows keep us for any more such!" And it seemed as if the
goodman were weeping-ripe, whereof none marvelled. But Osberne spake,
and the sound of his own voice seemed strange unto him: "Tell me,
goodman, have ye lost nought by the murder of men whenas the
strong-thieves fell on some stead?"

"Nay," said Wulfstan, "the thieves have wasted no other stead save
Longryggs, whereas, as I have said, the folks escaped the murder, and
this little house which is hard hereby of Hartshaw Knolls. There
forsooth the two women be missing, but no slain body of carle or quean
have we found, nought of slaughter save the slaughter of kine and sheep.
And I must tell you that this morning our folk sought all about
heedfully, yea, and looked into every thicket and nook of the wood."

"Belike," quoth Osberne, "they will have carried off the two women?"
Said Wulfstan: "I fear it may well be so."

Said Osberne: "Well, this loss of two women, whom maybe ye shall find
again, is but little: but grievous is the manfall of the battles. Yet
not soon meseem shall reivers fall upon West Dale now they have learned
the valour of the folk thereof. Heried be the Lord God that the folk yet
liveth and shall live!"

He spake measuredly and in a loud voice, so that all heard, and they
cheered his speech with deep and strong voice; but they who stood
nighest unto Osberne say that his face was stern and very pale as he
spake; and it seemed to them that had Boardcleaver been naked on the
West side in that stour yet more of the strong-thieves had fallen.

Now they parted, and Osberne and his Wethermelers went home, and the
other Eastdalers also, each to his place. But as to the Westdalers, they
fell to, and drew away the slain thieves from the field of deed, for
that they feared the begrudging of the Dwarfs, and they laid them in
earth hard by where they had stood to have that converse with them of
the East; and they raised a great howe over them, and it is called
Thieves' Howe unto this day. And the tale of the said thieves who were
slain by the Eastdalers in the shot-stour is three score and ten and
seven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV. Osberne Seeks Counsel of Steelhead](sunf37)

</div>
