<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sunf21)  [Next](sunf23) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sundering Flood*, by William Morris, \[1897\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f20"></span>

Chapter XX. Osberne Fares to Eastcheaping and Brings Gifts for Elfhild

But when June was, Master Nicholas would ride to Eastcheaping, and he
took Osberne with him; and a great wonder it was to see so many houses
built of stone and lime all standing together, and so fair, as he deemed
them, though it was but a little cheaping. Howsoever, without the walls
was an abbey of monks, which was both fair and great, and the church
thereof as well fashioned as most; and when the lad went thereinto he
was all ravished with joy at the great pillars and arches and the vault
above, and the pictures on the walls and in the windows, and the
hangings and other braveries about the altars. And when he was at high
mass, and the monks and the minstrels fell to singing together, he
scarce knew whether he were in heaven or on earth. Yet whether in one or
the other, he longed to have his friend from over the river with him,
that she might see and hear it all, and tell him what she thought of it.
Wondrous also was the market wherein they did their chaffer, and the
chapmen in their fine coats of strange fashion to him and their outland
faces, and the carts and wains of the country folk and their big sleek
horses. And when it was all done he found that he had more than a silver
penny or two in his pouch; for a deal of the wares sold were his own, to
wit the peltries he had gotten by his shooting and his valour. For a
great bear had he slain with spear and shield, he by himself, and two
more with the help of Stephen the Eater, and wolves and foxes and
ermines and beavers a great many. But when he had his money it burnt a
hole in his pocket; for he must needs go to the booths and buy for
Elfhild, as far as his money went, such things as he deemed he could
shoot across the Flood to her, as fair windowed shoon, and broidered
hosen and dainty smocks and silken kerchiefs, and a chaplet for her
head. And when this was done, he was along with his grandsire in the
street, and there came down from the Castle a company of riders, all in
jack and sallet and long spears, and two knights in white armour all
gleaming in the sun, and the banner of the good town with them. Then his
heart rose so high at the sight, and he yearned so for deeds of fame,
that he smote his hands together and called good luck on them, and some
of them turned about and laughed to each other, and praised the goodly
boy, and knew not that he had slain a stouter man than e'er a one of
them.

Withal his eyes might be no longer while off the gay-clad young women
(for it was holy day, and they dressed out in their best), and he stared
so downrightly on them that his grandsire rebuked him aloud. And that
heard some of the women, and they who were fair amongst them laughed and
praised him, for they deemed him right welcome to look on all he might
see of them, so fair a boy as he was: and one of them, a goodly woman of
some thirty summers, came up to him and bade the old carle hold his
peace and not scold at the boy: "For," said she, "the lad is so
well-liking that he hath good right already to deal with any woman as he
will; and when he groweth older by a half-score years, God-a-mercy,
which of us shall be able to say him nay! Would I were younger by that
tale of years, that I might be able presently to follow him all over the
world." And therewith she kissed him betwixt the eyes and went her ways.
But as before, he was but half pleased to be so kissed, as a mere child.
Shortly to say, there they made great feast for the joy of all these
things, and rode back to the Dale in a day or two and came safe and
sound to Wethermel.

Now at the next meeting 'twixt the two children Osberne bore down all
those fair things; and he found Elfhild on the ness, and she looking shy
and dear, for he had told her that he was going to the cheaping. And now
was her hair no longer spread abroad but bound up close to her head, and
she was clad in a seemly gown of homespun, with black hosen and skin
shoes well laced.

Straightway after the first greetings was great ado about shooting those
fair things across the water; and when  they were all across, Elfhild
undid them, and wept for sheer joy of them and for love of her valiant
friend, and at last she sat nigh the edge hugging them all to her bosom,
and said: "Now, sweetheart, is the tale on thy side; for thou must tell
me all that thou hast seen and done." So he fell to, nought loth, and
told everything at large, and the little maiden's eyes sparkled and her
face glowed; but when he had told last of all about the women and of her
who had kissed him, she said: "Ah, all that is just what my carline
saith of thee, that all women shall love thee; and that is most like,
and what shall I do then, I who shall be so far away from thee?" Then he
swore to her that whatever betid he would always love her, and she made
as if she were gladdened again thereby; but in her heart she could not
but deem that he made somewhat light of it, and was nought so anxious as
she was.

But ere they parted that day, she went aback a little, and did on her
all those fair things which he had brought, such as she might get upon
her body; and a green gown of fine cloth was one of them, which he had
made a shift to cast across bundled up, by dint of his new strength. So
dight, she stood for him to look at, and he was well pleased, and
praised her in such wise that it was clear he looked at her wisely and
closely. So they parted. But when he was gone, she sat down and wept,
she knew not why. And in a while, she arose and did on her everyday
raiment and went home.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Warriors from Eastcheaping Ride into the
Dale](sunf23)

</div>
