[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte1-5) [Next](tte1-7)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

### VI.—P<span class="small">ROBABLE</span> O<span class="small">RIGIN AND</span> H<span class="small">ISTORY</span>.

If we suppose the physical conditions and the climate of the Eskimo
regions not to have altered in any remarkable way since they were first
inhabited, their inhabitants of course must originally have come from
more southern latitudes, and, after their arrival in those regions, have
made the inventions and adopted the mode of life which constitute their
character as Eskimo. When we consider how uniformly this character now
manifests itself, notwithstanding the great separation of the tribes for
upwards of a thousand years or more, it seems probable, firstly, that
the nation during such a period of development must have lived in closer
connection, allowing of concurrence in making the necessary inventions,
as well as in bringing about a general adoption of the same mode of
life; and secondly, that the development of their culture during that
period must have been active and rapid in comparison with the time of
separation which followed, during which the tribes have been leading a
very stationary existence, almost without any perceptible change.
Passing on to the next question—where this development or this change of
a migrating tribe from the south into a polar coast people has taken
place—it appears evident on many grounds that such a southern tribe has
not been a coast people migrating along the sea-shore, and turning into
Eskimo on passing beyond a certain latitude, but that they have more
probably emerged from some interior country, following the river-banks
towards the shores of the polar sea, having reached which they became a
coast people, and, moreover, a polar coast people. The Eskimo most
evidently representing the polar coast people of North America, the
first question which arises seems to be whether their development can be
conjectured <span id="page_71">p. 71</span> with any probability to have
taken place in that part of the world. Other geographical conditions
appear greatly to favour such a supposition. It has been stated
(principally by Lewis Morgan) that the primitive hunting nations of
North America have obtained their principal means of subsistence from
the rivers, especially by the salmon-fishery. The north-west angle of
America, from California to the Coppermine river, contains several large
rivers very rich in fish. The general tendency of all the primitive
nations to expand by driving out one another must have almost
necessarily compelled those of them who occupied the extreme confines to
go onward till they reached the sea-shore. If this happened to be that
of the polar seas, the new settlers would at once in its animals find a
rich source of sustenance, at the same time as the country which they
had passed through and left behind had gradually grown more barren and
destitute of the means of supporting human life. This almost sudden
change in their whole mode of life is also very likely to have given
rise to the general sharp separation of this coast people from the
inland tribes, and the position of hostility in which they stood to each
other. The North-West Indians might be considered as forming an
intermediate link between them. These derive about one-half of their
supplies from the sea by whale-fishery. The rivers taking their course
to the sea between Alaska and the Coppermine river, seem well adapted to
lead such a migrating people onwards to the polar sea. While still
resident on the river-banks in the interior, they may be supposed to
have had the same language, and to have been able to communicate
overland from one river to the other. This intercourse we may assume to
have been still maintained while those of the bands most in advance had
already settled down on the sea-shore and begun catching seals and
whales, covering their boats with skins instead of birch-bark, and
making the principal <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> inventions with
regard to seal-hunting peculiar to the Eskimo; and while the whole
nation in this way gradually settled down on the sea-shore, it also
maintained the unity necessary for the purpose of defending itself
against the hostile inland people. If, in accordance with what will be
explained in the following introduction, we likewise suppose the
principal part of the folk-lore to have originated about this period,
the subjects mentioned in the tales would constitute a means for guiding
us in search of the locality where the first settling on the sea-shore
is likely to have taken place. For this purpose it will be sufficient to
call to mind the tales treating of the following subjects:—

1\. An expedition to the inlanders for the purpose of procuring metal
knives.

2\. A man descended both from the coast people and the inlanders, and
his deeds among both.

3\. The brothers visiting their sister, who had been married into a
tribe of cannibals.

4\. An onslaught on the coast people, from which only a couple of
children were saved, who went off roaming far and wide, and performed
great deeds.

5\. A woman living alternately among the coast people and the inlanders,
persuading them to wage war against each other.

6\. Women who from different causes went and settled down among the
inlanders.

7\. A man taming wild animals for the purpose of crossing the frozen
sea.

8\. Different travels to Akilinek.

On comparing these subjects of the tales with the present geographical
conditions, we will find that in all respects they suggest America and
not Asia. The probable identity of the "inlanders" with the Indians has
already been remarked on. When the new coast people began to spread
along the Arctic shores, some bands of them may very probably have
crossed Behring Strait <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> and settled on
the opposite shore, which is perhaps identical with the fabulous country
of Akilinek. On the other hand, there is very little probability that a
people can have moved from interior Asia to settle on its polar
sea-shore, at the same time turning Eskimo, and afterwards almost wholly
emigrated to America.

On comparing the Eskimo with the neighbouring nations, their physical
complexion certainly seems to point at an Asiatic origin; but, as far as
we know, the latest investigations have also shown a transitional link
to exist between the Eskimo and the other American nations, which would
sufficiently indicate the possibility of a common origin from the same
continent. As to their mode of life, the Eskimo decidedly resemble their
American neighbours; whereas all the northernmost nations of the Old
World, with the exception of the Kamtskadales, are pastoral tribes,
regarding fishing on their rivers as only a secondary occupation; and
when some of them have settled on the river-sides, or even on the
sea-shore, given up their reindeer, and made fishing and hunting their
main means of subsistence, these have still been families originally
belonging to the pastoral tribes, who have changed their mode of life
chiefly on account of poverty. In the Old World we nowhere find anything
at all like a coast race as opposed to an inland people, with the
exception of the Asiatic Eskimo or the Coast-Tschoukschees, who are
quite different from, but still live in friendly relations with, the
pastoral Tschoukschees. As to religion, the Eskimo are also allied to
the Americans, and differ from the Asiatic nations, who have a more
perfect system of deities, worship idols, and with whom sacrifices form
the principal part of their religious rites. With regard to their
language, the Eskimo also appear akin to the American nations in regard
to its decidedly polysynthetic structure. Here, however, on the other
hand, we meet with some very remarkable similarities between the Eskimo
idiom and <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> the language of Siberia,
belonging to the Altaic or Finnish group: first, as to the rule of
joining the affixes to the end and not the beginning of the primitive
word; and second, the very characteristic mode of forming the dual by
*k* and the plural by *t*.

At all events, it must be granted that the origin of the Eskimo people
remains very obscure; and that, possibly, early intercourse and
subsequent mutual influence may once have existed between the
northernmost nations of the two continents, which future researches may
yet reveal.

As regards their numbers, the Eskimo must also be supposed to have
increased considerably in early periods beyond what has been the case in
later times; and the feuds between the single families, or larger bands,
must probably have accelerated their being dispersed to the far east of
Greenland and Labrador. According to the sagas of the Icelanders, they
were already met with on the east coast of Greenland about the year
1000, and almost at the same time on the east coast of the American
continent, on the so-called Vinland, probably Massachusetts or Rhode
Island. Thorvald, the son of Erik the Red, was killed in a fight which
ensued at this meeting; but later travellers in Vinland engaged in
barter with the same natives, and brought two young Eskimo back with
them, who were subsequently baptised, and stated that their mother's
name was Vatheldi, and that of their father Uvœge (probably the
Greenlandish *uvia*, signifying her husband). Between the years 1000 and
1300, they do not seem to have occupied the land south of 65° N.L., on
the west coast of Greenland, where the Scandinavian colonies were then
situated. But the colonists seem to have been aware of their existence
in higher latitudes, and to have lived in fear of an attack by them,
since, in the year 1266, an expedition was sent out for the purpose of
exploring the abodes of the *Skrælings*, as they were called by the
<span id="page_75">p. 75</span> colonists. In 1379, the northernmost
settlement was attacked by them, eighteen men being killed and two boys
carried off as prisoners. About the year 1450, the last accounts were
received from the colonies, and the way to Greenland was entirely
forgotten in the mother country. It must be supposed that the colonists,
on being thus cut off from the world abroad, retired into the interior
of the fiords and creeks; while the Eskimo gradually settled on the
islands,—and that the latter defeated and partly destroyed the remains
of the former. The features of the natives in the southern part of
Greenland indicate a mixed descent from Scandinavians and Eskimo, the
former, however, not having left the slightest sign of any influence on
the nationality or culture of the present natives. In the year 1585,
Greenland was discovered anew by John Davis, and found inhabited
exclusively by Eskimo. After a series of exploring and fishing
expeditions, during which many acts of violence and cruelty were
perpetrated on the natives, the present colonies were founded by Egede
in the year 1721; and since then the whole west coast, upwards to 74°
N.L., has been brought into complete and regular connection with
Denmark. I have spoken of the habits of the Greenlanders chiefly in the
past tense, simply for the reason that though their hunting habits, ways
of life, and methods of thought are still much as they always were, the
influence of the Danish officials, who conduct the trading monopoly, and
of the missionaries, has been such that they have within the bounds of
the Danish possessions abandoned many of their ancient customs along
with their paganism, which change we shall endeavour to explain in the
following section.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte1-7)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
