[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte1-2) [Next](tte1-4.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III.—S<span class="small">OCIAL</span> O<span class="small">RDER</span>, C<span class="small">USTOMS, AND</span> L<span class="small">AWS</span>.

As a matter of course, what we have now to treat on is closely connected
with what has already been said regarding the sustenance and mode of
life peculiar to the Eskimo, because the life of a hunting people
appears to require or give rise to a certain natural partnership or
joint possession of goods confined to wider or smaller circles of the
inhabitants, and directed by certain laws or customs. What one
individual gains by his own labour being, in <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> consequence of this partnership, made accessible to others,
this restriction of his right of property must necessarily be
counterbalanced by certain obligations on the part of others; or, in
other words, the right of property being in a peculiar way restricted
with all the hunting nations, the personal rights and duties must have
their corresponding peculiarities. In dealing with this part of our
subject, we shall first treat of the division of the inhabitants into
smaller communities; second, of the mutual rights and obligations of the
individuals and of those communities as regards persons as well as
property; and lastly, of the larger or smaller public meetings, which at
once represent the national rejoicings and the courts of justice, by
which the laws were maintained.

*The smaller communities or subdivisions which were based upon a certain
partnership*, we have already alluded to as falling under the three
following classes—the family, the inhabitants of a house, and the
inhabitants of a wintering place or hamlet. But scarcely any further
connection of this kind can be traced between the different wintering
places.

*Firstly, regarding the family*. Scarcely anywhere did more than a very
few of the men appear to have more than one wife, but the right of
divorce and of taking another wife seems to have been tolerated without
any definite restriction. Divorce, however, as well as polygamy and the
exchange of wives, which is also mentioned as having existed, was only
approved of by public opinion in so far as it aimed at propagation,
especially of male descendants. The betrothal was managed in three
ways—by mediators, as being fixed on from childhood, and by compulsion.
But the wedding itself seems rarely to have taken place without some
degree of force having been practised upon the bride—a custom of very
universal use among so-called savage races. It also seems that the
engagement had first to be settled with the bride's parents and <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> brothers, and that their consent in every case
was requisite. A girl having many and eligible suitors, but the parents
and brothers being unwilling to part with her, is a very common theme in
the traditional tales. The wedding was performed without any special
ceremony, and without imposing any peculiar obligations. The bride
brought along with her her clothes, an "oolo," or semicircular knife,
and generally a lamp. The family in a narrower sense comprised
foster-children, as well as widows and other helpless persons, who were
adopted into it on the ground of relationship, and more or less occupied
the place of servants. We are inclined to believe that the so-called
slaves or war-prisoners of the western Eskimo live under conditions
similar to those held by the latter. The use of slaves as an article for
barter is not so contrary to the ideas of social order in general as one
would at first incline to believe. We only need to call attention to a
tale in which a company of brothers are spoken of as being unwilling to
allow their sister to marry till one of them happened to acquire a good
friend, whom he persuaded to take her solely with the view of making him
his brother-in-law. This story is in no way offensive to the feelings of
the Greenlanders. But, on the other hand, their mode of life and of
housekeeping hardly seems to allow of these slaves being treated
otherwise than as subordinate members of the family. In a wider sense
the family comprised married children, where these did not found a
separate household by acquiring a separate boat and a tent for
summer-travels. The joint ownership and use of these belongings, and the
common labour and toil in obtaining the means of support by their aid,
seems consequently to define the real community of family or kindred.
The right of being adopted into the family may also be claimed by the
parents-in-law. The new-married couple used to join the parents of one
party, and as soon as the parents of the other were no longer able to
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> support themselves, they also took up
their abode with the children. Besides these, brothers or sisters
without providers, and widows of brothers, were also adopted by the
family, as circumstances might require it. Where a mother-in-law was a
member of the family, the daughter-in-law or wife of the master of the
house was subordinate to her. The husband also had the right of
punishing his wife by striking her in the face with just sufficient
force to leave visible traces. But the children were never, and still
less the servants, subjected to any corporeal punishment. If a man had
two wives, the last was always considered as a concubine only, but
succeeded the first in case of death. In cases of divorce the son always
followed the mother. As a result of these arrangements every family
generally had more than one provider. Widows or unmarried women with
children rarely set up housekeeping by themselves, and were generally
provided for by their housemates or kindred. If there was more than one
son, the subsequent ones sometimes, on acquiring a boat and tent, left
home and established a separate family or household. The owner of a boat
or a tent was thus considered the chief or head of the family, and it
was principally he who was called the **igtuat** of the others. Simpson
mentions the chiefs on Point Barrow as *Oomeliks*, which no doubt must
be the Greenlandish **umialik**, signifying *owner of a boat*, and thus
is in strict accordance with what has just been said. When a man died,
the oldest son inherited the boat and tent, along with the duties
incumbent on the provider. If no such grown-up son existed, the nearest
relative took his place and adopted the children of the deceased as his
foster-children. But when these were grown up, and had themselves become
providers, their widowed mother was at liberty to establish a separate
household with them, without any further obligation to the
foster-father. As regards inheritance in general, it must be remembered,
that <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> among the Greenlanders it
represented a question of obligations and burdens rather than of
personal gain. Moreover, the only real hereditary goods—viz., the boat
and tent—required annual repair and covering with new skins, almost as
many as one hunter on an average could procure during the whole year.
Lastly, it must be noticed that, even if the family were divided by
removing to distant winter-quarters, the ties of relationship were
always respected whenever mutual assistance was required.

*The next kind of community was that of the housemates*, where more than
one family agreed to inhabit the same house. This, as a general custom,
has perhaps only existed in Greenland, where often three or four,
sometimes even more, families housed together. Each of these families,
however, in the main maintained their own household; every family in the
narrower sense—viz., the married couple with their children—having its
own room on the main ledge with its lamp standing in front of it, while
the unmarried people and the guests slept on the window and side ledges.
As the house was built and repaired by joint labour, it could scarcely
be said to have any particular owner; or if there happened to be one, he
would only have all the burdens and obligations without any real rights
as to possession. But among the heads of the several families one was
generally found who was held in greater esteem than the rest by all the
housemates, though not in the same degree as the members of a family
respected their so-called *igtuat*.

*The third kind of community is what we may call place-fellows*—viz.,
inhabitants of the same hamlet or wintering place. Only in exceptional
cases might a single house be found at such a place. When it is
considered how widely the population was spread, and how distant the
hamlets were from each other, it will be understood as a matter of
course that the inhabitants living together on <span id="page_27">p.
27</span> such a sequestered spot must continually come into contact
with each other in the hamlet itself, as well as in their common
hunting-places, which made them form a band or community separated from
the rest of the population. But still less than among the housemates was
any one belonging to such a place to be considered as chief, or as
endowed with any authority to command his place-mates. The folk-lore in
many cases shows how men who had succeeded in acquiring such a power
were considered as usurpers of undue authority, and vanquishing or
killing them ranked as a benefit to the community in general. However,
it was a standing rule that nobody from a distance could settle down for
good at the place without the general consent of its inhabitants.

 

T<span class="small">HE</span> P<span class="small">RINCIPAL</span>
L<span class="small">AWS WITH REGARD TO</span> P<span
class="small">ROPERTY AND</span> G<span class="small">AIN WERE AS
FOLLOWS</span>:—

*Of every seal caught at a winter station* during the whole season of
their dwelling in the winter-houses, small pieces of flesh, with a
proportionate share of the blubber, were distributed among all the
inhabitants; or if insufficient for so many, the housemates first got
their share. Nobody was omitted on these occasions, and in this way not
the very poorest could want food and lamp-oil so long as the usual
capture of seals did not fail. Besides this general distribution, every
man who had taken a seal used to invite the rest to partake of a meal
with him. It must, however, be understood, that where the population of
a place exceeded a certain number, or at times when the seals were very
plentiful, this sharing of flesh and blubber, either by distribution or
by feasting, would probably be limited, in the first case, to perhaps
some of the nearest houses or relatives.

*Beyond the confines of such places* as were already inhabited, *every
one was at liberty to put up his house* <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>
*and go hunting and fishing* whenever he chose. Not even where others
had first established a fishing-place, by making weirs across a river,
would any objection be made to other parties making use of these, or
even injuring them.

*Any one picking up pieces of driftwood or goods lost at sea* or on land
was considered rightful owner of them; and to make good his possession,
he had only to carry them up above high-water mark and put stones upon
them, no matter where his homestead might be.

*If a seal was harpooned and got off* with the harpoon sticking in it,
the first striker lost his right to it as soon as the hunting-bladder
became detached. It then became the property of whoever found and
finally killed it. This would take place when the animal had been hit
with the large harpoon and the hunting-line snapped, while the small
harpoon or bladder-arrow has the bladder attached to it. But if the
animal ran far away with the bladder-arrow, the first hunter also lost
his claim, just as if the bladder had been wanting. The weapons attached
to the animal were restored to the proper owner when he announced
himself.

*Any other kind of goods found* were considered the property of the
finder.

*If two hunters at the same time hit* a bird or a seal, it was divided
into equal parts with the skin attached. But if this happened with a
reindeer, the animal belonged to the one whose arrow had reached nearest
the heart, the other only getting part of the flesh.

*All kinds of game or animals which happened to be rare*, on account of
their size or other unusual circumstances, were more than ordinary
species considered common property. Of walrus and the smaller cetaceous
animals, in localities where they were rarely found, the killer only
took the head and tail, the remainder being given up to public use. This
was also the case on the first capture of such animals as only appeared
at certain seasons, or <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> with any animal
caught during times of long want and bad luck to the hunters. But if *an
animal of the largest size, more especially a whale, was captured, it
was considered common property*, and as indiscriminately belonging to
every one who might come and assist in flensing it, whatever place he
belonged to, and whether he had any share in capturing the animal or
not. The flensing was also managed without any order or control; and if
any one happened to wound another on such an occasion, he was not held
answerable for it.

In South Greenland, where bears are rarely seen, it is said that, *on a
bear being killed*, it belongs to whoever first discovered it, setting
aside altogether the person who killed it.

*When no seals or other larger animals were brought home to a house*,
those families who were best off for provisions generally invited the
other housemates, but not the place-fellows, to partake of the principal
daily meal with them; or one or two families went joint shares in this,
each contributing something.

*If a man had borrowed* the tools or weapons of another, and lost or
injured them, he was not bound to give the owner any compensation for
the loss or damage. Moreover, if any one neglected to make use of his
fox-traps, and another went and had them set and looked after, the
latter became owner of the game captured.

*If a man repented of a bargain*, he had a right to retract it. Nothing
was sold on credit, at least not without being paid for very soon.

Looking at what has been said regarding the rights of property and the
division of the people into certain communities, in connection with the
division of property into the classes just given, we are led to the
conclusion that the right of any individual to hold more than a certain
amount of property was, if not regulated by law, at least jealously
watched by the rest of the community; and <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> that, virtually, the surplus of any individual or
community—fixed by the arbitrary rate which tradition or custom had
assigned—was made over to those who had less. From this point of view,
the first class of goods would be what belonged to a single person—viz.,
his clothes, weapons, and tools, or whatever was specially used by
himself. These things were even regarded as having a kind of
supernatural relation to the owner, reminding us of that between the
body and the soul. Lending them to others was not customary; but if a
person owned more suits than usual, public opinion would doubtless
compel him to allow others to make use of them. The custom just
mentioned, that a borrowed article which was lost or damaged need not
necessarily be returned or compensated to the owner, strikingly shows
that if a man had anything to spare or lend, it was considered
superfluous to him, and not held with the same right of possession as
his more necessary belongings, but to be ranked among those goods which
were possessed in common with others. The consequence was, that
superfluous garments or implements rarely existed. Only a few first-rate
hunters possessed two kayaks, one fitted for the open sea and another
for the sheltered inlets; but if he did happen to have three kayaks, he
would at times be obliged to lend one of them to some relative or
housemate, and sooner or later would lose it. The next class of property
was what belonged to the whole family—the boat and tent, the provisions
collected during the summer season, and lastly, a small store of skins
and other articles intended either for family use or for bartering
purposes. The third class consisted of what belonged to the housemates
in common—viz., the house itself, the supply of victuals sufficient for
certain meals, &c. A fourth class we may make comprise what was shared
with the inhabitants of the same hamlet, such as the flesh and blubber
derived from all the seals caught during the <span id="page_31">p.
31</span> stay in winter-quarters. A fifth and last class might be
added, comprising those spoils which, either on account of the size of
the captured animal, or sometimes owing to great scarcity and famine,
were shared with the inhabitants of the neighbouring hamlets.

Some of the laws or customs above described concerning property—as, for
instance, those that relate to things found—which at first sight may
appear very strange, will find their explanation on closer inspection,
and with due consideration of the peculiar localities, the long
distances, and the scanty population, on account of which any article
lost could hardly be expected to be recovered in a state still fit for
use. But as to the principal peculiarities, it naturally follows that
the members of the different communities, in profiting by the gains of
so dangerous and toilsome a trade as that of the seal-hunter, could not
be exempted from certain mutual obligations. *The principal of these
obligations were as follows*:—

*The duty of providing*, and the right of being *adopted into a family*,
have already been described in connection with the mutual relationship
of its members. In order to become housemates, an agreement between the
families in question was of course required. So also, if a *new family
wished to settle at an inhabited place*, the newcomers had to wait the
consent of the people already settled there, which was given by means of
certain signs of civility or welcome, the strangers having meanwhile put
their boat ashore, but not yet begun bringing up their goods. If those
signs were not given, they put off again, and went on to look for
another place.

It might be considered a law that *every man, as far as he was able to
do it, should practise the trade of a hunter on the sea*, until he was
either disabled by old age or had a son to succeed him. This duty
neglected, he brought upon himself the reprehensions not only of the
other members of his own family, but also of the wider <span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> community. So also he was in duty bound to
bring up his sons to the same business from their early childhood.

From their living together in small habitations, *a friendly way of
conversing* was necessary; and all high words or quarrelling are
considered as unlawful. The Greenlandish language is therefore devoid of
any real words for scolding. The general mode of uttering annoyance at
an offence is by silence; whereas the slightest harshness in speaking,
even to younger or subordinate persons, is considered as an offence in
so far that it may give rise to violent quarrels and ruptures.

In what has now been said, as in general, we have mainly had in view the
Greenlanders under ordinary conditions. We have, however, also noted,
that the rules of property were necessarily subjected to several
modifications, according to the size of the houses, the hamlets, and
other local circumstances. Where among the western Eskimo one place is
said to contain 50 houses and 300 inhabitants, the housemates here must
have represented the family as well, and the population have been too
numerous to allow of any general distribution of flesh and blubber
during the winter. In such cases it would be reasonable to suppose that
the inmates of a certain number of houses were united, and made a
community by themselves, like that of a whole hamlet in Greenland.
Nobody being able to acquire and accumulate property beyond certain
limits, and the state and conditions of the different households being
all alike even there, the principles of social institutions among the
western Eskimo can hardly be supposed to have differed much from those
of the Greenlanders.

*No court of justice was established as a special authority* to secure
the maintenance of the laws. With exception of the part which the
angakoks, or the relatives of an offended person, took in inflicting
punishment upon the delinquent, public opinion formed the judgment-seat,
<span id="page_33">p. 33</span> the general punishment consisting in the
offenders being shamed in the eye of the people; and *the only regular
courts were the public meetings or parties*, which at the same time
supplied the national sports and entertainments, and greatly contributed
to strengthen and maintain the national life.

*The first kind of meetings* were those which daily occurred when the
men returned from their seal-hunt and invited each other to partake of
whatever they had brought home. The men alone partook of those meals,
the females getting their share afterwards. During these meals the
events of the day were told and commented on, several matters of common
interest discussed, and the had behaviour, or perhaps vices, of some
individuals censured and blamed.

*The other kind of meetings* consisted of the real festivals, which were
most commonly held in the middle of the winter; though they also took
place during summer, when, of course, the guests could be more numerous.
Besides eating and talking, the principal entertainments on those
occasions consisted in (1) different games and matches of strength and
agility; (2) singing and drum-playing, with dancing and declamation; (3)
satirical songs, or nith-songs, which, properly speaking, represented
the court of justice.

Playing at ball was the favourite game, and managed in two different
ways,—either by throwing the ball from one person to the other among the
same partners while the opposite party was trying to get hold of it; or
each of the sides had its mark, at a distance of 300 to 400 paces, which
they tried to hit with the ball, kicking it along with the foot from
either side. The athletic exercises or matches consisted in wrestling
with arms and fingers, different exercises on lines stretched beneath
the roof, kayak-races, boxing on level ground, and several other games.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

The songs and declamations were at times performed in the open air, but
generally at the feast, immediately after the meal, and by the men
alternately. The singer stood forth on the floor with his drum—a ring 1½
foot in diameter with a skin stretched on it—beating it with a stick in
accompaniment to his song, adding gesticulations, and dancing at
intervals. The nith-songs just mentioned were of a peculiar kind, used
for settling all kinds of quarrels, and punishing any sort of crime, or
breach of public order or custom, with the exception of those which
could only be expiated by death, in the shape of the blood-revenge. If a
person had a complaint against another, he forthwith composed a song
about it, and invited his opponent to meet him, announcing the time and
place where he would sing against him. Generally, and always in cases of
importance, both sides had their assistants, who, having prepared
themselves for this task, could act their parts if their principals
happened to be exhausted. These songs also were accompanied by
drum-playing and dancing. The cheering or dissent of the assembly at
once represented the judgment as well as the punishment.

*As regards real crimes*, those in violation of the rights of property,
as a matter of course, can only have been trifling; on the other hand,
the passions of the people tending to ambition, domineering, or the mere
fancy for making themselves feared, sometimes gave rise to violence and
murder. The practice of witchcraft must also, be ranked among this
class—those who believed, or even confessed themselves able to practise
it, being stimulated by almost the same passions, and punished in the
same way if suspected. When the witches, on being threatened with death,
did not deny their guilt, the only passion which can have incited them
seems to have been a kind of ambition; and this is quite in accordance
with the angakoks being their principal adversaries, denouncing <span
id="page_35">p. 35</span> them, and inflicting punishment upon them.
Murder, and under certain circumstances witchcraft, were, as a rule,
punished with death, which was carried out in two different ways—either
as revenge of blood, or being duly deliberated upon by the inhabitants
of one or more stations. To fulfil the blood-revenge was the duty of the
nearest relative; and having performed it, he had to denounce himself to
the relatives of him whom he had killed. Capital punishment, as the
result of deliberation and decree, was inflicted upon witches, and upon
such individuals as were obviously dangerous to the whole community, or
at least suspected of being so. Lastly, some cases of manslaughter
occurred which were considered neither decidedly admissible nor
altogether unlawful. These were as follow: The killing of an infant
that, from the loss of its mother, would be liable to die from
starvation; the killing of insane persons threatening the life of the
housemates; and lastly, the continued blood-revenge or this revenge
carried out on some kindred or place-fellow of the murderer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte1-4.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
