[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte1-1) [Next](tte1-3.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II.—L<span class="small">ANGUAGE</span>.

Of all the original American languages, perhaps none has been so
minutely scrutinised, both lexicographically and grammatically, as that
of the Greenlanders. The Labrador dialect also belongs to the better
known amongst them. But as regards the dialect spoken by the western
Eskimo on the shores of Behring Strait, our only source of information
is a few lists of words given by travellers of different nations, partly
modified by translation. Such exist in Russian, English, and German.
There are also a few very scanty grammatical remarks given by a single
author. These lists are inevitably exceedingly imperfect copies of the
original words. They have been procured by questioning natives, which
has been partly done by gestures and <span id="p012"></span>{see
[picture](p012.md) facing page 12} <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> through
interpreters of little intelligence; and then the structure is so widely
different from that of European languages, that a single word in most
cases has no corresponding word in these, but requires several for its
complete expression. The sounds, too, may make a different impression on
different hearers—may be imperfectly expressed in Russian, English, and
German writing, and this also may not be free from errors of
transcription. All this may cause any amount of misunderstanding. Let us
first take up the question of a variety of dialects, where closer
examination will perhaps show the contrary. These authors alluded to
mention about eight different Eskimo dialects round Behring Strait. Some
examples will explain how the supposed differences between the words
here and in Greenland may have originated. For instance, wife is called
*nulijak* and *ahanak;* man, *uika* and *nuhelpach;* baby, *mukisskok;*
shoulders, *tuichka* and *tuik;* hand, *tatlichka* and *aiged;* dying,
*tukko* and *tukoeuchtuk;* cold, *ninhlichtu* and *paznachtuk;* heat,
*matschachtuk* and *uknachtuk;* fire, *eknek* and *knk* (!), Let us now
take what we find in the Greenlandish dictionary and grammar:
**nuliaĸ**, wife (of a man); **arnaĸ**, woman; **uviga**, my husband;
**nukagpiaĸ**, unmarried man; **mikissoĸ**, small; **tuvíka**, my
shoulders; **tuvik**, shoulders; **tatdlíka**, my arms; **agssait**,
fingers or hand; **toĸo**, death; **toĸussoĸ**, dead; **nigdlertoĸ**,
cool; **panertoĸ**, dry; **masagtoĸ**, wet; **ûnartoĸ**, hot;
**ingneĸ**, fire. The apparent differences between these two lists seem
evidently to have arisen from mere misunderstanding, without any real
variation between the languages. On comparing, in the same manner, the
rest of the lists of words from Behring Strait, two-thirds or
three-fourths of the words are found to be more or less Greenlandish.
Moreover, taking into consideration the manner in which travellers have
been enabled to communicate with one tribe of Eskimo, by interpreters
taken from another, and that the difference between the Greenland <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> and the Labrador is smaller than, for
instance, between Swedish and Danish, one is induced to assume an
affinity of language among all the real Eskimo sufficient to allow
mutual intercourse everywhere. On the other hand, it cannot be denied
that the language of the Eskimo to the west of the Mackenzie is
considerably different from that of the eastern tribes.

Taking it for granted that Greenlandish may be held to represent the
Eskimo tongue in general, we shall endeavour to give an idea of its
remarkable construction. Its most striking general peculiarity is the
length of its words; and this, in fact, expresses its chief
dissimilarity from all languages, except the American. What in other
tongues may demand a whole sentence, and even additional dependent
sentences, in Greenlandish may sometimes be expressed by a single verb.
Consequently, Greenlandish grammar has both to construct words and to
fix them in the sentence. This construction is effected by the help of
additional elements or imperfect words, having no meaning by themselves,
but expressive as additions to the main word, with which they can be
combined in varieties of number and order, every combination altering or
modifying the sense of the radical or adding a certain complexity of
notions to it. Composition is completed by flexion, and particularly by
conjugation, which not only, as in several other dialects, can make the
verb include a pronoun as subject, but also as object, and in this way
can form a sentence by itself, whereby these additional elements may
render the sentence compound, or even include other sentences. The
following abstract of Samuel Kleinschmidt's Greenlandish grammar will
give a sufficient idea of this process:—

*Writing and pronunciation*.—The language is written with the same
letters as the German, only omitting some, and with the addition of the
following:—

**ĸ**, differing from **k** by its being formed in the remotest <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> part of the mouth, and sounding as something
between gh, rk, and rkr.

**r’**, sounding like a very guttural German ch. \[The letter *r* is
sometimes, but not necessarily, marked with an apostrophe, or headed by
a comma, to make it sound like a very guttural German *ch*. {from the
errata}\]

**ss**, like the French j.

**ng** and **rng**, nasal sounds.

The pronunciation of the vowels is often modified by the next
consonants. The letter *a* is often heard as in the English word *at*.
The accents ´ ^ \~, which show whether the syllable is to be pronounced
sharp, long, or long combined with sharp, are of the greatest importance
as to the sense of a word. Otherwise, the letters have mostly the same
power as in German and the Scandinavian tongues.

Greenlandish likes simplicity in its syllables, preferring those
composed of one vowel and one consonant. More than one consonant in a
syllable is not allowed, if any harshness should arise. No word can end
with other consonants than **ĸ, k, p,** and **t,** nor begin with others
than these, and **m, n,** and **s.** All the combinations of consonants
possible in the structure of words are limited to thirty.

*Parts of speech*.—The words are composed of the *stem* and the
*enclitic for flexion*. The stem can be changed, even abbreviated to the
root, which is the part always remaining.

*The stems* are divided into (1) *primitive*, as **igdlo**, house; (2)
*added*, as **ssuaĸ**, great or large; **lik**, having or endowed with.
The latter can hever be used alone, but must be appended to the former
singly, or followed by more, as **igdlorssuaĸ**, a large house;
**igdlorssualik**, one who has a large house. These added stems, which
perhaps originally were words, are numerous as well as completely
movable, and can be embodied in the word as required by the meaning.
Affixes of this kind are of course not wanting in our better-known
European languages, but are by no means so numerous or serviceable as in
Greenlandish. On the other hand, the formation <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> of compound words by simply joining other real words, is
completely unknown in Greenlandish.

With regard to their endings, both kinds of stems are divided into (1)
*nominal*, having of themselves the meaning of nouns; (2) *verbal*,
which, with their proper endings, are only used exceptionally in
phrases, or with the sense of interjections, but for the verbal purpose
require a particular addition, which is the part altered through the
conjugation—for instance, **ajoĸ** and **pisuk** are incomplete words,
giving the notions of illness and going, but with the verbal ending they
give **ajorpoĸ**, he is bad; **pisugpoĸ**, he goes. By help of the same
ending also, nouns can be converted into verbs, but only a few of them,
and then they comprise some peculiar additional signification, such as
that of acquiring or getting, as **âtâĸ**, a seal; **âtârpoĸ**, he
caught a seal.

In the way here described, the stems give rise to *nouns and verbs;* and
in reality these are *nearly the only elements of speech* in this
tongue, which otherwise has only some particles or inflexible words, and
even these seem to have had the same source, whereas all the other parts
of speech are more or less directly to be looked for in the nouns and
verbs, the pronouns especially in the latter.

*The grammatical forms*.—Flexion is obtained by help of some additional
endings, combined with more or less modification of the word. It
comprises the *number*—viz., singular, dual, and plural; and as to the
verbs, also persons, as **igdlo**, a house; **igdluk**, two houses;
**igdlut**, several houses; **takuvoĸ**, he sees; **takuvugut**, we see.
Next, the flexions express something *relating to another* thing, either
as a property or as an object; and in these cases they have obtained the
name of *suffixes*, as **igdlua**, his house; **igdluvut**, our houses;
**takuvâ**, he sees it; **takuvavut**, we see them. Moreover, the nouns,
besides their simple form, in which they are used as objects, and which
on this account is called objective, also <span id="page_17">p.
17</span> have a subjective form given to them, either in case of their
being possessors (corresponding to genitive) or subjects in a transitive
sentence, as **teriangniaĸ**, the fox; **teriangniap**, the fox's;
**teriangniaĸ takuvâ**, he sees the fox; **teriangniap takuvâ**, the fox
sees him. In nouns flexion also takes the *place of prepositions*, by
help of cases answering to the questions *where, in what way, whereto,
in what manner*,—as **nuna**, land; **nuname**, on the land;
**nunavtinut**, to our land. Lastly, in verbs the flexion comprises
*seven moods*—viz., indicative, interrogative, optative, conjunctive,
subjunctive, infinitive, and participle.

While end-flexion thus expresses the relations in a remarkable manner,
on the other hand it has no form for sex and tense. The context must
show whether the verb has the sense of present or past, and otherwise
time is expressed more distinctly by help of additional stems containing
the notions of begins to, has finished, is going to, joined to the
original verb.

As regards nouns particularly, they all in their objective form end in a
vowel, or in **ĸ, k,** and **t,** the subjective taking **p**, the dual
**k**, and the plural **t**. There are two kinds of suffixes expressing
the relation to the subject itself, or to another; and besides this,
every suffix has its peculiar form for number, subjective, objective,
and the local cases. But in order to add the above flexional letters,
the nouns themselves, in certain cases, must be somewhat modified; and
the rules for this transformation are nearly the only complicated part
of Greenlandish grammar. Yet the natives would seem sometimes not to
consider this transformation absolutely necessary in correct speaking,
saying **igdlo**, house; **igdlut**, houses; but **tupeĸ**, tent;
**tovĸit**, or also **tupit**, tents. Excepting these transformations,
the numerous forms may be represented by help of a scheme which can be
written on a quarto page.

The verbs are divided, according to the mark of the <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> third person indicative, into five classes,
with endings as follow: **poĸ, rpoĸ, gpoĸ, voĸ,** and **aoĸ,** but each
still to be conjugated according to the same scheme, which comprises all
the numerous combinations of these forms—viz., numbers, persons,
suffixes, and moods—and still, on account of its regularity, can be
written on one folio page. Negation is expressed by the additional stem
**ngilaĸ**, which is conjugated in a somewhat peculiar manner.

In consequence of what has just been explained, personal pronouns
generally are of no use. Still, some words of pronominal signification
exist, used when the person must be expressed more distinctly; but even
those words seem to have been formed by help of suffixes, such as
**uvanga**, I, which perhaps originally signified, my being here.
However, of demonstrative roots twelve are found corresponding to the
notions here (**ma**), north, south, there, above, &c. Without any
addition or flexion, they only occur as interjections, but otherwise
always as nouns, answering to the questions—*where, whence, which way,*
and *whereto*. Of these roots, pronouns for the third person are formed
by adding **na**, with the sense of, *this here* (**mána**), he there in
the north, &c.

The real numerals only run from 1 to 5, like the fingers on one hand,
then the fingers on the other are enumerated, and afterwards, if
necessary, the toes on the feet. For this reason 20 is called "the man
finished." The rest are expressed by some partitive word showing the
number counted, as **atauseĸ**, 1; **mardluk**, 2; **pingasut**, 3;
**sisamat**, 4; **tatdlimat**, 5; but **arfineĸ pingasut**, 8 (or 3 upon
the other hand); 24 is called 4 upon the second man, and 80, finishing 4
men.

*Construction of words*.—We have already mentioned the signification of
the stems. These are derived from roots, and it must be supposed that
either several stems have a common root, or that several roots have been
<span id="page_19">p. 19</span> related to each other, as, for example,
**ĸôĸ**, urine; and **kûk**, a river. But the grammar does not explain
the origin of the stems, whose formation is considered as accomplished
and fixed; and here we shall only try to give an idea of their further
application in constructing words. With the exception only of the verbal
ending, necessary for the formation of real verbs, words are always
composed or formed by help of the *additional stems*, also called
*affixes*. These are divided into (1) the transforming class, by which
verbs can be converted into nouns, or nouns into verbs; (2) the
formative class, by which the word remains unchanged in this respect.

 

*A selection of the most remarkable additional stems or affixes.*

I. A<span class="small">DDED</span> N<span class="small">OUNS OR</span>
N<span class="small">OMINAL</span> A<span class="small">FFIXES</span>.

1\. *Transforming*.

**toĸ** or **ssoĸ**, being or doing so, consequently a sort of nominal
participle, as **ajorpoĸ**, he is bad; **ajortok**, a bad one;
**autdlarpoĸ**, he goes away; **autdlartoĸ**, he who is departed.

**taĸ, ssaĸ** or **gaĸ**, representing a kind of passive participle, as
**tûniúpâ**, he gives it; **túniússaĸ**, what is given, a present.

**fik**, the time or place, when or where the action has passed.

**ut** or **t**, the means or reason for the action, as **agdlagpoĸ**,
he writes; **agdlaut**, a thing to write with, pen, ink, and also the
object described.

2\. *Formative*.

<span class="small">a. *Adjective-like* or neutral, which alter the
stem-word in no essential way.</span>

**gssaĸ**, destined for or future, as **pôĸ**, a bag; **pûgssaĸ**, a
cloth or skin for making a bag.

**ssuaĸ**, large or very, as **igdlorssuaĸ**, a large house;
**ajortorssuaĸ**, very bad.

**nguaĸ**, small or little.

**tsiaĸ** or **atsiaĸ**, tolerable or somewhat.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="small">b. *Substantive-like*, which make the stem-word
totally subordinate.</span>

**lik**, provided with.

**mio**, inhabitant of.

**ussaĸ**, like or similar, as **sioraĸ**, sand; **sioraussaĸ**,
something like sand, among other meanings used for raw sugar.

II\. A<span class="small">DDITIONAL</span> V<span class="small">ERBS
OR</span> V<span class="small">ERBAL</span> A<span
class="small">FFIXES</span>.

1\. *Transforming*.

**gâ** or **râ**, has for, uses as, regards as—**erneĸ**, son;
**ernerâ**, he has him for a son.

**ĸarpoĸ**, has or there is, as **savik**, a knife; **saveĸarpoĸ**, he
has a knife, or there is a knife.

**liorpoĸ**, makes, builds.

**liarpoĸ**, travels or goes to.

**uvoĸ**, is; **savik**, a knife; **saviuvoĸ**, it is a knife.

**sivoĸ**, gains or acquires.

2\. *Formative*.

<span class="small">a. *Neutral*, with a meaning partly as auxiliary
verbs, partly as adverbs.</span>

**savoĸ**, will or shall; **saveĸásavoĸ**, he shall have or will get a
knife.

**niarpoĸ**, endeavours to.

**dluarpoĸ**, well, sufficiently; **ingerdlavoĸ**, it moves;
**ingerdlavdluarpoĸ**, it goes quick.

**ngârpoĸ**, highly; **angivoĸ**, it is large; **angingârpoĸ**, is very
large.

**tarpoĸ**, repeatedly or using to.

<span class="small">b. *Intransitive*.</span>

**juipoĸ**, never.

**gajugpoĸ**, is bending to, likes to.

**narpoĸ**, is to make one; **masagpoĸ**, is wet; **masangnarpoĸ**, is
to grow wet from.

<span class="small">c. *Transitive*.</span>

**tipâ**, causes him to; **autdlarpoĸ**, goes away; **autdlartípá**, he
sends him away.

**rĸuvâ**, commands or wishes that he.

**serpâ**, waits till he; **tikipoĸ**, he comes; **tikitserpâ**, is
waiting till he comes.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

It is by combining a series of these added stems to the principal stem,
that such an extraordinary complexity of ideas can be conveyed in a
single word. Only the more intelligent, however, are perfectly skilled
in this operation, and the number of affixes attached to one primitive
stem seldom amounts to ten. The order in which they are linked to one
another depends on the meaning, besides certain particular rules for
each of them; but they are always put after the primitive stem, and the
flexion always ends the word. The total number of affixes is about two
hundred. As a sample, we shall try here to compose a word of some of the
stems given above—

**igdlor-ssua-tsia-lior-fi-gssa-liar-ĸu-gamiuk.**

This word consists of a primitive stem, seven affixes, and lastly the
flexion for the third person conjunctive with the suffix for him. It
signifies—as he commanded (or wished) him to go to the place, where the
tolerably large house shall be built.

**igdlu-gssar-si-ni-uti-ger-ĸu-vara.**

This word is constructed of one primitive and six additional stems, with
the flexion for the first person indicative, and the suffix for him or
it, and signifies—I ordered him to use it as a means for buying
(endeavouring to get) house-materials (a future house).

*Syntax*.—In consequence of what has been explained above, much of what
in other dialects belongs to syntax, in Greenland is represented by
composing words and by flexion. There is a very sharp distinction
between the verbs as transitive, intransitive, or having both qualities
at once. The exclusively transitive verbs always require a suffix; where
this is wanting they grow *reflective*—for instance, **toĸúpâ**, he
killed him; but **toĸúpoĸ**, he killed, always supposes himself.

Among the seven moods of the verb, the infinitive and the participle do
not exactly correspond to what are <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> so
called in other languages. The infinitive is very often used like the
participle in a run of sentences, to express what in other tongues is
obtained by help of while, then, as, during, &c, The participle exhibits
the peculiarity of only *in some degree corresponding to a noun*, on
which account it has been called a verbal participle. It can become the
object, but not the subject of a sentence. On the other hand, even in
this mood the verb includes at once its own subject and its object, for
which reason the participle is used for subordinate sentences, as
**takugâ**, he who sees him; **takugingma**, thou who seest me;
**takugivkit**, I who see thee; **nalugavkit** (of **naluvâ**, he does
not know it), **takugingma**, as I did not know thee, thee who saw
me—viz., as I did not know that thou sawest me; **naluvarma
takugivkit**, thou didst not know that I saw thee.

Lastly, it must be remembered that in agreement with what has already
been explained, if even a sentence has its subject and object expressed
by particular nouns, its verb nevertheless must indicate both by aid of
the suffix in its ending, as **inûp igdlo takuvâ**, the man (s)—the
house—he saw it,—viz., the man saw the house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte1-3.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
