[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte1-0) [Next](tte1-2.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

### I.—S<span class="small">UBSISTENCE AND</span> M<span class="small">ODE OF</span> L<span class="small">IFE</span>.

The sustenance of the Eskimo is entirely derived from the capture of
seals and cetaceous animals, which has made them inhabitants of the
sea-shore. Both kinds of animals enable them, especially by means of
their blubber, and the seals also by their skins, to brave the severity
of climate, and, independent of any vegetable resources, to settle and
procure the means of life as far north as any explorers have hitherto
found human inhabitants. The seals are sufficient, and at the same time
indispensable, for this purpose. They are caught partly from kayaks, or
shuttle-shaped boats, and partly from the ice and the shore. Among their
more or less peculiar hunting contrivances we may mention: (1) *Their
kayaks, or boats, which consist of a framework of wood*, joined together
principally by strings, and provided *with a cover of skins*
impenetrable to the water. (2) *The adjustment of the kayak itself and
the kayak-coverings*, with a view to provide *an entire shelter for the
kayaker*, or seal-hunter, with the exception only of the face, to
protect him against the water. Only a small number of Eskimo have kayaks
fitted for more than a single man;<span
id="page_6_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_6_note_1.md) and still more
exceptionally, in the farthest north some are found who have no kayaks
at all, from the sea being almost constantly frozen. (3) *The adaptation
of a bladder filled with air to the harpoons or javelins*, in order, by
retarding the animals, to prevent them escaping after being struck, and
to prevent the harpoon sinking, should the hunter miss his aim. (4) *The
very ingenious way in which the point of these weapons*, and of the
spears with which the animals are finally killed, *are fitted into the
shaft*, so that having penetrated <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="p007"></span>{see [picture](p007.md) facing page 7} the skin of the
animal, the point is bent out of the shaft, which is either entirely
loosened, while only the point with the line and the bladder remains
attached to the animal, or keeps hanging at the point. Without this
precaution, the animal in its struggles would break the shaft or make
the barbs slip out of its body again. (5) *The sledge with the dogs*
trained for drawing it. In speaking of these complex contrivances as
characteristic of the Eskimo, we do not claim any of them as their
exclusive property or invention, or as having been unknown among other
nations now or in former ages. It would, however, be perhaps difficult
to find anything at all like their kayaks in any other part of the
globe.

*Their dwellings* are always of two kinds—namely, tents for the summer,
and houses or huts for winter use. The tents, generally adapted for less
than ten and rarely for more than twenty individuals, consist of from
ten to fourteen poles, with one end raised high and leaning on the frame
which forms the entrance, and the whole covered over with a double layer
of skins. The tents seem to be constructed in the same way everywhere,
and to differ from those of neighbouring nations in having their highest
point at the entrance in front, from which the roof inclines towards the
sides, resting all round upon a low wall of stones and turf; while the
neighbouring tribes generally construct their tents of a conical form,
with the top in the centre. The winter-houses are far more varied in
structure. Generally they are built of stones and turf, the roof-spars
and the pillars which support the middle of the roof being of wood. Only
the Eskimo of the middle regions have vaults of snow for their
habitations; whilst the western Eskimo build their houses chiefly of
planks, merely covered on the outside with green turf. Some of the very
far northern Eskimo are obliged to use bones or stones instead of wood.
As to the form of the houses, the passage leading into them is long and
very narrow, and <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> elevated towards both
ends—viz., the outer and the inner entrances; so that on entering the
house one has first to descend, and afterwards again to ascend before
reaching the interior. This consists of a single apartment, only the
ledge or bench for resting and sleeping on is divided into separate
portions for the different families. In Greenland the ledge or bench—the
"brix," as the Danes call it—only occupies one side of the house, its
length being proportioned to the number of the families, whose rooms or
stalls are separated by low screens, each of these rooms having its lamp
standing on the floor in front of it. The snow-huts, from their circular
form, are of course arranged differently; and this is also the case with
the plank-houses in western Eskimo-Land, which have a cooking-place in
the centre of the floor, with a smoke-hole in the roof, like the houses
of the neighbouring Indians. But the house-passage has generally
everywhere a small side-room with a cooking-place. The provisions are
sometimes kept in rooms connected with the house or house-passage; in
other places in separate storehouses, or in caves or holes of the rocks
covered with stones. In former times it seems to have been the custom at
the more populous places to have a public building for meetings,
especially for solemn occasions. Such buildings are still in common use
among the western Eskimo: they are also spoken of in Labrador; and in
Greenland they are well known by tradition, and were called **ĸagsse**;
while in other districts they are termed *kagge*, *karrigi*, and
*kashim*. Though the dwelling-houses are nearly always built for more
than one family, the number of these is seldom found to exceed three or
four. In south Greenland, however, houses have been met with more than
sixty feet in length, and containing stalls for ten families. At Point
Barrow, Simpson found nearly fifty houses with two *karrigi*, for 309
inhabitants.

*The dress* for men and women is much alike, consisting <span
id="p008"></span>{see [picture](p008.md) facing page 8} <span
id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span id="p009"></span>{see [picture](p009.md)
facing page 9} of trousers, and a jacket with a hood to be drawn up to
cover the head (at least for men), and otherwise fitting tightly round
the body, leaving no opening excepting for the face and the hands. The
same shape is adopted for the kayak-jacket, the inside border of which
is pressed closely round the rim encircling the opening in which the man
sits, and the hands are protected by a pair of waterproof leather
mittens. The foot-gear consists of different kinds of boots, exceedingly
well made, and in preparing the skins for the manufacture of which a
considerable degree of care and ingenuity is displayed.

*The Eskimo may more properly be classed among the people having fixed
dwellings than among the wandering nations*, because they generally
winter in the same place through even more than one generation, so that
love of their birthplace is a rather predominating feature in their
character. During the rest of the year, however, they are constantly on
the move, carrying their tents and all their furniture with them from
one place to another, choosing their route with different objects,
generally preferring that of reindeer-hunting, but also having an eye to
seal-hunting, fishery, or trade. When travelling in this manner for very
distant places, they are sometimes arrested on their route and obliged
to take up winter quarters before reaching their proper destination. An
Eskimo from the northern shores of Hudson Bay, who accompanied Franklin
as interpreter, is said to have reported that people in his house
resided during the winter on the borders of the lakes in the interior,
and in summer at the sea-shore. If this be true, it would form a
remarkable exception to the general rule.

*The mode of life* of the Eskimo being mainly that of hunters and
fishers, they must, in comparison with other nations, be
regarded—speaking broadly—as having no regular property. They only
possess the most necessary utensils and furniture, with a stock of
provisions for less <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> than one year; and
these belongings never exceed certain limits fixed upon by tradition or
custom. On account of these limits, which are of great importance as
regards their social order, and the laws which will be discussed
hereafter, the properties may be thus classified:—

1\. Property owned by an association of generally more than one
family—*e.g.*, the winter-house, which, however, is only of any real
value as regards the timber employed in raising it, the rest of it being
built of such materials as are to be found everywhere, by the work of
women's hands.

2\. Property the common possession of one, or at most of three families
of kindred—viz., a tent and everything belonging to the household, such
as lamps, tubs, dishes of wood, soapstone pots; a boat, or *umiak*,
which can carry all these articles along with the tent; one or two
sledges with the dogs attached to them; the latter, however, are wanting
in South Greenland. To this must be added the stock of winter
provisions, representing as much as, used exclusively, will be
sufficient for two or three months' consumption; and lastly, a varying
but always very small store of articles for barter,

3\. As regards personal property—*i.e.*, owned by every
individual—cognisance must be taken of clothes, consisting of, at least
for the principal members of the family, two suits, but rarely more; the
sewing implements of the women; the kayaks of the men, with tools and
weapons belonging to these; a few other tools for working in wood; and
weapons for the land-chase. Only a very few first-rate seal-hunters own
two kayaks, but several of them have two suits of the appertaining
implements,—namely, the *large harpoon* (**tukaĸ**, the point; and
**ernangnaĸ**, the shaft of it), with its bladder and line; the
*bladder-arrow* or javelin (**agdligaĸ**), a smaller harpoon with the
bladder attached to its shaft; the *bird-arrow* or bird-spear
(**nugfit**); the *lance* or spear (**anguvigaĸ**), the point of which
is without barbs; *fishing-lines*, and various smaller articles.

<span id="p010"></span>{see [picture](p010.md) facing page 10}

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Excepting the houses of the western Eskimo, which, being composed of
timber, are of more value, the conditions of property seem to be nearly
alike everywhere. With a few exceptions, the natives carry all their
movable goods along with them in the boat on their summer travels, and
on arriving at some narrow strip of land which has to be crossed,
everything is brought over along with the boat.

Notwithstanding their very limited feeling as to accumulating property,
the Eskimos have kept up a kind of trade among themselves, and it is for
this purpose that some of their most distant journeys are undertaken.
But the mere desire to travel may perhaps have urged them quite as much
as the prospect of gain. The objects for barter have been such as were
produced or were only to be found in certain localities, and which
nevertheless might to a certain degree be considered almost
indispensable—such as soapstone, and the lamps and vessels manufactured
from it, whalebone, narwal and walrus teeth, certain kinds of skin,
sometimes even finished boats and kayaks, but rarely articles of food.
The articles looked upon as most precious were, however, any objects
made of metal, or other materials more exclusively possessed by foreign
nations. In the most remote ages the Eskimo on those trading expeditions
appear to have overpassed their present southern limits. This may be
gathered partly from pure Eskimo words being found in the language of
more southern tribes, partly from the sagas of the old Scandinavians,
who seem to have met travelling Eskimo even to the south of
Newfoundland. In more modern times, a regular trading communication has
been discovered, by means of which certain articles from Asia have
reached the Eskimo of the middle territories, perhaps even sometimes the
shores of Davis Strait or Hudson Bay; and others, on the other hand,
have travelled from there to Behring Strait,—all through internal
trading carried on among <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> the natives
themselves. No communication of this kind seemed to have existed between
the tracts last named and Greenland; but the inhabitants of different
parts of Greenland, with the exception of the northernmost tribes, have
always maintained an intercommunication. The European settlements have,
of course, entirely altered or annihilated this intercourse; but even
while it existed, the mutual trade among the natives has scarcely given
rise to any organisation of labour, or furthered any kind of industry
which might have been of some consequence for the development of certain
manufactures. Every community of kindred being in possession of a boat
and a tent, must be able to provide what is necessary to secure
themselves a comfortable life, except the few articles mentioned as
among the principal articles of trade.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte1-2.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_6">p. 6</span>

<span id="page_6_note_1"></span>[1](#page_6_fr_1.md) Such kayaks, suited
for two people—one sitting behind the other—are the "baidars" of the
Eskimo of Behring Strait.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
