[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte1-3) [Next](tte1-5)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV.—R<span class="small">ELIGION</span>.

The following account of the religious belief of the Eskimo is
principally founded upon the traditions—the author having made inquiries
among the natives as to all that appeared doubtful and obscure, and
lastly, completing this information with the help of the oldest authors.
The whole information thus brought together has been divided and
arranged with a view to making it as convenient and intelligible to the
reader as possible: a more complete understanding of several portions of
it must be sought in the tales themselves.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

 

1\. G<span class="small">ENERAL</span> I<span class="small">DEAS
CONCERNING THE</span> E<span class="small">XISTENCE OF THE</span> W<span
class="small">ORLD, THE</span> S<span class="small">UPREME</span> P<span
class="small">OWERS, AND THE</span> C<span class="small">ONCEPTION
OF</span> G<span class="small">OOD AND</span> E<span
class="small">VIL</span>.

Only very scanty traces have been found of any kind of ideas having been
formed as to the origin and early history of the world, and the ruling
powers or deities, which seems sufficiently to show that such
mythological speculations have been, in respect to other nations, also
the product of a later stage of culture. Existence in general is
accepted as a fact, without any speculation as to its primitive origin.
Only the still acting powers concealed in nature, and to which human
life is subordinated, are taken into consideration.

Men, as well as animals, have both *soul and body*. The soul performs
the breathing, with which it is closely allied. It is quite independent
of the body, and even able to leave it temporarily and return to it. It
is not to be perceived by the common senses, but only by help of a
special sense belonging to persons in a peculiar state of mind, or
endowed with peculiar qualities. When viewed by these persons, the soul
exhibits the same shape as the body it belongs to, but is of a more
subtle and ethereal nature. The human soul continues to live after death
precisely in the same manner as before. The souls of animals also, to a
certain degree, seem to have been considered as having an existence
independent of the body, and continuing after its death. Here and there
traces have also been found of a belief in the migration of souls, both
between dead and living men, and between men and animals; but it remains
uncertain whether this ought not rather to be explained as having an
allegorical sense. Lastly, they say that the human soul may be hurt, and
even destroyed; but on the other hand, it may also be fitted together
again and repaired. We sometimes find it mentioned that the migration
may be partial—viz., that some parts of the soul of a deceased <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> person may pass into another man and cause in
him a likeness to the first.

The whole visible world is ruled by supernatural powers, or "*owners*,"
taken in a higher sense, each of whom holds his sway within certain
limits, and is called **inua** (viz., *its* or *his* **inuk**, which
word signifies "*man*," and also *owner* or *inhabitant*). Strictly
speaking, scarcely any object, or combination of objects, existing
either in a physical or a spiritual point of view, may not be conceived
to have its inua, if only, in some way or other, it can be said to form
a separate idea. Generally, however, the notion of an inua is limited to
a locality, or to the human qualities and passions—*e.g.*, the inua of
certain mountains or lakes, of strength, of eating. The appellation,
therefore, quite corresponds to what other nations have understood by
such expressions as spirits, or inferior deities. An owner or ruler
conveys the idea of a person or soul, but it appears not necessarily
that of a body. The soul of the dead seems to have been considered as
the inua of the bodily remains.

*The earth, with the sea* supported by it, rests upon pillars, and
covers an *under world*, accessible by various entrances from the sea,
as well as from mountain clefts. Above the earth an upper world is
found, beyond which the blue sky, being of a solid consistence, vaults
itself like an outer shell, and, as some say, revolves around some high
mountain-top in the far north. The *upper world* exhibits a real land
with mountains, valleys, and lakes. After death, human souls either go
to the upper or to the under world. The latter is decidedly to be
preferred, as being warm and rich in food. There are the dwellings of
the happy dead called **arsissut**—viz., those who live in abundance. On
the contrary, those who go to the upper world will suffer from cold and
famine; and these are called the **arssartut**, or ball-players, on
account of their playing at ball with a walrus-head, which gives rise to
the aurora borealis, or Northern <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> lights.
Further, the upper world must be considered a continuation of the earth
in the direction of height, although those individuals, or at least
those souls temporarily delivered from the body, that are said to have
visited it, for the most part passed through the air. The upper world,
it would seem, may be considered identical with the mountain round the
top of which the vaulted sky is for ever circling—the proper road
leading to it from the foot of the mountain upwards being itself either
too far off or too steep. One of the tales also mentions a man going in
his kayak to the border of the ocean, where the sky comes down to meet
it.

The invisible rulers by which the earth is governed can scarely be
imagined without regarding them in some relation of dependency one on
another. Inasmuch as we are allowed to consider almost every spot or
supposed object a special dominion with its special inua ruling within
certain limits, we might also be led to imagine several of those
dominions as united, and made subordinate to one common ruler, by which
means we would have a general government of the world under one supreme
head ready organised. The mythology of the Greenlanders, however, does
not contain any direct doctrine with such a tendency. Very scanty traces
also have been found of any attempts towards explaining the origin of
the world, as well as of things existing and their qualities, as,
*e.g.*, regarding some species of animals, besides the moon and several
stars. Though it has been asserted the Greenlanders believe that the
first of our race arose from the earth, and that the first man, called
Kallak, created the first woman out of a tuft of sod, and also that some
tradition exists about the Deluge, yet these statements cannot be
accepted without doubt and reservation, because they may have partly
originated from the questioners themselves, who pretend to have heard
them from the Greenlanders, but have probably involuntarily acted upon
the latter by <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> their prepossessed mode of
questioning. Still, on looking at the whole religious views of the
natives, they do seem to presuppose a single power by which the world is
ruled. Certain means were believed to exist by which man was not only
enabled to enter into communion with the invisible rulers, but could
also make them his helpers and servants. Such supernatural assistance
might be acquired in a more or less direct way—viz., either through men
endowed with the peculiar gift called *angakoonek* (cor. spelling
**angákûneĸ**, signifying *angakok-wisdom* or *-power*, or the state of
*being angakok*). But these men only acquired this gift by applying to
and calling on a yet more exalted power, which made these rulers become
their *helping* or *guardian spirits*, or *tornat* (plural of
**tôrnaĸ**). This supreme ruler was termed *tornarsuk;* and in his being
thus enabled to dispose at will of all the minor powers, forcing them to
serve the angakut, and in the same degree making the whole nature
subordinate to mankind, some idea surely of the godhead must be
connected with him. It also seems to have been ascertained that the
Greenlanders have imagined him as having his abode in company with the
happy deceased in the under world; but to this vague belief the whole
doctrine concerning his existence seems to have been limited. The early
authors on Greenland, indeed, have given utterance to different opinions
concerning tornarsuk which they have gathered from the natives, some of
them representing him as the size of a finger, others of a bear, and so
on; but all these statements seem to rest upon error and superficial
inquiry. As far as the traditions are concerned, the name of tornarsuk
is very rarely mentioned in any of them.

Among the supernatural powers was another constituting the source of
nourishment, supplying the physical wants of mankind. These being almost
exclusively got from the sea, we cannot wonder that this power had its
abode in the depths of the ocean; and its being represented <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> as a female is probably emblematical of the
continual regeneration of life in nature, as well as of economy and
household management, generally devolving on women. This being is named
*arnarkuagsak* (cor. sp. **arnarĸuagssâĸ**, also signifying old woman in
general); but the common opinion among the older authors, describing her
as a demon of evil, is quite erroneous. She sits in her dwelling in
front of a lamp, beneath which is placed a vessel receiving the oil that
keeps flowing down from the lamp. From this vessel, or from the dark
interior of her house, she sends out all the animals which serve for
food; but in certain cases she withholds the supply, thus causing want
and famine. Her retaining them was ascribed to a kind of filthy and
noxious parasites (**agdlerutit**, which also signifies abortions or
dead-born children), which had fastened themselves around her head; and
it was the task of the angakok to deliver her from these, and to induce
her again to send out the animals for the benefit of man. In going to
her he first had to pass the *arsissut*, and then to cross an abyss, in
which, according to the earliest authors, a wheel was constantly turning
round as slippery as ice; and then having safely got past a boiling
kettle with seals in it, he arrived at the house, in front of which a
watch was kept by terrible animals, sometimes described as seals,
sometimes as dogs; and lastly, within the house-passage itself he had to
cross an abyss by means of a bridge as narrow as a knife's edge.

According to the religious notions just given, there must have existed a
generally established belief in the presence of some ruling power to
which mankind and nature were alike subjected, as well as in certain
modes of obtaining assistance from this power. This supernatural aid, as
well as all the actions of men with a view to call it forth, were in
social estimation considered as being good and proper. But besides this,
there existed another supernatural influence, which was wholly <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> opposed to that which had its source from
tornarsuk; and the art of summoning it was practised and taught from
mouth to mouth by people not acknowledged or authorised by the
community. It was always invoked in secret, and always with the object
of injuring others, and wholly in favour of the practiser. This art was
called *kusuinek* or *iliseenek* (cor. sp. **ilisîneĸ**), corresponding
very exactly to witchcraft, and representing the worst form of evil,
both with regard to the help obtained and the means of procuring it. The
essence of it was selfishness in the narrowest sense, being alike
adverse to the interest of the community and to the supreme rule of
things existing in which the people believed. When we look at these
ideas, as very strongly discerned and maintained by the Greenlanders,
certain opinions not unfrequently professed by authors as to the
religious creeds of the more primitive nations are shown to be utterly
erroneous,—viz., first as regards confounding the practice of witchcraft
with their calling to their aid supernatural powers, authorised and
acknowledged by their religious beliefs; and secondly, the maintaining
that those nations on a lower stage of civilisation were wholly without
any conception of moral good and evil, and limited their regards to
physical evil.

In the practice of iliseenek, or witchcraft, a power was applied to
which was superior to mankind; and we might thus be led to suppose that
this power represented an evil being or ruler in opposition to
tornarsuk. Some mystical tradition is related by Egede, mentioning two
men engaged in dispute, one desiring man to be subjected to death, and
the other insisting upon his becoming immortal. The words spoken by them
may perhaps be considered as magic spells, and the one of them is
represented as having made death enter into the world. This legend is
rather obscure, both with regard to its authenticity and its meaning;
but the idea of death was closely connected with that of witchcraft,
this latter always more <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> or less having
death for its aim. Sickness or death coming about in an unexpected
manner was always ascribed to witchcraft; and it remains a question
whether death on the whole was not originally accounted for as resulting
from it. The fact that witches were punished as transgressors of human
laws, and were persecuted by the angakut, makes it possible that they
represent the last remains of a still more primitive faith, which
prevailed before the angakut sprang up and made themselves acknowledged
as the only mediators between mankind and the invisible rulers of the
world. These primitive religious notions may in that case have amounted
to a belief in certain means being capable of acting on the occult
powers of nature, and through them on the conditions of human life.
Traces of the same belief were perhaps also preserved among the people
in the shape of some slight acquaintance with the medical art, and
superstitions regarding amulets, the knowledge of which was likewise
peculiar to women. And allowing this supposition, we shall find the most
striking analogy between the persecution of witches by the angakut and
the persecution of the angakut by the Christian settlers, with this
exception, that the Christian faith exhibits a personification of the
evil principle which enabled the missionaries to vanquish for ever the
authority of tornarsuk as the supreme ruler and source of benefits, by
transforming him into the Christian devil, who for this reason
henceforth was termed tornarsuk.

In the folk-lore of the Greenlanders, as well as of other nations,
divine justice principally manifests itself in the present life.
According to the older authors, they had also some faint ideas of
punishment and reward after death. We learn from these that witches and
bad people went to the upper world; whereas those who had achieved any
great and heroic actions, or suffered severely in this life, such as men
who had perished at sea, or women who had died in child-birth, went to
the world below. At <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> the same time, some
tales seem to hint at a belief that the manner in which the body of the
deceased is treated by the survivors influences the condition of his
soul. When closely examined, this belief is akin to the idea of
punishment and reward corresponding to the actions performed in this
life.

 

2 O<span class="small">N THE</span> S<span
class="small">UPERNATURAL</span> A<span class="small">GENCIES BY
WHICH</span> H<span class="small">UMAN</span> L<span class="small">IFE
IS INFLUENCED</span>.

By supernatural we understand such agencies as do not work according to
the usual laws of nature, and accomplish their deeds in a manner
imperceptible to the common organs of sense, except in a few rare
instances, but only manifest themselves to certain individuals
peculiarly gifted, or in some cases to animals; also endowed with a
peculiar sense. This sense is generally called *nalussaerunek*, and the
individual possessing it *nalussaerutok*, signifying, "not being
unconscious of anything," consequently nearly the same as *clairvoyant*.
Such agencies may be divided into those which are performed by the
*inue* (plural of *inua*) of nature in general, and those belonging to
witchcraft.

(1.) *The Supernatural Rulers, or Inue*.

These have already been mentioned. As far as they may be perceived by
the common senses, they generally have the appearance of a fire or a
bright light; and to see them is in every case very dangerous, partly by
causing *tatamingnek*—viz., frightening to death—partly as foreshadowing
the death of a relative (**nâsârneĸ**). Moreover, some of these powers
are able, even at a distance, to *sever the soul from the body*
(**tarnêrutoĸ**, he who is bereft of his soul; and perhaps also
signifying, the soul in this way temporarily separated from the body).
Heavy grief often produced a state of mind called **suilârĸineĸ**, in
which the sufferer deliberately <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> went out
in search of horrors and dangers, in order to deafen grief by means of
*excitement*.

Although all the supernatural rulers may be considered as the inue each
of their special domains, they also lead an independent existence as
individual beings wholly apart from these, In the first place, it is
possible even for man, and in certain cases animals, to practise a
supernatural power from some motive or other; and secondly, some of the
supernatural beings must no doubt be considered as having originated
from real beings, only transfigured through the traditional tales.

*As to men*, they are invariably *free after death to reappear as
ghosts;* but certain persons are in this respect more dangerous than
others: and besides, some persons or people in a peculiar state of
existence are even in life endowed with superhuman properties.
Individuals belonging to this class in general are commonly called
**imáinaĸ íngitsut**, which signifies, *who are not only such*,—meaning,
*as others;* or, *not of common kind*. The dead man is considered as the
inua of his grave, and of the personal properties he left, it is no
doubt for this reason that things belonging to absent persons can by
certain signs announce the death of their owners or their being in
distress. The soul even appears to remain in the grave during the first
days. The most harmless way in which a ghost can manifest himself is by
whistling, the next by a singing in the ears (**aviuiartorneĸ**), by
which performance he simply asks for food; and generally when singing in
the ear is perceived, it is the custom to say: "Take as thou
likest"—viz., of my stores. But more dangerous are the ghosts that
appear in a true bodily shape, especiaily those of delirious people and
of angakut. The deceased must also be considered fully able to
recompense the benefits bestowed upon them during their lifetime, being
a kind of guardian spirits to their children and grandchildren,
especially to those who are <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> named after
them. But a slain man is said to have power to avenge himself upon the
murderer by *rushing into him*, which can only be prevented by eating a
piece of his liver. Danger is more or less connected with everything
appertaining to, or having been in any contact with, dead bodies, or
used at funerals, the invisible rulers in some cases being apt to take
offence, or *have smoke or fog of it*—viz., causing bad weather and bad
hunting on this account.

*Persons in an extraordinary state were as follow*:—

A *kivtgtok* (correct spelling, **ĸivigtoĸ**), or a man who fled mankind
and led a solitary life alone with nature, generally in the interior of
the country, obtained an enormous agility, and became nalussaerutok,
learned to understand the speech of animals, and acquired information
about the state of the world-pillars. The reasons which led men to
become kivigtok, were being unjustly treated, or being merely scolded by
kindred or housemates, who in this case were always in danger of
vengeance from the hand of the fugitive.

An *anghiak* (correct spelling, **ángiaĸ**) was an abortion, or a child
born under concealment, which became transformed into an evil spirit,
purposely to revenge himself upon his relatives. Akin to the anghiak
were those who, either when new-born or at a maturer age, were converted
into monsters, devouring their former housemates.

An *angherdlartugsiak* (correct spelling, **angerdlartugsiaĸ**) was a
man brought up in a peculiar manner, with a view to acquiring a certain
faculty, by means of which he might be called to life again and returned
to land in case he should ever be drowned while kayaking (also called
**anginiartoĸ**), For this purpose the mother had to keep a strict fast,
and the child to be accustomed to the smell of urine, and be taught
never to hurt a dog. Lastly, when placing him in the kayak for exercise,
the father mumbled a prayer, beseeching his deceased <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> parents or grandparents to take the child
under their protection. On coming back to shore certain things might
scare him, whereas the dogs protected and took care of him.

*As to animals*, if in the tales they are represented as speaking, or in
the shape of men, this is not always to be understood as analogous to
fable. Partly it is in the power of beasts to show themselves in a
supernatural shape, partly they may appear as ghosts, or in some state
akin to that. Probably they must also be considered as the inue of their
own kind, having the power of avenging their destruction. The so-called
*umiarissat* (plural of **umiariaĸ**) is a supernatural "umiak," or
women's boat and its crew, who are, in some cases at least, represented
to be seals transformed into rowers.

Among *the purely supernatural or fabulous beings*, the following must
be particularly mentioned:—

The *ingnersuit* (plural of **ingnerssuaĸ**, properly, great fire) have
their abodes beneath the surface of the earth, in the cliffs along the
sea-shore, where the ordinarily invisible entrances to them are found.
They have also been noticed entering through mounds of turf. Probably
these abodes have some connection with the real under world itself. They
are divided into two classes, the upper and the lower ingnersuit. The
former, called *mersugkat* or *kutdlit*, are benevolent spirits,
protecting the kayakers. They have the shape of men, but a white skin,
small noses, and reddish eyes. Their mode of life is like that of the
Greenlanders themselves, only their houses and furniture are finer and
richer. They often accompany the kayaker, assisting and taking care of
him, but invisible to himself, and only to be seen by others at some
distance. The lower ingnersuit, called *atdlit*, have no noses at all;
they persecute the kayakers, especially the most skilled whom they know,
dragging them down to their home in the deep, where they keep them in
painful captivity.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

The *kayarissat* (plural of **ĸajariaĸ**) are kayakmen of an
extraordinary size, who always seem to be met with at a distance from
land beyond the usual hunting-grounds. They were skilled in different
arts of sorcery, particularly in the way of raising storms and bringing
bad weather. Like the umiarissat, they use one-bladed paddles, like
those of the Indians. Pieces of bark from American canoes, which are
sometimes brought ashore on the coast of Greenland, are named after both
kinds.

The *kungusutarissat* (plural of **ĸungusutariaĸ**), or mermen, are
considered as the proper inue of the sea. They are very fond of
fox-flesh and fox-tails, which therefore are sacrificed to them in order
to secure a good hunting. They are also declared enemies to petulant and
disobedient children.

The *inugpait* are giants inhabiting a country beyond the sea, where all
things have a size proportionate to them, and where also one-eyed people
are found.

The *tornit* (plural of **tuneĸ**) are the most eminent among the inue
of the interior. Their dwellings are partly situated in the tracts
visited by men, but the entrance to them is hidden by vegetation and
soil. They are twice the size of men, or even more, but lead the same
kind of life. They also go hunting at sea, but only in foggy weather and
without kayaks, sitting on the surface of the water. They are wise men,
and know the thoughts of men before they are spoken.

The *igaligdlit* (plural of **igalilik**) are inlanders, who wander
about with a pot on their shoulders, cooking their meat in it at the
same time.

The *isserkat* (plural of **isseraĸ**) are inlanders also, called
**tukimut uisorersartut**, those who twinkle or blink with their eyes
longwise or in the direction of length.

The *erkigdlit* (plural of **erĸileĸ**) have the shape of man in the
upper part of their body, but of dogs as to their lower limbs.

The *inuarutligkat* (plural of **inuarutdligaĸ**) are a kind <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> of dwarf, possessing a shooting-weapon, with
which they are able to kill a creature by merely aiming or pointing at
it.

Among the inlanders are also to be included the *tarrayarsuit*, or
shadows, and the *narrayout*, or big-bellies. Several monsters reside at
the bottom of lakes and inside certain rocks, and are named the inue of
these places. Among these are to be ranked the *amarsiniook* and the
*kuinasarinook*, referred to in the tales.

The *amarok*, which in other Eskimo countries signifies a wolf, in
Greenland represents a fabulous animal of enormous size, also repeatedly
referred to in the tales.

The *kilivfak*, also called **kukoriaĸ, kukivfâgâĸ, ataliĸ,** is an
animal with six or even ten feet.

The *kugdlughiak* (correct spelling, **ĸugdlugiaĸ**) is a worm,
sometimes of enormous size, with a number of feet, and extraordinary
speed.

Other similar monsters mentioned in the tales are: The *kukigsook,
agshik, avarkiarsuk;* the *monster-foxes, hares,* and *birds*, and the
*ice-covered bears*.

The upper world is also inhabited by several rulers besides the souls of
the deceased. Among these are the owners or inhabitants of celestial
bodies, who, having once been men, were removed in their lifetime from
the earth, but are still attached to it in different ways, and pay
occasional visits to it. They have also been represented as the
celestial bodies themselves, and not their inue only, the tales
mentioning them in both ways. The owner of the moon originally was a
man, called Aningaut, and the inua of the sun was his sister, a woman
beautiful in front, but like a skeleton at her back. The moon is
principally referred to in the tales.

The *erdlaveersissok*—viz., the entrail-seizer—is a woman residing on
the way to the moon, who takes out the entrails of every person whom she
can tempt to laughter.

The *siagtut*, or the three stars in Orion's belt, were <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> men who were lost in going out to hunt on the
ice. These are mentioned in the tales in the same way as the
*igdlokoks*, who have the shape of a man cleft in two lengthwise.

Among the rulers who are named only according to special domains, and
whose number appears almost unlimited, are the inua of the air, the inua
of appetite or eating, and the inerterrissok or the prohibitor—viz., he
who lays down the rules for abstinence.

(2.) *Witchcraft*.

The practice of witchcraft has already been explained in the preceding
pages as representing the principal source from which all the evils to
which mankind is subject have their origin—viz., death, and what will
more or less immediately lead to death, as sickness and famine.
Generally, it is called *kusuinek*, and its performance may be limited
to a single act; but those who have practised it to a certain degree are
called *iliseetsut* (plural of **ilisîtsoĸ**), witches or wizards. It
appears to have been also practised by supernatural beings as well as by
mankind. Witches, however, in part acquired the powers of these—their
souls being able to leave the body, and to approach those whom they
intended to injure without being visible to any but the nalussaerutut or
clairvoyants, to whom the witches themselves appeared as breathing fire,
and with their hands and the lower parts of their arm blackened.

In practising witchcraft some magic words were spoken, but it remains
uncertain if words were thought necessary in every case, or if words
alone sufficed; and lastly, whether witches were able to work their
wicked ends by merely touching. Generally, different materials were
considered necessary for the performance of witchcraft, such as (1)
parts of human bodies, or objects that had been in some way connected
with dead bodies, as if some remnant of that power which had caused
death <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> still attached to them. (2) Worms
and insects, perhaps on account of their apparent annual coming out of
the soil, the common grave of all that lives and breathes, or possibly
on account of their mysterious nature and destination; spiders were used
for creating sickness; and insects swallowed in drinking water could be
made to eat the entrails, kill the man, and reappear from out his body
enlarged in size. (3) Parts of the animals caught by the person to whom
mischief was intended. In most cases this was done by cutting a small
round piece out of the skin. This, when put down into graves, caused the
total failure of the owner's hunt from that time. From this kind of
witchcraft the name of kusuinek is derived, signifying, taking away
from, or diminishing something. In all cases witchcraft was an art
handed down by tradition, but taught as well as practised in perfect
secrecy.

 

3\. O<span class="small">F THE</span> M<span class="small">ANNER IN
WHICH</span> M<span class="small">AN BY</span> S<span
class="small">UPERNATURAL</span> A<span class="small">SSISTANCE CAN
AVERT</span> E<span class="small">VIL AND OBTAIN</span> B<span
class="small">ENEFIT</span>.

Certain agents or means are given to mankind by which they are enabled
to avert impending misfortune and obtain prosperity, in a manner
deviating from the ordinary laws of nature. These means are gained by
aid of a knowledge the highest stage of which is called *angakoonek*.
But an angakok being not only able himself directly to procure specially
desired advantages, but also acting as the leading authority in all
matters of religion, the angakoonek will be separately treated of
hereafter. The fair and righteous means to which mankind in general may
have recourse are thus to be considered as having their source in
tornarsuk, with the angakut as mediators. Their general aim may be said
to be the counteracting and defeating of witchcraft, at the same time
serving to appease and influence the inue of nature, partly for the
purpose of averting the danger <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> arising
from these powers, especially that of being frightened to death, partly
in order to obtain what may be desired. Moreover, they may be divided
into two classes: first, the general religious means to be used by
people in general for certain purposes or in certain cases; secondly,
some peculiar faculties, which are possessed only by certain
individuals.

(1.) *The General Religious Means*.

*The general religious means* may again be divided into three separate
classes, the first consisting of words to be spoken—viz., prayer and
invocation; the second, in the possession and application of certain
material objects called amulets; and the third, of certain actions, such
as the following out certain rules as to the mode of life, sacrifices,
and different other observances for appeasing the ruling powers and
defeating witchcraft.

*In the prayer or serranek*, as far as we know, only the desired object
is pronounced, without any direct mention being made of the fulfiller;
whereas the *invocation* (**ĸernaineĸ**) is merely an appeal for aid to
some special owner of power (**ĸernarpâ**, he invokes him). It is not
known whether in any of these cases words of the pronouncer's own choice
could be employed. The general custom, at all events, was to use
distinct spells with peculiar tunes belonging to them. Such a prayer was
called *serrat* (in the tales translated by *spell, magic lay,* or
*song*), and might have reference to health, hunting, assistance against
enemies or dangers—in short, whatever purpose might be desired within
the limits of what was deemed right and proper. A serrat was supposed to
have a power by itself, independent of the person who happened to know
or make use of it. It was therefore considered an object of possession
and barter; but it had also a deeper significance, in so far as a man in
using it applied to a certain power, or had his thoughts fixed upon the
fulfiller or the original giver of the spell, these persons <span
id="page_52">p. 52</span> being generally identical—viz., the nearest
deceased kindred of the user. The serrats were in some cases expressly
directed to the invoker's ancestors, and are also known to have been the
hereditary property of the same family. In the same way, invocations
were generally addressed to the souls of the grandparents, and were
principally employed as a preventive against being frightened to death.
A serrat had to be originally acquired by a revelation to some
individual who possessed a certain degree of angakok-wisdom, and in most
cases they probably dated from very remote ages. The serranek was
chiefly practised by old men, who, while performing it, partly uncovered
the head.

The *amulets*, or *arnuat* (plural of **arnuaĸ**), were small articles
which either permanently belonged to the individual, and in this case
were always carried about his person or worn on the body or inserted in
his weapons, or were sometimes only acquired for certain special
occurrences. The efficacy of an amulet depends firstly on the nature of
the original thing or matter from whence it has been derived. To serve
this purpose, certain animals or things which had belonged to or been in
contact with certain persons or supernatural beings were chiefly chosen;
and sometimes, but more rarely, also objects which merely by their
appearance recalled the effect expected from the amulet, such as figures
of various objects. Undoubtedly the original inua of the objects was
believed to be still acting by means of them. Those in most esteem were
objects pretended to have belonged to the ingnersuit and the
inuarutligkat. Very precious amulets were got from the *avingak*, which
in Labrador signifies a kind of weasel, but in Greenland a fabulous
animal, and the application of which in a tale from both countries
exhibits a most striking similarity. It is also said to serve the
western Eskimo for amulets. Probably the choice and appreciation of
things most useful and appropriate for amulets was <span id="page_53">p.
53</span> akin to their faith in different medicines, both kinds of
knowledge being principally professed by old women, and was perhaps,
like witchcraft, a remnant of the older religion which was tolerated by
the angakut. Although the articles thus used had a power of their own
because of their origin, they still required the application of a
serrat, which was pronounced by him who gave the amulet to its final
proprietor. If it was only to be used in particular cases, a special
serrat was also required in order to make it work; and in some cases,
when the owner happened not to have the amulet at hand, he might have
recourse to invocation. Among the amulets probably we should also
include what was called **pôĸ**, or bag, signifying the skin of some
animal, enabling a man to acquire its shape. Amulets were ordinarily
acquired from the parents during early childhood.

It remains somewhat doubtful how to class the art of making *artificial
animals*, which were sent out for the purpose of destroying enemies. In
the tales we meet with bears and reindeers of this description; but most
common is the belief in the **tupilak**, composed of various parts of
different animals, and enabled to act in the shape of any of those
animals which was wished. The tupilak differed from the amulet in being
the work of its own user, and being secretly fashioned by himself. It
therefore might seem to belong to witchcraft; but according to the
opinion of the present Greenlanders, it is considered as having been a
just and proper remedy, made by help of a serrat. It must always be
remembered that its secret origin and traditional teaching, and not the
immediate intention of it in every single case, constituted the evil of
witchcraft. The serrat and arnuak might be used with a good intention,
though at the same time pernicious to their immediate objects—viz., the
enemies. On the other hand, they could certainly also be used with evil
designs: and moreover, even angakoks were known to have practised
witchcraft; <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> but all such cases were
condemned by public opinion as evil abnormities and abuses.

*The rules concerning their mode of life* were principally concerned
with *fasting* and *abstinence*, but also included certain regulations
as to clothing, out-of-door life, and daily occupations in general. They
partly referred to the ordinary routine of daily life, particularly that
of the wife, the child, and the mourners after death; partly to special
or accidental occurrences, such as sickness. The powers worshipped
through these observances appear to have been, besides the
*inerterrissok*, the inue of the air, the moon, and other domains,
supposed to influence the weather and the chase, and also the souls of
the deceased. The lying-in woman was not allowed to work, nor to eat any
flesh excepting from the produce of her husband's chase, and of which
the entrails had not been wounded; but fish was allowed. Two weeks
subsequent to her delivery she might eat flesh, but the bones of it were
not to be carried outside the house. In the first child-birth they were
not allowed to partake of the head or the liver. They were permitted
neither to eat nor drink in the open air. They had their separate
water-tubs; and if any one else should happen to drink out of these,
what remained was thrown outside. The husbands likewise were not
permitted to work or do any barter for some weeks. They also used to
pull off one boot and put it beneath the dish they were eating, in order
to make the son grow up a good hunter. During the first few days of the
child's life no fire must be lighted at their stall, and nothing be
cooked over their lamp. Bartering was likewise not customary where there
was a person sick. Immediately after birth, a name was given to the
child; and it was always a matter of great importance to have it called
by the name of some deceased relation, one of the grandparents being
generally preferred. But, on the other hand, names belonging to persons
recently dead must not be pronounced, <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>
for which reason a second name was generally given for daily use, and
even this, for the same reason, was apt to be afterwards changed. The
navel-string of the child must not be cut with a knife, but with a
mussel-shell, if not bitten off, and was often used as an amulet. A
urine-tub was held above the head of a woman in labour, in order to ward
off all manner of evil influences. When the child was a year old, the
mother licked it all over its body, in order to make it healthy. If any
one happened to die in a house, everything belonging to the deceased was
brought outside to avoid infecting the living. All the housemates
likewise had to bring out their belongings, and take them in at night
after they had been well aired. The persons who had assisted in carrying
the corpse to the grave, for a time were considered to be infected, and
had to abstain from taking part in certain occupations. All the kindred
and housemates of the deceased for some time had also to abstain from
certain kinds of food and occupation. During the time of mourning, the
women had to abstain from washing themselves, and were not allowed in
any way to make themselves smart or even dress their hair; and when
going out they wore a peculiar dress. The bodies of those who died in a
house were carried out through the window, or if in a tent, underneath
the back part. According to an account from Labrador, a small child must
not eat the entrails nor blubber kept in stomach-bladders, nor the flesh
on the inner side of the ribs, nor the upper part of the shoulder-blade.
At the birth of a child, some of the heart, lung, liver, intestine, and
stomach was provided; and the child having been licked all over, the
mother ate a dish of the mixture as a means of procuring health and long
life to the baby.

To the customs just enumerated may be added various regulations
regarding the chase, especially that of the whale—this animal being
easily scared away by various kinds of impurity or disorder. As to all
kinds <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> of hunting, the belief was general
that liberality in disposing of what had been taken secured future
success. If a person who used to have ill-luck visited a successful
hunter when an angakok was present, the latter used to cut a piece out
of the liver of a seal caught by the lucky hunter and give it to the
unlucky one, who chewed and swallowed it slowly.

*Sacrifices* (**mingulerterrineĸ** or **aitsuineĸ**) were not much used.
Besides the fox-flesh to the *kungusotarissat*, gifts were offered to
the inue of certain rocks, capes, and ice-firths, principally when
travelling and passing those places. Certain marks of homage were,
moreover, observed towards the inue of various localities, such as
abstaining from laughing, from pointing at them, &c.

The expelling, capturing, and destroying of evil and dangerous spirits
was ordinarily incumbent upon the angakut. The traditions, however,
mention similar operations as practised also by other people; and even
in our own day, there are cases of this among the Christian inhabitants,
such as shooting at tupilaks and umiarissat. Several fetid and stinking
matters, such as old urine, are excellent means for keeping away all
kinds of evil-intentioned spirits and ghosts.

(2.) *Men gifted with Special Endowments*.

The persons now to be spoken of belong to the class. we have already
referred to as **imáinaĸ ingitsut**, or *not of common kind*—not like
other people. They may be regarded as much the same as *canny folk* of
the Scottish peasant, wise men or clairvoyants.

*Tarneerunek*, the act of taking the soul out of the body, may be
achieved either by external means, or by dreams or several states of the
soul. When delivered in this way, especially by the power of the moon or
by dreams, the soul is enabled to roam all over the universe, and return
with news from thence.

*Pivdlingayak* means a fool or "natural;" and *pivdlerortok*, <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> a mad or delirious person. By degrees as
madness increases, disturbing the operation of the senses, and clouding
the judgment and insight into things present, the absent or concealed
things, and the events of the future, unfold themselves to the inner
sight of the soul. A pivdlerortok was even gifted with a faculty of
walking upon the water, besides the highest perfection in divining, but
was at the same time greatly feared; whereas the pivdlingayak, being
also clairvoyant, was esteemed a useful companion to the inhabitants of
a hamlet.

*Piarkusiak* was a child born after several others had died off at a
tender age. It was considered specially proof against all kinds of
death-bringing influences, especially witchcraft, and therefore employed
in persecuting witches. A child like this was even more than ordinarily
petted, and had all its wishes complied with.

*Agdlerutig*(*h*)*issak*—viz., having been the cause of **agdlerneĸ**,
or of certain rules of abstinence observed by the mother—was a child
fostered in a manner similar to the angherdlartugsiak, and also
considered to have a peculiar faculty for resisting witchcraft.

*Kiligtisiak* was a man brought up by an angakok with the purpose of
training him for a clairvoyant, which on the part of the angakok was
performed by taking him on his knee during his conjurations.

*Kilaumassok* and *nerfalassok* were people who, having failed in
becoming angakok, had nevertheless acquired a faculty for detecting
hidden things and causes. In cases of sickness, the head of the invalid
was made fast by a thong to the end of a stick, and on lifting it up
(**ĸilauneĸ**), the nature of the sickness was discovered.

 

4\. A<span class="small">NGAKOONEK OR</span> P<span
class="small">RIESTHOOD</span>.

With regard to the name **angákoĸ** (plural, **angákut**), it cannot be
traced back in the usual way to any positive root, but it appears to be
closely akin to **angivoĸ**, he is great; **angajoĸ**, the older one;
**angajorĸat**, the parents, <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> In a
vocabulary of the language spoken by the inland Eskimo on the borders of
the river Kuskokwim, or the tribe farthest from the Greenlanders, the
"*Shamans*" are called *tungalik* and *analchtuk*, which words afford a
striking instance of similarity, showing the unity of all the Eskimo
tribes, the latter sounding somewhat akin to angakok, the first
corresponding to the Greenlandish word **tôrnaliĸ**—viz., *one who owns
tornaks*, a quality that constitutes the real definition of an angakok.
Another tribe nearer to Behring Strait, denominated by the rather
curious name of *Tschnagmiut* (probably a corruption of a word like the
Greenlandish **sinamiut**, coast people), is also said to use the word
*tungalik* for a "*Shaman*," and a third tribe in the same district to
use the word *angaigok* for a "*chief*."

Women as well as men might become angakut; and this profession appears
to have two, or even more, different stages. But the highest of these,
described by the older authors as that of an *angakok poolik*, is not
confirmed as being known by the present Greenlanders. The "studies"
necessary before becoming an angakok were in most cases begun in
infancy, an angakok educating the child as kiligtisiak. Afterwards,
self-application was required, consisting in strict fasting and invoking
*tornarsuk* while staying alone in solitary places. In this way the soul
became partly independent of the body and of the external world;
finally, tornarsuk appeared and provided the novice with a
*tornak*—viz., a helping or guardian spirit, whom he might call to his
aid by taking certain measures any time he chose. While this revelation
was being made, the apprentice or pupil-angakok fell into a state of
unconsciousness, and on regaining his senses, he was supposed to have
returned to mankind. Some of the old people speak of *angakussarfiks*,
or caves, containing a stone with an even surface and a smaller one, the
angakok apprentice having to grind the first with the second until
tornarsuk <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> announced himself in a voice
arising from the depths of the earth. Others maintain that only the
inferior angakut perfected themselves in these caves, while the higher
grade was obtained by allowing vermin to suck the blood of the
apprentice in a dried-up lake, until the unconsciousness just referred
to came on.

On returning to men subsequent to this meeting with tornarsuk, before he
became an acknowledged angakok, he had still to show his power by
calling forth his tornak. During this interval, his state would
sometimes be revealed by the fact of his feet sinking in the rocky
ground just as in snow; and according to others, he was liable to die if
he did not manifest himself within a certain time. The clairvoyants
could detect the angakut from their breathing fire like the witches;
they had not, however, black arms like these. If an incipient angakok
failed ten times in succession to call forth his tornak, he had to give
up his claims to become an angakok, but still remained a *canny* or
peculiarly gifted individual.

An angakok had more than one tornak, and most of the inue of land and
sea could be made such, and also the souls of kivigtut, of the dead, and
of animals. As to the services rendered by these, some of them were only
advising and informing spirits, others assistant ones in danger, and
others, again, revenging and destructive powers. The first kind, called
**eĸungassoĸ**, were indispensable on account of their skill, but were
without strength, though they boasted of their bravery, and were
therefore ridiculed. According to the early authors, an angakok was
raised to a higher grade, becoming *poolik*, by being able to invoke or
conjure a bear and a walrus. The bear at once seizing him, throws him
into the sea; and the walrus, devouring them both, afterwards throws up
his bones again on the beach, from which he comes to life again. The
word *poolik* has already been mentioned.

The angakut were acknowledged or authorised teachers and judges on all
questions concerning religious belief; <span id="page_60">p. 60</span>
and this belief in many ways acting upon the customs and social life of
the people, the angakut necessarily became a kind of civil magistrate:
and lastly, they had not only to teach their fellow-men how to obtain
supernatural help, but also to give such assistance directly themselves.

With regard to the mode of practising their art, it has to be remarked
that they partly made use of the same medical appliances or remedies
which are accessible to mankind in general, partly that they had
recourse to a means peculiar to the angakut—viz., summoning their
tornaks. The first kind of acts may more or less be ranked among those
explained in the preceding section, only distinguished by being still
more marvellous than those performed by ordinary people. Of course the
art often degenerated into mere imposture, with a view to impress the
credulous with awe. To the acts of this kind belonged the *angmainek*,
or taking out the entrails of a sick person, and returning them to their
place after having them cleaned, the *repairing of a soul*, or from a
tub of water divining information as to persons lost or missing
articles. The other kind of deeds were performed by means of what is
termed **tôrnineĸ**, or *conjuring*, the angakok either merely summoning
a tornak and asking counsel of him, or himself starting for an
**ilimarneĸ**, or *spirit-flight*, for the purpose of examining or
accomplishing what was required, or finally calling forth evil spirits,
such as witches and anghiaks, in order to defeat and destroy them. The
art of *torninek* ordinarily had to be performed before a company of
auditors in a house, this being made completely dark, while the angakok
was tied with the hands behind his back, and his head between the legs,
and thus placed on the floor beside a drum and a suspended skin, the
rattling of which was to accompany the playing of the drum. The auditors
then began a song, which being finished, the angakok proceeded to invoke
the tornak, accompanying <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> his voice by
the skin and the drum. The arrival of the tornak was known by a peculiar
sound and the appearance of a light or fire. If only information or
counsel were required, the question was heard, as well as the answering
voice from without, the latter generally being somewhat ambiguous, in
some cases also said to proceed from tornarsuk himself. If, on the other
hand, the angakok had to make a flight, he started through an opening
which appeared of itself in the roof. Whether his flight was supposed to
be a bodily one, or by his spirit alone, for the time severed from its
mortal frame, is a question which, like many others connected with
religious matters, has to be answered differently, according to the
intelligence of the individuals applied to for information. Not until
the torninek had been finished was the house allowed to be lighted as
before, on which the angakok showed himself released from his bands.
During the following days no work was allowed to go on in the house.
Evil spirits could exceptionally be summoned at daylight and in the open
air, in the same way as the angakok at any time could invoke his
tornaks, in case he himself required their assistance.

Witchcraft, as well as certain other influences, such as the presence of
a woman having an anghiak, could make the conjuration fail, and even
become fatal to the conjuror as well as to his audience.

As regards their objects, the different branches of the craft consisted
of the following:—

That of giving counsel in all cases connected with supernatural help.

That of discovering the cause of accidental disasters, including a
certain judicial authority—viz., that of denouncing certain individuals
as guilty either as regards witchcraft or any other violation of customs
or rules.

Especially was their art exercised in discovering the whereabouts and
the fate of persons who had disappeared, and in tracing out and
defeating enemies in general, as <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> well as
those who, like the anghiaks, could only be perceived and caught by the
angakut.

Their other functions consisted in giving counsel and instructions as to
the rules of abstinence and the mode of life, travels, hunting, and
means of sustenance in general, as far as necessary on account of
supernatural influence;

In procuring favourable weather (**silagigsaineĸ**);

In procuring success in hunting (**angussorsaineĸ** or **pilersaineĸ**),
either by conciliating the *arnarkuagsak* or by invoking a tornak in the
shape of an iceberg called *kivingak*.

An angakok called to a sick person of any renown, if he saw his state
was hopeless, used to console him in a solemn manner, if possible in
company with others, praising the happiness of the life to come in
low-keyed song accompanied by drum-playing.

The angakut used a peculiar official language, chiefly made up of
allegorical expressions and transformations of ordinary Greenlandish
words.

The death of an angakok was believed to be generally attended by various
strange phenomena. His soul, it appeared, had more than ordinary
difficulty in disengaging itself from the body; and he might thus happen
to lie in a half-dead state, reviving at intervals. Death having finally
taken place, after five days had elapsed, he was apt to reappear in the
shape of a ghost.

 

5\. T<span class="small">HEIR</span> R<span
class="small">ELIGIOUS</span> B<span class="small">ELIEF AS
INFLUENCING</span> L<span class="small">IFE</span>, H<span
class="small">ABITS, AND</span> C<span class="small">USTOMS</span>.

The nation being so widely spread, its traditions, and especially the
religious element in them, formed the only connecting-link between the
scattered tribes; just as the supporters of that belief, the angakut, in
their persons afforded the means of connection between smaller
communities. From this cause religion, more than could reasonably be the
case with nations in higher stages of culture, became the standard by
which <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> social and private life was alike
regulated; and this circumstance also very likely accounts for the
marked disinclination of the people to any change in their habits. It
must be observed that, the angakut being the only authority who were
acknowledged to derive their power from the supernatural world,
naturally make the religious belief a governing principle in their
actions. Their influence, of course, at the same time, rested upon their
greater intelligence and talent. The unshaken faith with which the
population regarded their marvellous deeds cannot be explained except by
supposing them to have had a more profound knowledge of the laws of
nature, enabling them to form a more accurate conception than others of
what was likely to happen as regards weather, hunting, sickness, and
everything depending upon physical laws; while as to their own belief,
their skill in divination most probably was confounded in their own
fancy with imagined revelations from superior beings. No doubt they
themselves relied upon the reality of their supernatural performances,
notwithstanding the necessity which, on the other hand, often caused
them to act with the sole aim of more or less consciously deceiving
others as well as themselves.

The rules and customs concerning property, position, and what
represented the administration of justice, evidently bore a close
relation to their religious belief. The customs according to which an
individual became member of a family, partaking of its reputation as
well as its means of subsistence, were supported and confirmed by the
belief that the souls of ancestors remained guardian spirits to their
descendants, having left them their amulets and serrats as a kind of
pledges. The same ideas must be regarded as having formed the principal
foundation for the avenging of blood.

The social institutions in connection with the local conditions leaving
still ample room for arbitrary acts of violence, the fear of vengeance
by ghosts, kivigtoks, <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> anghiaks, serrats,
amulets, and tupilaks, must have powerfully contributed to prevent weak
and helpless persons being wronged.

By the custom of naming a child after a deceased person, it was intended
to secure rest in his grave for the latter. The child, when grown up,
was bound to brave the influences which had caused his death. If, for
instance, the deceased had perished at sea, his successor had only so
much greater an inducement for striving to grow a skilful kayaker.

The education of children was apparently managed without any corporal
punishment; but threatening them with the vengeance of malevolent
spirits, principally the kungusotarissat, was one of the means employed
to keep unruly urchins in check.

The various rules for abstinence in many instances certainly had a
direct relation to health.

As to the funeral rites, the treatment of the body being considered in
some way to influence the state of the soul after death, it was
generally placed on the floor, for the purpose of guiding the soul on
its road to the under world; but in the case of malefactors, the body
was dismembered, and the separate limbs were thrown apart. Otherwise the
funeral rites differed extremely, the Asiatic Eskimo, it is said,
burning their dead, the East Greenlanders throwing them into the sea;
whereas the rest and greater part of the nation buried them beneath a
heap of stones, or in a kind of stone cell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte1-5)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
