[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte0-2) [Next](tte1-1.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE ESKIMO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

WITH the exception of a few small and scattered tribes who may be
considered as the only link between the coast people and the inlanders,
the Eskimo always have their habitations close to the sea, or on the
banks of rivers in the immediate vicinity of their outlets into the sea.
Even on their hunting and trading expeditions they seldom withdraw more
than twenty, and only in very rare cases more than eighty miles, from
the sea-shore. Save a slight intermixture of European settlers, the
Eskimo are the only inhabitants of the shores of Arctic America, and of
both sides of Davis Strait and Baffin Bay, including Greenland, as well
as a tract of about four hundred miles on the Behring Strait coast of
Asia. Southward they extend as far as about 50° N.L. on the eastern
side, and 60° on the western side of America, and from 55° to 60° on the
shores of Hudson Bay. Only on the west the Eskimo near their frontier
are interrupted on two small spots of the coast by the Indians, named
Kennayans and Ugalenzes, who have there advanced to the sea-shore for
the sake of fishing. These coasts of Arctic America, of course, also
comprise all the surrounding islands. Of these the Aleutian <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> Islands form an exceptional group; the
inhabitants of these on the one hand distinctly differing from the coast
people here mentioned, while on the other they show a closer
relationship to the Eskimo than any other nation. The Aleutians,
therefore, may be considered as the only abnormal branch of the Eskimo
nation. The Aleutian language, though differing completely from the
Eskimo with regard to the sound of the words, shows a great similarity
to it in structure; and otherwise the Aleutians only seem to differ from
the Eskimo inasmuch as some institutions have been slightly more
developed among them. On the other hand, all over the eastern and widest
parts of their territories the Eskimo are very distinctly severed from
the adjoining nations. In the western part some slight transitions may
be traced: namely, in the case of the inland Eskimo by the different
situation of their dwelling-places; in that of the Aleutians by their
language and social institutions. Finally, it may be mentioned that a
few small Indian tribes have adopted somewhat of the Eskimo mode of
life, which has also been the case with some of their neighbours on the
Asiatic side.

As regards their northern limits, the Eskimo people, or at least remains
of their habitations, have been found nearly as far north as any Arctic
explorers have hitherto advanced; and very possibly bands of them may
live still farther to the north, as yet quite unknown to us.

From the north-western to the south-eastern point the Eskimo territories
in a straight line measure about 3200 miles. If we consider their
extreme western range to be Behring Strait, and their extreme eastern
one to be Labrador and Greenland, the natives from either of these
points would have to travel about 5000 miles along the coast in order to
reach the others. Strictly speaking, these journeys might still be
performed by the natives with their own means of conveyance; but there
are certain boundaries which, in our days at least, <span id="page_3">p.
3</span> are scarcely ever passed—partly on account of natural
obstacles, partly because the nation at those points has been broken up
into tribes, whose mutual intercourse for the purpose of barter has been
frequently interrupted by hostilities. For these reasons the Eskimo
might now be divided into many smaller tribes. But from our point of
view the following principal divisions will be sufficient:—

1\. *The East Greenlanders*, along the whole of the east coast of
Greenland down to Cape Farewell, the southernmost of whom every year
make bartering excursions to the Danish settlement nearest the Cape, and
have intercourse with the next section.

2\. *The West Greenlanders*, or inhabitants of the Danish trading
districts from the Cape upwards to 74° N.L. In conformity with the
administrative division of the colonies, they are generally divided into
South and North Greenlanders—only the latter are not to be confounded
with the next, with whom they seem to have had no intercourse whatever
since these regions have been known to Europeans.

3\. *The Northernmost Greenlanders*, or inhabitants of the west coast to
the north of Melville Bay, or what Sir John Ross called the "Arctic
Highlanders."

4\. *The Labrador Eskimo*.

5\. *The Eskimo of the middle regions*, occupying all the coasts from
Baffin and Hudson Bays to Barter Island near Mackenzie River. This
division is the most widely spread of them all—its territories
representing an extent of land, traversed and intercepted in many
directions by the sea, measuring 2000 miles in length and 800 miles in
breadth. Perhaps there may be reasons for establishing subdivisions of
this section, but they do not appear anywhere to exhibit such mutual
differences as those separating them from the next tribe, with whom they
have regular meetings on Barter Island.

6\. *The Western Eskimo*, inhabiting the remaining <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> coast of America from Barter Island to the west and south. They
seem to deviate from all the former in respect of certain habits, such
as the labial ornaments of the men and the head-dress of the women. They
must also be considered as the nearest akin to the Aleutians and the
inland Eskimo, and in the vicinity of Alaska they show traces of
intermingled Indian blood. This may be owing to the Indian women
captured in war with the Eskimo having been married into the nation.

7\. *The Asiatic Eskimo*.

As regards their development when they first became known to modern
Europeans, the Eskimo may be classed with the prehistoric races of the
age of the ground stone tools with the exceptional use of metals. It has
been usual to designate all nations of this kind as "savages;" some
authors have even described them as being totally destitute of those
mental qualities through which any kind of culture is manifested, such
as social order, laws, sciences, arts, and even religion. That those
opinions find utterance can scarcely be wondered at when we observe the
carelessness with which such important questions are discussed, and see
travellers who merely go on shore from a ship and spend a couple of
hours with the inhabitants proceed to make inquiries as to their ideas
of God and the origin of the world; and also how European settlers among
natives whose language they are quite unconversant with pretend to have
found them altogether without religion. Such views, however, resting
upon the prejudice of race and on superficial observation, are now being
abandoned. We have gradually been finding out that manifestations of
culture must be supposed to exist in every nation, although they may not
assume the same form as those we observe among more advanced races. We
think it a great mistake to suppose any people devoid of religion; and
it seems to us equally unreasonable <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> to
fancy a community of men living altogether without laws, if by laws we
understand bonds or restrictions by which the community voluntarily
limits the free actions of its members. In the lower stages of
development, the laws, being principally represented by habits and
customs, leave the individual perhaps even less free than in a more
civilised state, inasmuch as they dictate his mode of life, and not even
in his most private and domestic affairs is he left to act at liberty.
These habits and customs are closely allied to the religious opinions,
by which they are still more powerfully influenced. When laws and
religion were asserted to be wanting, there was still less likelihood of
art and science being observed. In the following introduction ([page
83](tte2-000).md) we shall endeavour to explain how these utterances of
culture are for the most part embodied in the traditional tales.

It is in accordance with the views here stated that the author has been
guided in attempting to divide and arrange the subject-matter of the
following remarks. It has already been mentioned, and will, moreover,
become evident from the traditions, that the Eskimo exhibit great
conformity and similarity, notwithstanding their being spread over such
vast territories. An examination of one of the principal divisions or
tribes named above will therefore more or less illustrate the others.
For this reason the Greenlanders, who are by far the best known of all,
may here be considered to represent the Eskimo in general; though it
must not be forgotten that, as there can scarcely have existed any
absolute stability with regard to culture lasting for many centuries,
there is also no absolute or actual identity between the different
tribes. It must therefore be kept in mind that wherever no other
particulars are specially brought forward, the following descriptions
refer to the West Greenlanders, such as their state is supposed to have
been when Europeans came to settle among them during last century—viz.,
in 1721.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte1-1.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
