[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-032) [Next](tte2-034)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 33. A LAMENTABLE STORY.

<span class="small">\[From one of the older manuscripts.\]</span>

AN old man had taken up his position on the ice watching the
breathing-holes of the seals, in order to spear them as they appeared.
Meanwhile some little girls were playing on shore in a cleft between
some rocks, as usual, carrying their little baby sisters and brothers in
the *amowts* (hoods) at their backs. Just as the old man was in the act
of spearing a seal, the children happened to give a shout, and the
terrified seal at once dived to the bottom. On this the old man got into
a great passion, and cried out aloud, "Shut up, mountain-cleft!" and
accordingly it closed upon all the playing children, who were not able
to escape, but were now buried in a cavern, wide at the bottom, and
narrow towards the top. <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> The babies
soon began to cry for thirst, and the girls put their fingers into their
mouths to suck at, trying to hush them by telling them, "When mother has
finished soling the boots, she will come and suckle thee." At length the
mothers came to the spot, and poured water down in the cleft. The water
trickled along the walls, and they licked it up, and the mothers could
very well see the children, but as it was impossible to get at them, all
of them were starved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-034)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
