[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-132) [Next](tte2-134.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

133\. A<span class="small">N</span> O<span class="small">LD</span>
B<span class="small">ACHELOR</span>, being a very successful hunter, was
always worried by his place-fellows about taking to himself a wife. At
last he consented; but when about to make a choice, none of the women at
the place appeared good enough for him. Starting in his boat for the
neighbouring hamlet, he declared he was going to fetch the only sister
of some men living there. On his way thither he met with another
kayaker, and addressed him, "Art not thou one of the many brothers?"
"Yes, I am the middle one of them." "I come to demand thy only sister in
marriage, and if I may have her I will give thee my boat and a new
tent." "We will allow no one to get her, because she is the only woman
in our house." Having got this information the old bachelor instantly
made about, went home, and gave up all thoughts of marrying. Being once
in his kayak, and suffering from thirst, he observed a small stream of
water running down a rock. Remaining in his kayak, he merely turned his
face upwards, so as to let the water run into his open mouth. When his
thirst had been quenched, and he wanted to push off, his mouth clung to
the rock, being at the same time gradually prolonged, because the tide
was falling; and thus he had to remain hanging until the next tide
should float him off again.

<span class="small">N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—A number of stories
are found ridiculing bachelors, and all more or less trifling, like this
one. Generally their passions are represented as being excited at the
sight of a fine woman; but on approaching her, and perhaps even getting
hold of her, she proves to be a gull, or perhaps a stone. Others will
marry none but a dwarf, or a woman without breasts. One of them out of a
piece of ice makes a little island to live upon by himself.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-134.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
