[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-010) [Next](tte2-012.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 11. THE FAITHLESS WIFE.

<span class="small">\[This and the next tale, with a third one about
"the dog's offspring," which has been omitted in this translation, are
taken from five manuscripts, one of which was written down in Labrador,
the others in different parts of Greenland. In these some parts of the
stones were intermixed in various ways, but still they seem originally
to have represented the three separate stories, of which two are here
given.\]</span>

A MAN who was living alone with his wife noticed that she often left the
place without his knowing where she went. On his return from his
day-work, he seldom found her at home. This made him suspicious; and one
morning he feigned to be going far away, but when he went out in his
kayak he only paddled to the nearest point, and went on shore again and
hid himself behind some rocks. After a little his wife emerged from the
tent in her best attire. He now stole up behind her, and followed her
till she reached a lake; there he observed her throw off something into
the water, upon <span id="page_144">p. 144</span> which a masculine
being appeared, and she undressing, went out to him in the water. At
this sight the husband got into a great rage, and set about gathering
all kinds of vermin; and one day when he was quite alone with his wife
he stuffed them into her, and in this manner killed her. From that time
he was all alone, but did not wish to go out in his kayak minding his
usual business. One day, on his returning to his lonely tent, he was
very much surprised to find his supper cooked, and the smoking meat
served up. The next day the same thing happened again; the meat smoking
hot was served up on his dish, and his boots were dried and ready to put
on:<span id="page_144_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_144_note_1.md) and all this
was repeated every day. One day he only paddled a little way off the
coast, and then went on shore to hide in a place, whence he could keep a
look-out on his tent; and he soon observed a little woman, with her hair
dressed up in a very large tuft, come down the hill and enter his tent.
He now quickly made for his kayak, paddled home, and went creeping up to
his house. Having softly lifted the door-curtain, he noticed a strong
unpleasant smell, and saw the little woman busily trimming his lamp. She
was really a fox transformed into the shape of a woman, and this
accounted for the strong smell. Nevertheless, he took her for his wife.
One day he met his cousin out at sea, and told him about his new wife,
praising her loveliness, and next asked him to come and see her, "But,"
added he, "if thou shouldst happen to notice a rank smell about her, be
sure not to make any remarks about it." The cousin followed him at once,
and having landed together they both entered the tent. But when the
visitor observed how nice and pleasant the wife of his cousin was, <span
id="page_145">p. 145</span> he grew quite jealous; and in order to make
mischief exclaimed, "Whence comes this nasty smell?" Instantly the
little woman rose to her feet: she had now got a tail, wherewith she
extinguished the lamp, and like a fox cried, "Ka, ka, ka!"<span
id="page_145_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_145_note_1.md) and ran out of the tent.
The husband followed her quickly; but when he again caught sight of her
she was transformed into a fox, running up hill as fast as possible. He
pursued her, and at last she vanished into a cave. It is told that while
he stood outside calling for her, she first sent him a beetle, and then
a spider, and at last a caterpillar. He then grew quite enraged, heaped
some fuel together at the entrance, and burned her alive; and once more
he was quite alone, and at last killed himself in a fit of madness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-012.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_144">p. 144</span>

<span id="page_144_note_1"></span>[1](#page_144_fr_1.md) The Eskimo boots,
or *kamik*, are neatly made of dressed seal-skin. After they are put off
they must be dried, and then rubbed with a broad-pointed blunt stick
until they are soft and fit to be used again. Rubbing and drying boots
and dog-skin socks form a most important part of an Eskimo wife's
household duties.

<span id="footnotes_page_145">p. 145</span>

<span id="page_145_note_1"></span>[1](#page_145_fr_1.md) Or, as the sound
is sometimes attempted to be expressed in the books of Arctic voyagers,
"Huk, huk, huk!"

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
