[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-043) [Next](tte2-045)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

### 44. THE CHILD THAT WAS STOLEN BY THE INLANDERS.

A MAN, whose name was Tungnerdluk, had his fixed abode by a firth, from
which he made his regular excursions into the highlands to hunt the
reindeer, and generally he was lucky. In winter he carried on
seal-hunting at the mouth of the firth. One summer he was out chasing
the deer as usual, and during his absence his wife went away to gather
berries among the heather, with their only child. She put the boy down
on the sod, and left him a moment; but she had hardly turned away before
she heard him crying out. Although she instantly turned back, she did
not find him in his place, but only heard his lamentations a long way
off from where she was standing. She returned to the tent in great
affliction, and told how she had suffered her child to be taken by the
inlanders, adding that she feared her husband's anger. In the evening he
returned, heavily laden, and they heard him call out, "I have got plenty
of reindeer-flesh for thee." On finding that nobody answered, he at once
knew that some mischief had befallen them in his absence. He hurried in,
and breathlessly asked if his son had died. The wife made no answer; but
the others enlightened him, saying, "She let the inlanders take him;"
upon which Tungnerdluk asked his trembling wife to put new soles on his
boots—he wanted to go and consult his cousin, who was an angakok. This
man pointed out the place to which the boy had been taken, and
accompanied the father on his way to find him. At a good distance they
reached a large house; and the angakok now told him he must go up to it
alone, and that he himself would have to return. Tungnerdluk <span
id="page_269">p. 269</span> peeped in at the window, and saw two
terrible women quarrelling and fighting about his weeping child. He
leapt down into the outer passage; but he was obliged to creep on hands
and feet to get through the inner one up into the main room. Having at
last succeeded, he made his way up to the two hags to snatch his child;
but whenever he tried to take it from one woman, she directly handed it
to the other, and thus they went on a good while. A huge man at length
entered, who said he would assist him, declaring that he had sprung from
the coast people. He said, "Thou'dst better run on beforehand: be sure I
will soon come after with the child; but mind be quick—my house-fellows
will soon be pursuing us." And Tungnerdluk came running at full speed,
and entered his tent, saying, "Make ready to depart at once;" and
meanwhile the other entered with the child. They folded their tents, and
quickly loaded their boat; and at the very moment they pushed from shore
they saw their enemies descending the hills. When they had fairly got
down to the beach, Tungnerdluk could not resist putting back to fight
them, and he soon despatched one of them with his harpoon, and then
followed his own people out of the firth. After this his son fell sick,
and again he consulted an angakok, who was not, however, able to find
out the cause of his complaint. He then called another one, who was
besides renowned as a performer of *headlifting* (a peculiar charm for
discovering the cause of sickness). He conjured and called up spirits;
and lying down on his back, he first let go his breath, then rose up,
and again began to breathe, saying, "The child's spirit is still with
the inlanders." The father rejoined, "Then lose no time in preparing for
an *angakok-flight* to bring it back and restore it to us;" and he flew
away to the inlanders, fetching the spirit of the child home with him.
On his return to the parents, he heard the voice of the child growing
weaker; but by restoring the spirit to it, the baby soon recovered.
Tungnerdluk <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> paid the angakok well with
different kinds of victuals, adding, "Whenever thou shouldst happen to
be in any distress, I will gladly assist thee." Shortly afterwards he
had two visitors who had come on purpose to mock him. On their approach,
he observed that one carried a lot of whalebones with him. They
addressed him, saying, "We have heard of the celebrated Tungnerdluk, who
fetched his child back from the inlanders; pray tell us some of thy
achievements: we will make thee a present of our whalebones in return."
Tungnerdluk answered, "I am not in want of any such thing,"—whereat he
took them to his storehouse, where he showed them his large stock of
whalebones as well as of walrus-teeth. Seeing this, they respectfully
retired, and left the place without so much as entering the house.

<span class="small">N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—A story very
similar to this has been received in another manuscript, and through a
verbal narration written down by the author. The principal difference
consists in the fact of the inlanders being replaced by the
*amarsiniook* (a fabulous monster, which lived upon one of the
mountain-tops emerging from the inland ice). The old *k’elaumassok* (or
angakok of an inferior class), who brought back the child, was again
overtaken by the amarsiniook, who put both of them into his hood. The
angakok then summoned his *tornaks*, the *slinghitter* and the *falcon*,
of which the latter succeeded in vanquishing the monster, and making him
drop the old man and the child out of his hood.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-045)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
