[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-069) [Next](tte2-071)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

### 70. THE STRONG MAN ON UMANAK.

ON the isle of Umanak in the Isortok firth (South Greenland) lived a
very strong man, besides a great many other people. He gained great fame
from his extraordinary strength, and was likewise considered a
first-rate hunter and skilled angakok. He was in fact a principal
provider for the whole place, and their angakok into the bargain. He
used to take his little son on his knee when conjuring, in order to
teach him his art. The people themselves had no lack of good hunting off
the coast in the autumn season; but after the winter solstice the
angakok used to roam about on the open sea all by himself, and when he
had caught a couple of big seals, he used to put them upon his kayak,
one in front and the other behind (viz., instead of towing them), making
them fast with his harpoon-line. Before the sun had gone round to the
west he was sure to have reached home with his two seals; and then lost
no time in ordering the women to cook the briskets. When the meal was
served, the men sat down to it, and generally the angakok started the
conversation by saying, "I was again caught in a heavy snowstorm from
the north." This seemed very strange, for on shore the weather had been
fine, and far away seawards only a small mist-band had been noticed.
Being a man of such rare qualities, he naturally wished his son to come
up to his own standard, and carefully trained him with this view. When
full grown the son also would go far out to sea in all weathers, and
bring big seals home with him. From that time the father grew quite easy
about him, and occasionally remained at home himself, though perfectly
hale and hearty. Once in the long days the son <span id="page_374">p.
374</span> had started by himself, and at night the father in vain
expected his return. The next morning at daybreak he set out in search
of him. When so far from land that the southern islands looked quite dim
and shadowy, he heard a voice calling out "*Eek!*" On hearing this
strange voice, which he soon knew did not belong to any of his
countrymen, he hastened on southwards, steering towards the sun; and in
a little while he suddenly stopped short, again hearing a voice shouting
"Where?" Soon after he came in sight of an immense kayak, and on nearing
it found it to be a *kayariak* (fabulous kayaker). The huge kayaker had
a paddle with only one blade, which he plied vigorously by shifting it
alternately from one side of the kayak to the other. Approaching him
from behind, he discovered one of his son's arms lashed on to the
after-part of the kayariak. At this sight he got into such a rage that
he instantly darted his harpoon and killed the kayaker. Having drawn out
the harpoon, whose point was the length of half an arm, he kayaked still
further along, until he heard the former cry repeated. He answered it,
and continuing his way soon fell in with another kayaker, who carried
the second arm of his son, aft on his kayak. Having killed him also, he
stood out to sea, till the high mountains of his own country were almost
lost to sight. He again heard a deep rough voice, belonging to a similar
kayaker, who was the father of the two he had already killed. The
weather being calm, with a swell from the south-west, he put in his oar,
and having secured it by means of the kayak-line, drifted along,
steering only with his hands. Approaching the great kayaker thus, he
discovered his son's body behind him on his kayak. He did not throw his
lance, but rowed right in upon him, and kept alongside of him by hooking
his oar into the stranger's kayak-straps. This somewhat startled the
former, and he was heard to exclaim, "Where are those whom I am
seeking?" and then the angakok understood of whom he was speaking. <span
id="page_375">p. 375</span> Turning landwards, they soon fell in with
one kayak, floating bottom up. The angakok now inquired, "Canst thou
revive him there?" To this the kayariak rejoined, "Why, yes, I could;"
and lifting the wounded man up he merely touched him, and brought him to
life again. Then they reached the next, and the father did the same to
him. Being now four in number, the angakok went on, "Perhaps ye would
not mind making him alive too whom ye have got there on your kayak." The
other replied, "It might be done if a fitting place can be found to
manage it properly." On reaching a piece of floating ice they landed
upon it, and when the kayariak had joined the severed limbs together,
and had revived him that had been slain, the father said, "What is to be
done next? he has got no kayak; can't we have the loan of one of those?"
"Well, take it, but be sure ye bring it back immediately, and when ye
land do not let any one look into it." The angakok now returned with his
son, who found his kayak such a size that he went down into it to the
pit of his arms. On reaching land he cried out that no one must look
down into the big kayak. But one unbeliever among their placemates did
so, in consequence of which the son of the angakok who had made use of
it grew lame in his legs. The unbeliever also was found close by, having
been frightened to death at something he had seen inside the big kayak.
Meantime the angakok brought the kayak back to the big man, who stood
waiting for him on the ice. The sons now both descended into their
kayaks, but the father remained a while, and first took a general view
of the whole horizon, and then producing a small pipe he had hidden in
his own boat, he blew it successively towards the four quarters of the
horizon, and then repaired to his boat. When the angakok left them the
weather was fine and calm, but he was hardly off before clouds arose,
the sky became overcast, and all of a sudden a heavy gale was blowing.
The wind rushing on from different <span id="page_376">p. 376</span>
quarters almost prevented his making the land. However, he went ahead
undauntedly, having a first-rate kayak covered with skins, joined
together lengthways. When the storm abated, and the stars again shone
out, a high land became visible, which he recognised to be Akilinek, on
the shore opposite his own. He was again caught in a tempest; but this
having also subsided, he landed at the southernmost point of our country
(Cape Farewell), and finally reached his own home, where his family had
long believed him dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-071)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
