[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-031) [Next](tte2-033.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 32. THE WIDOW'S VENGEANCE.

<span class="small">\[From one of the older manuscripts.\]</span>

THERE was a widow with a son named Kujanguak; beyond her house was
another one, inhabited by a number of brothers, all clever at their
profession, and <span id="page_229">p. 229</span> well off. Whenever
they had brought home any seals, the widow, according to the custom,
would send her son to get a *tamorasak* (viz., little bit of blubber);
but the men generally replied, "Thou lazy beggar, thou never assisted us
in providing anything; so thou wilt not get anything neither." On his
returning with this answer, his mother only said, "Never mind—just let
them talk." One day they caught a *mamartok* (viz., a delicious kind of
seal—one that has shed hair). The mother now took a stronger fancy than
ever for a little morsel, and sent her son for it; but he was treated as
usual: the men took a bit of whatever they could lay hand on, and flung
it at him. When he came back and gave their message to his mother, she
was in a great rage; and taking one of her boots, seated herself in a
corner of the ledge to practise some charm. On the following morning,
when her son looked into the pot, there was an eider-duck in it. The
mother merely remarked, "Just take it." Part of it she boiled, and the
rest was put by for future use. In the evening she repeated her charms
and spells, and a small seal was found in the water-tub. The third day,
the son, to his great surprise, saw standing on the floor a completely
furnished kayak; the mother took him down to the beach, and made him
practise paddling, as well as upsetting and again righting, till he had
got quite expert at these things. The following day she let him go out
again, and pointing to an iceberg, told him to round it in his kayak. He
pushed off at her bidding, and when he was out of sight, she returned to
the house. The neighbours likewise set off, and saw Kujanguak attacking
a bear, which at last took refuge on an iceberg. The eldest of the
brothers tried to climb it, but was not able. After him Kujanguak made
the attempt; and having first asked the other to take care of his kayak,
he clutched hold of the ice, and scrambled up. At the very top he
encountered the bear, and immediately fell upon it; and taking hold of
it by the neck, <span id="page_230">p. 230</span> flung it down into the
sea, stone-dead. The youngest of the brothers, Sanak, cried out, "I have
got a bear!" but Kujanguak quietly descended, got into his kayak,
fastened his towing-line to the bear, and paddled home, followed by the
other kayakers, who had given him their assistance. The mother now went
down to the beach, accompanied by the sister of the brothers. While they
were busy dragging the bear up to the house, the mother mockingly
observed, turning to her, "Who knows how nourishing that flesh may be!"
adding, "Now haul it up the rest of the way thyself; I am going to fetch
water." Having finished this task, however, she returned to the bear,
and now divided it into two equal parts, of which she gave her companion
one, saying, "The skin thou mayst keep for a ledge-cover." She then
boiled the flesh, and invited the whole party to partake of it. The
other woman she asked to sit down on the main ledge; and when she had
served the meal up she remarked, "It is a pity one cannot make sure
whether there is any nourishment about this game of Kujanguak's." The
woman visitor said, "I have been longing ever so much for bear's meat
lately." They all ate well; and on taking leave the female visitor
thanked her saying, that she had altogether found it a delicious and
hearty feed. The following day Kujanguak again set off to the iceberg,
and got a large seal. When he was returning towing it homewards, he
chanced to encounter the brothers. Happily his mother had advised him
beforehand, "If ever they venture to persecute thee, take some water out
of the sea with thy left hand, and moisten thy lips with it." Kujanguak
tried this as soon as they all came rushing in upon him. The eldest
brother began the attack by catching hold of the kayak point, doing his
utmost to upset it; but no sooner had Kujanguak tasted the water with
his lips than the other let it go. Sanak now said, "Look at the foarning
breakers there! let us try which of us can first get beyond them;" <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> and all of them pushed on as fast as
possible. Kujanguak, who had a seal on his line, was first obliged to
tighten it; but this done, he pushed on like a shot, and soon came up
with the eldest brother, ahead of the others; and while they rowed
outside of the breakers, Kujanguak went right across them, carried along
by the surf. When the waves retreated, he jumped out upon the rocks; and
when the breakers came rolling on again, he hastened back into the
kayak. On the way home the brothers secretly consulted to surround him;
however, he made his escape from them. Meanwhile his mother suddenly
missed a certain lock of hair, and knowing this to be a bad omen for her
son, was very anxious about him, until it shortly afterwards proved to
be in its proper place on her forehead. Reassured with regard to her
son, she now mounted the hills to look out for his return. On landing he
was received on the beach by her along with the other woman, who asked
him how her brothers had fared. He answered her, "I wonder thou carest
to bother thyself about those stupid fellows!" When the flesh of the
seal had been prepared, and the men were supping upon the briskets, the
mother of the many sons grew envious and resentful because she was not
invited to share the good fare. On hearing this the widow cut a piece of
the loin, and having pronounced a spell upon it, carried it to her by
way of a present. When they sat down to eat it, Sanak was almost
suffocated, and presently his old mother likewise cried for water.
Having got a drink, she recovered; Sanak, however, expired. When the
widow re-entered the room, the eldest brother accused her of the deed,
saying, "You only fed them to work their destruction—it is none but thou
who hast killed them!" and, at the same time, he rose and rushed against
the house-pillars, in order to shake it down and make it fall over her:
but the widow replaced them quickly. Again he rose from his seat, and
turning towards the widow herself, he quickly snatched off <span
id="page_232">p. 232</span> the two points of her jacket—the one in
front as well as the one behind. Little heeding this affront, she now
ran out, and told her son that two of their adversaries had now been
despatched. In the enjoyment of the happy event, they both bolted across
the boat in great glee; however, the mother happened to break her back.
When Kujanguak had got her indoors, she took some filth from beneath the
place where her dead mother used to put all kinds of dirty refuse, and
threw it out at the house of their enemies. This brought sickness upon
them, from which all of them died excepting the sister, who turned
*kivigtok* (*i.e.*, one who has fled from mankind).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-033.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
