[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-108) [Next](tte2-110)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

109\. K<span class="small">UANAK, AN</span> A<span class="small">NGAKOK
IN</span> S<span class="small">OUTH</span> G<span
class="small">REENLAND</span>, started for a flight, having previously
had his feet and his head tied together. While passing along between two
high rocks, an *amarsiniook* rushed out from the mountain-side and
wanted to take him into his hood. He made his escape by dropping into
the sea, and proceeding onwards beneath the surface of the sea and the
earth, finally emerged from the floor of his own house. Another time,
when he had gone off on a flight, his drum, which he had left in the
house, was lifted up by itself, and soared about in the room till at
length it stopped and fell down. At that same moment a voice was heard
from without, and hastening to look whence it came, they found him in an
almost dying state lying upon the snow, an old skin-cover from a <span
id="page_452">p. 452</span> kayak having frightened him and caused his
downfall. Kuanak was once capsized by a seal he had just harpooned; but
being an *anghiniartok*, his senses again returned, and he found himself
at the bottom of the sea, in company with his grandmother. She tied his
kayak-jacket close to his body, leaving no part of it uncovered, and
then supplying him with a piece of skin by way of kayak, she pushed him
upwards. When he emerged from the water he first betook himself far out
to sea, and thence made the land again, but happened to touch at an
inhabited place, where somebody was emptying out the urine-tub, which
scared him away from the shore. He tried to land on another place, but
here a woman, dressing her hair on the beach, scared him away. If he had
a third time taken fright, he would never have returned to the land of
the living. But he happened to land at Pisugfik, where a couple of old
men were sitting playing at dice. They at once knew him to be an
anghiniartok; and on merely touching his naked body, he dropped down
senseless; but on their chanting a magic lay, he revived. They then
brought him back to his homestead, where his relatives, who had already
finished their days of mourning and nearly forgotten him, were gladly
surprised at hearing the crew of the boat that brought him home intuning
Kuanak's song.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-110)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
