[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-058) [Next](tte2-060.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 59. ATERFIO.

TWO widows, having each a son, had chosen their winter quarters at no
great distance from one another. Both of them happened to have several
neighbours; but though these principally consisted of rich and
prosperous people, they did not think of assisting the poor orphans.
Having lost their supporters, the widows suffered much from want, and
they therefore admonished their young sons to be wise and kind to the
other children, lest they should be deprived of the scanty help they now
enjoyed. At last, however, the relatives furnished the orphans with
kayaks. He who lived furthest south was named Aterfio, and the other one
living to the north was called Sukallassok. They grew up to be much
renowned for their strength and vigour. They always chose their
hunting-places far off <span id="page_334">p. 334</span> the coast; and
even in hard weather and heavy gales went out, and never came home
empty-handed. On their return they always used to give the orphans a
plentiful repast, and had special stores of provisions set apart for
orphan children against hard times. One day Aterfio had gone out hunting
beyond the skerries and islands; the wind was northerly and the sky
clear. He had already got two seals, and, expecting to catch some more,
he still rowed on, till all of a sudden he heard a noise, and turning
round, beheld Sukalassok with raised arm aiming his harpoon at him. Not
being able to make any resistance, he was obliged to await his fate;
keeping his eyes on him, he capsized his kayak towards him so as make
the harpoon only touch the side of it. As soon as he again had risen,
the thought flashed through him to revenge himself on Sukalassok; but be
gave up the idea and turned towards home. On his arrival he did not
mention the matter at all; but sometime later, in a gale from the north,
the same thing happened over again. He forebore to take revenge; but
this time told those at home that Sukalassok had twice attempted to kill
him. But his mother bade him not to take revenge. "Never mind," she went
on; "let him go on as be likes, only thou shun his companionship." Soon
after, however, Aterfio being busy in his hunting-grounds, suddenly
heard a whizzing sound close by, and presently afterwards was grazed by
an arrow, which fell into the water alongside of him. His wrath was now
up, and be could not resist paying him back. In less than no time be
levelled his harpoon at Sukalassok and killed him right off. At home he
reported his deed, and said be would flee to the south, thinking it
probable that the relatives of Sukalassok might take part with the slain
and pursue him. But his mother told him be need not fear his new
enemies, and he remained at the old place as before. Soon after be
married and got a son, whom be called Akeralik. One day <span
id="page_335">p. 335</span> an old man came to visit them, who reported
that the relatives of Sukalossok were ill-minded towards Aterfio; to
which he rejoined, "They are quite welcome to anything; and thou mayst
tell them that I myself, my little son, and the rest of the household,
are ready to receive them whenever they like." But from that day they
grew suspicious, and not long afterwards a great many strange boats
appeared off the coast. At the sight Aterfio went in, relieved himself
of his jacket, went straight down to the beach, and seated himself on a
flat stone with his back turned to the sea. Rowing on, the kayakers
deliberated among themselves who should be the first to wound him. Some
of them quickly gained upon the rest, and on coming quite close to him,
the foremost took up his harpoon to strike him; although it hit the
mark, it did him no harm, but the harpoon broke in three pieces. The
next kayakers likewise unlaunched their harpoons at him, but had them
broken in the same manner without wounding him in the least. They now
held a council, and agreed in landing to try a match with him on shore.
Aterfio willingly attended. The strangers stayed the night over; and
early the next morning four stout and powerful men made their way
through the entrance; but Aterfio said, "My house is too small, let us
fight in the open air." Having reached the meadow above, one of the
strong men instantly rushed in upon Aterfio to try a wrestling-match
with him; but Aterfio only turned to him and thrust him down as easily
as if he had been a fox, upon which he soon died. The foreigners now
made a general assault on him, but he shook them off like children, and
on the way home he killed the whole of them. After this Aterfio trained
his son to all kinds of daring feats on land as well as at sea; and thus
Akeralik grew to be a man, and was still stronger and even more fearless
than his father. His hunting-ground was far out at sea, and he hunted
seals and white whales alike, and could keep his <span id="page_336">p.
336</span> breath under water as well as any seal. One day when they
were a long way off the coast, a small-topped cloud rose on the horizon.
Aterfio asked his son, "Dost thou see the cloud yonder? When the mists
come up from that side it will not be child's-play; let us put back with
all speed." They put their seals on the top of their kayaks and made
them fast with the harpoon-lines, and headed for the shore. Each of them
had captured two seals. Scarcely had they put about, before a heavy gale
came rushing down upon them, turning the sea into one mass of foam, and
completely hiding the land. A roaring noise was now heard, and Aterfio
said, "Take care we don't smash together; keep further away from me." At
the same time he saw a great sea topped with foam close upon them, and
turning side on, bolted across them; but notwithstanding, they kept
their breath and rowed away under water until they soon afterwards both
emerged on the surface. At last his son got a tear in his thick outer
jacket; then he spoke to his father, "Now mind thine own self, I must
needs speed on;" and he skimmed the surface like a falcon pursuing his
prey, and was lost to sight in less than a moment. Both safely reached
home. About this time the Southlanders happened to hear the fame of the
mighty Aterfio and of his son Akeralik, who with his kayak matched a
falcon in speed. Among this people of the south there was a strong man
named Tajarnek, who greatly longed to have an encounter with Aterfio.
One day Aterfio and all his family remained at home. The air was clear
and the weather fine. They saw a great many boats and kayaks apparently
passing by their place; but Aterfio came down to the water's edge, and
hailed them, shouting, "Where are ye for? It is late in the evening; ye
had better put in and take shelter with us for the night." One of the
men replied, "We have heard of the mighty Aterfio, and have come to
offer him a match." Aterfio replied, "He whom ye see is nothing <span
id="page_337">p. 337</span> extraordinary, but his son is a man of great
strength;" so saying, he pointed to him as he stood at his side, to let
them know of whom he was speaking. The kayakers stopped short in great
amazement, never thinking him to be the person in question. But Aterfio
went on, "But here is a first-rate landing-place, and ye can pass the
night here." Accordingly they landed; and after a needful rest, they all
resorted to a level spot above the houses. Tajarnek first seized
Aterfio, but was soon thrown over—without being hurt, however. Several
times they closed with him, but Aterfio was as staunch as a rock.
Akeralik now thought it time for him to interfere; every man he touched
was soon thrown down. At first they turned them over without injuring
them further; but at length they slew Tajarnek and all the rest. All the
Southlanders, women and children included, were thus put to death. From
this time upwards Aterfio roamed all along the coast-side, and father
and son were equally renowned; and they both ended their days without
ever having been wounded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-060.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
