[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-051) [Next](tte2-053)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 52. THE OLD BACHELOR.

THERE was once a queer old bachelor who had a singular dislike to
singing: whenever he heard people sing, he would take himself off
immediately. One day, being out at his hunting-place off the coast, he
heard people singing, and it proved to proceed from the crew of a boat
which was going up the firth right against the wind, and without being
rowed. This song pleased him; and he went up to the boat, which he
several times noticed to be lifted up into the air, soon to sink down
again on the surface of the water, and constantly advancing, although
the crew seemed resting on their oars all the while. He now asked leave
to be one of the party; and the steersman said he might follow them if
he chose, but that he must keep close to them; upon which they tied his
kayak to the boat, and then continued singing, **ĸangátarsa,
ĸangátarsartigut!** (let us be taken aloft!) **imaĸaja, ah, ha, ha.**
They were instantly lifted up and taken away across the country. <span
id="page_301">p. 301</span> Being now on the top of a very high
mountain, they took a little rest there, but soon after travelled on
through the air until they alighted close beside a house. They
discharged the boat; and the old bachelor also got out of his kayak on
land, and be entered a house to pay them a visit. He came to like them,
remained with them, and learned their magic song. But at length he
bethought himself of his relatives, who were sure to be missing him, and
be concerned about his fate, and be resolved to return. His hosts
proceeded to fill his kayak with victuals, after which he got in: and
singing the magic lay, he flew away in the same direction he had
formerly come from; but when he reached the high mountain, he got a
strong fancy to repose for a while on the summit of it, which happened
to be a very steep peak. After a while he wanted to be off again, but
found that he had suddenly forgotten the lay, and then he sat down all
at a loss on the steep mountain-side. At last he lost his balance, and
was about to fall down. He tried to catch hold of the proper words, and
sang, "'*immakaja!*'—no; not quite that; '*kanajaja!*'—no, that's not it
neither;" and now he began crying and tumbling down the precipice. When
he was quite close to the stone-heaps at the foot of the mountain, he
remembered the song, and was again carried through the air, and thus
saved from destruction. At last he saw his dwelling-place, where his
house-fellows had quite given him up for lost. They were just assembled
outside, when all at once they heard a song from above, and looking
upwards, perceived a kayaker overhead rushing through the air, and
before long they recognised their own old bachelor. He directed his
course staight towards the entrance, never stopping until he sat right
down on the ledge, his kayak's point crushing against the wall of the
room; and this was his first and last journey through the air.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-053)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
