[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-089) [Next](tte2-091.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

90\. T<span class="small">HE</span> A<span
class="small">NGHIAK</span>.—A company of brothers had a single sister,
and would not allow her to marry. Nevertheless, having many suitors, she
finally came to be with child; and because of her brothers' reproaches,
she secretly had a miscarriage; but the child got intellect, and became
an anghiak. It picked up the skull of a dog, using it as a kayak, and
the bone of a man's arm for a paddle. Every night it used to creep into
the house and lie down to suckle its mother's breasts, but during the
day-time it was about pursuing her brothers when they were kayaking, and
made them capsize and perish one after another. Having accomplighed its
revenge, it repented its deeds, and fled to the north, where it slipped
down in the doorway of a house in which a conjuration was going on. The
<span id="page_440">p. 440</span> angakok (by means of his second-sight)
at once observed its approach; and when the people of the house had got
a light, and went to look for it, they were all *frightened to death*.
It then became still more powerful, but went back again to its mother's
abode, and found a refuge in a heap of rubbish. It now happened that the
angakok of the place was about to perform a conjuration for the purpose
of finding out what had caused the brothers' destruction. The sister, on
being examined, first denied, but finally she confessed her sin, saying,
"What I brought forth was no real child." No sooner had she pronounced
these words than the anghiak felt a pain in its head, and while she
continued her tale, it lost its senses and died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-091.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
