[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-093) [Next](tte2-095.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

94\. T<span class="small">HE</span> M<span class="small">EANS FOR
GETTING</span> C<span class="small">HILDREN</span>.—A married couple had
in vain been in hope of getting children. At length the man set out in
search of some means to attain their desire. The first summer he
travelled as far as he could get to the north, and the next as far as
possible to the south, before he succeeded <span id="page_444">p.
444</span> in finding an old woman who promised to help him. From the
bottom of her bag she produced two small dried fishes, a male and a
female, of which he was to give his wife the former to eat if he wanted
a son, and the latter in case they preferred a daughter. He received the
fishes, and started on his way home; but having to travel very far, and
not always being able to get any victuals, he once in a great strain for
something to eat began to consider, "What is the use of keeping this
spawner? a son is what we desire;" on which he swallowed the one little
fish. After a while he began to feel very ill at ease, at the same time
growing bigger and bigger, till at length he could hardly manage to slip
down in his kayak. A skilful old woman, who lived at a place where he
happened to land, soon suspected what was the matter with him, and hit
on a charm to deliver him of what was encumbering his inside, which soon
proved to be a fine little daughter. (It is doubtful whether the rest of
the tale is of genuine Eskimo origin.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-095.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
