[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-041) [Next](tte2-043.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 42. ABOUT THE CHILDREN OF TWO COUSINS.

THERE were once two cousins living together at the same winter-station,
and at the time, their wives were both childless. In spring they parted
from each other, saying, "Well, we will see who first gets a child." One
travelled away to the south, and established himself for the coming
winter. At this place he lived in prosperity, and his wife bore him a
child. When the boy grew up, the father took a fancy to return to his
cousin. He, however, had still no children; and for this reason he
caught a young deer, and trained it up for his amusement. At length it
improved so much that it could understand human speech. About that
period the cousin returned, and he first beheld the calf running about
outside the house. The cousins once more lived together, and the boy and
the calf became playmates. The calf, however, soon grew stronger, and
sometimes knocked over the boy, at which he wept. For this reason the
boy's father went and shot the calf, <span id="page_265">p. 265</span>
though he loved his cousin dearly. The childless man got into a great
rage at this, and at once challenged his cousin, and they met, armed
with their bows; the childless man shot his cousin on the spot, but was
very much afflicted afterwards, and burst into a flood of tears. The son
of the man that had been thus killed removed to a distance, for he could
not endure the sight of his father's cousin. When he was full-grown and
strong he returned to the place, but he had come too late—the cousin was
no more. He heard some rumour of an enormously strong man who used to
rob other men of their wives; he challenged him to a wrestling-match,
and overcame and killed him, and returned the women to their own
husbands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-043.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
