[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-000) [Next](tte2-002)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

# TALES AND TRADITIONS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. KAGSAGSUK.

<span class="small">\[The following tale has been constructed from nine
different copies, received partly from various places in Greenland, and
partly from Labrador, all, however, agreeing upon every principal point.
It does not appear to rest upon any historical basis, but merely to have
a moral tendency, bringing before us the idea of a superior power
protecting the helpless, and avenging mercilessness and
cruelty.\]</span>

THERE was once a poor orphan boy who lived among a lot of uncharitable
men. His name was Kagsagsuk, and his foster-mother was a miserable old
woman. These poor people had a wretched little shed adjoining the
*house-passage*,<span id="page_93_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_93_note_1) and
they were not allowed to enter the main room. Kagsagsuk did not even
venture to enter the shed, but lay in the passage, seeking to warm
himself among the dogs. In the morning, when the men were rousing their
sledge-dogs with their whips, they often hit the poor boy as well as the
dogs. He then would cry out, "*Na-ah! Na-ah!*" <span id="page_94">p.
94</span> mocking himself in imitating the dogs. When the men were
feasting upon various frozen dishes, such as the hide of the walrus and
frozen meat, the little Kagsagsuk used to peep over the threshold, and
sometimes the men lifted him up above it, but only by putting their
fingers into his nostrils; these accordingly enlarged, but otherwise he
did not grow at all. They would give the poor wretch frozen meat,
without allowing him a knife to cut it with, saying his teeth might do
instead; and sometimes they pulled out a couple of teeth, complaining of
his eating too much. His poor foster-mother procured him boots and a
small bird-spear, in order to enable him to go outside the house and
play with the other children; but they would turn him over and roll him
in the snow, filling his clothes with it, and treating him most cruelly
in various ways: the girls sometimes covered him all over with filth.
Thus the little boy was always tormented and mocked, and did not grow
except about the nostrils. At length he ventured out among the mountains
by himself, choosing solitary places, and meditating how to get
strength. His foster-mother had taught him how to manage this. Once,
standing between two high mountains, he called out: "Lord of strength,
come forth! Lord of strength, come to me!" A large animal now appeared
in the shape of an *amarok* (now a fabulous animal, originally a wolf),
and Kagsagsuk got very terrified, and was on the point of taking to his
heels; but the beast soon overtook him, and, twisting its tail round his
body, threw him down. Totally unable to rise, he heard the while a
rustling sound, and saw a number of seal-bones, like small toys, falling
from his own body. The amarok now said: "It is because of these bones
that thy growth has been stopped." Again it wound its tail round the
boy, and again they fell down, but the little bones were fewer this
time; and when the beast threw him down the third time, the last bones
fell off. The fourth time he <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> did not
quite fall, and at the fifth he did not fall at all, but jumped along
the ground. The amarok now said: "If it be thy wish to become strong and
vigorous, thou mayst come every day to me." On his way home, Kagsagsuk
felt very much lighter, and could even run home, meanwhile kicking and
striking the stones on his way. Approaching the house, the girls who
nursed the babies met him, and shouted, "Kagsagsuk is coming—let us pelt
him with mud;" and the boys beat him and tormented him as before: but he
made no opposition, and following his old habits, he went to sleep among
the dogs. Afterwards, he met the amarok every day, and always underwent
the same process. The boy felt stronger every day, and on his way home
he kicked the very rocks, and rolling himself on the ground, made the
stones fly about him. At last the beast was not able to overthrow him,
and then it spoke: "Now, that will do; human beings will not be able to
conquer thee any more. Still, thou hast better stick to thy old habits.
When winter sets in, and the sea is frozen, then is thy time to show
thyself; three great bears will then appear, and they shall be killed by
thy hand." That day Kagsagsuk ran all the way back, kicking the stones
right and left, as was his wont. But at home he went on as usual, and
the people tormented him more than ever. One day, in the autumn, the
kayakers<span id="page_95_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_95_note_1) returned
home with a large piece of driftwood, which they only made fast to some
large stones on the beach, finding it too heavy to be carried up to the
house at once. At nightfall, Kagsagsuk said to his mother, "Let me have
thy boots, mother, that I too may go down and have a look at the large
piece of timber." When all had gone to rest, he slipped out of the
house, and having reached the beach, and loosened the moorings, he flung
the piece of timber on his shoulders and carried it up behind the house,
where <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> he buried it deep in the ground.
In the morning, when the first of the men came out, he cried, "The
driftwood is gone!" and when he was joined by the rest, and they saw the
strings cut, they wondered how it could possibly have drifted away,
there being neither wind nor tide. But an old woman, who happened to go
behind the house, cried, "Just look! here is the spar!" whereat they all
rushed to the spot, making a fearful noise, shouting, "Who can have done
this? there surely must be a man of extraordinary strength among us!"
and the young men all gave themselves great airs, that each might be
believed to be the great unknown strong man—the impostors!

In the beginning of the winter, the housemates of Kagsaguk ill-treated
him even worse than before; but he stuck to his old habits, and did not
let them suspect anything. At last the sea was quite frozen over, and
seal-hunting out of the question. But when the days began to lengthen,
the men one day came running in to report that three bears were seen
climbing an iceberg. Nobody, however, ventured to go out and attack
them. Now was Kagsagsuk's time to be up and doing. "Mother," he said,
"let me have thy boots, that I too may go out and have a look at the
bears!" She did not like it much, but, however, she threw her boots to
him, at the same time mocking him, saying, "Then fetch me a skin for my
couch, and another for my coverlet, in return." He took the boots,
fastened his ragged clothes around him, and then was off for the bears.
Those who were standing outside cried, "Well, if that is not Kagsagsuk!
What can he be about? Kick him away!" and the girls went on, "He must
surely be out of his wits!" But Kagsagsuk came running right through the
crowd, as if they had been a shoal of small fish; his heels seemed
almost to be touching his neck, while the snow, foaming about, sparkled
in rainbow colours. He ascended the iceberg <span id="page_97">p.
97</span> by taking hold with his hands, and instantly the largest bear
lifted his paw, but Kagsagsuk turned round to make himself *hard* (viz.,
invulnerable by charm), and seizing hold of the animal by the fore-paws,
flung it against the iceberg, so that the haunches were severed from the
body, and then threw it down on the ice to the bystanders, crying, "This
was my first catch; now, flense away<span
id="page_97_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_97_note_1) and divide!" The others
now thought, "The next bear will be sure to kill him." The former
process, however, was repeated, and the beast thrown down on the ice;
but the third bear he merely caught hold of by the fore-paws, and,
swinging it above his head, he hurled it at the bystanders, crying,
"This fellow behaved shamefully towards me!" and then, smiting another,
"That one treated me still worse!" until they all fled before him,
making for the house in great consternation. On entering it himself he
went straight to his foster-mother with the two bear-skins, crying,
"There is one for thy couch, and another for thy coverlet!" after which
he ordered the flesh of the bears to be dressed and cooked. Kagsagsuk
was now requested to enter the main room; in answer to which request he,
as was his wont, only peeped above the threshold, saying, "I really
can't get across, unless some one will lift me up by the nostrils;" but
nobody else venturing to do so now, his old foster-mother came and
lifted him up as he desired. All the men had now become very civil to
him. One would say, "Step forward;" another, "Come and sit down,
friend." "No, not there where the *ledge*<span
id="page_97_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_97_note_2) has no cover," cried
another; "here is a nice seat for Kagsagsuk." But rejecting their
offers, be sat down, as usual, on the *side-ledge*. Some of them went
<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> on, "We have got boots for Kagsagsuk;"
and others, "Here are breeches for him!" and the girls rivalled each
other in offering to make clothes for him. After supper, one of the
inmates of the house told a girl to go and fetch some water for "dear
Kagsagsuk." When she had returned and he had taken a drink, he drew her
tenderly towards him, praising her for being so smart for fetching
water; but, all of a sudden, he squeezed her so hard that the blood
rushed out of her mouth. But he only remarked, "Why, I think she is
burst!" The parents, however, quite meekly rejoined, "Never mind, she
was good for nothing but fetching water." Later on, when the boys came
in, he called out to them, "What great seal-hunters ye will make!" at
the same time seizing hold of them and crushing them to death; others he
killed by tearing their limbs asunder. But the parents only said, "It
does not signify—he was a good-for-nothing; he only played a little at
shooting." Thus Kagsagsuk went on attacking and putting to death all the
inmates of the house, never stopping until the whole of them had
perished by his hand. Only the poor people who had been kind to him he
spared, and lived with them upon the provisions that had been set by as
stores for the winter. Taking also the best of the kayaks left, he
trained himself to the use of it, at first keeping close to the shore;
but after some time he ventured farther out to sea, and soon went south
and northwards in his kayak. In the pride of his heart he roamed all
over the country to show off his strength; therefore, even nowadays he
is known all along the coast, and on many places there are marks of his
great deeds still shown, and this is why the history of Kagsagsuk is
supposed to be true.

<span class="small"> N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—In the Labrador
tale, the name of the champion is called *Kaujakjuk*, and in different
copies from Greenland, *Kausaksuk, Kassaksuk, Kausasuk,* and
*Kauksaksuk*. Several parts of Greenland claim the honour of pointing
out the ruins of his house. A remarkable ruin on cape *Noogsuak*, of a
very doubtful origin, is supposed to have been his bear-trap. In one of
the writings, the relater, hinting at the European fancy for
curiosities, <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> observes: "I wonder why the
masters, or even the king himself, who all seem so very fond of
collecting rare things, if they really believe in the tale, have not
taken one of the stones from this trap to be brought away with some
ship, if possible."</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-002)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_93">p. 93</span>

<span id="page_93_note_1"></span>[1](#page_93_fr_1) Or *doorway*, a long
and very narrow, sometimes half-subterranean, tunnel, leading by an
upward step to the main, or rather the only, room of the winter hut, and
adapted to keeping out the cold air. Its ends we have called the outer
and the inner entrance.

<span id="footnotes_page_95">p. 95</span>

<span id="page_95_note_1"></span>[1](#page_95_fr_1) Men in their kayaks,
or skin canoes, made for the purpose of seal-hunting, with room only for
a single person.

<span id="footnotes_page_97">p. 97</span>

<span id="page_97_note_1"></span>[1](#page_97_fr_1) Take off the skin
and blubber.

<span id="page_97_note_2"></span>[2](#page_97_fr_2) The main ledge or
bench; a low and broad bench for sitting and sleeping places, occupying
the whole length of the wall opposite to the windows, the narrower
side-ledge and window-ledge bordering the other walls. It is generally
known in Greenland as the "brix."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
