[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-014) [Next](tte2-016.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15. GIVIOK.

<span class="small">\[This tale is chiefly taken from a single
manuscript, but nevertheless it is well known all over Greenland. Some
slight traces will be found in it of the Indian Hiawatha tale.\]</span>

GIVIOK (pron. Ghiviok),<span
id="page_157_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_157_note_1.md) it is told, lost his
wife, and was about to leave his child and the place where she was
buried, in despair. He only waited till the boy had gone to sleep, and
then he let himself down from the ledge to the floor; but when the child
began crying, he again lay down beside him. Once he was all ready,
stooping down to get out of the entrance, but went back unable to leave
his son. One day the little boy passionately entered the room, saying,
"My mother is walking outside with a stranger." Giviok answered, <span
id="page_158">p. 158</span> "Thy mother is not here; she is lying under
the big stones yonder."<span
id="page_158_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_158_note_1.md) But the little boy
persisted, saying, "Look for thyself, then;" and when Giviok did look
out of the window, he actually saw his wife in the arms of another man.
At this he got into a great rage, went out, killed them, and put them on
top of each other into the stone grave. Father and son now went to rest:
but when the boy slept the father carried out his intention of taking
flight; and passing through the doorway, this time resisted the cries of
the boy, got into his kayak, and hastened away. He paddled on and on
across the wild sea; he came to the whirlpool, and was nearly drawn into
it. Somehow, however, he escaped. Then he got among the villainous
*sea-lice*. First he tried to keep them back by striking at them with
his kayak-stick; but that was soon devoured. Then he threw out his
sealskin gloves; and seeing that they lasted a little longer, he
bethought himself of covering his paddle-blades with a pair of old
gloves, lest the beasts should attack his paddle before he could slip
away from them; and then he managed to get past them. Continuing his
voyage, he saw a long black line, and on approaching it he noticed it to
be sea-weed, which he found to be so compact that he got out; and lying
down to rest, he went to sleep on it. When he awoke, he pushed himself
and his kayak on with his hands, and in this manner got across the
sea-weed. He continued paddling until he came in sight of two icebergs,
with a narrow passage between them; and he observed that the passage
alternately opened and closed again. He tried to pass the icebergs by
paddling round outside them, but they always kept ahead of him; and at
length he ventured to go right between them. With great speed and
alacrity he pushed on, and had just passed when the bergs closed
together, and the stern-point of his kayak got <span id="page_159">p.
159</span> bruised between them. At last he caught a glimpse of
something dark, and soon after he reached a great stretch of land
looming ahead of him. Giviok now thought, "If this country be inhabited,
I will be sure to find a bare rock;"<span
id="page_159_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_159_note_1.md) and such a one he soon
found. He shortly afterwards detected a house by the smoking chimney,
and he soon concluded that they were busy cooking inside. He went
straight on towards it, upset the funnel, and hid himself close by.
Instantly a female came rushing out, saying, "I wonder if any one upset
it?" upon which she again put it to rights; and meantime, perceiving
Giviok, quickly re-entered the house, but as quickly returned, saying to
him, "Thou art invited to step inside." On entering, he saw a hideous
old hag lying beneath a coverlet, who ordered her daughter to go and
fetch some berries; and, running out, she soon returned with a great
quantity of them, profusely mixed up with fat. Giviok, while he was
eating them, remarked, "They are really delicious;" and Usorsak (this
was the name of the old hag) rejoined, "No wonder; the fat is of quite a
young fellow;" but Giviok answered, "Fie! anything of that kind I cannot
eat;" and stooping down, he noticed a lot of human heads all in a row
beneath the ledge; and when the hag uncovered herself a little, and
turned her back towards him, he saw something glittering close behind
her. When they were all ready to go to rest, Giviok said, "I shall just
go outside for an instant." Accordingly he went, and soon found a flat
stone to cover his breast with; and re-entering, he lay down on the
ledge beneath the window. No sooner did he seem to be sleeping, than he
heard the daughter saying, "Now he is sound asleep;" and instantly the
old hag came jumping down from her place on the main ledge; but on his
feigning not to be quite asleep, she cautiously returned. When he again
had become quiet, and lying on his back <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> was exposing his breast, the daughter again said, "He surely
sleeps now;" and again the mother let herself down, even quicker than
the first time, and jumping up where he was lying, she sat down with all
her weight upon his chest, crying out, "Oh dear!" but instantly tumbled
down. "What a pity!" cried the daughter; "Usorsak has broken her tail;
she provided so nicely for all of us" (viz., killing men by help of her
tail). Giviok now got up from his couch, let fall the stone, and escaped
through the door, the daughter shouting after him, "Thou rascal!
wouldn't I like to have had a taste of thy fine cheeks!" but he was
already in his kayak, where he was nearly upset. Rising again, he broke
out, "Shouldn't I like to harpoon her!" and so saying, he killed her on
the spot. He now continued his journey; and after a while again reached
a bare rock. At a little distance from it he landed; and, as before,
went up to a house where he likewise upset the chimney-funnel, and
afterwards hid himself. A woman again emerged from the doorway; and when
she re-entered, he heard them wondering at the chimney having been
upset, as there had not been any wind. When she again made her
appearance, Giviok came forth, and was asked to come inside. Crossing
the threshold, he observed that the walls were covered all over with
hunting-bladders. Here, also, the inmates consisted of a mother and a
daughter. The mother now spoke—"It will soon be low-water; it is a bad
job for us that we have no one to haul in our draught when we have
harpooned and fixed the bladders to the fishes." Giviok answered—"I have
my kayak close by, and have just come from the bad women yonder, both of
whom I have killed." "Then thanks to thee!" they exclaimed. "We, too,
have had men in our house, but these monsters put all of them to death;
but now thou hadst better stay here with us." Giviok at once consenting,
they went on saying, "To-morrow we shall have low-water, and <span
id="page_161">p. 161</span> when thou hearest a roaring noise, thou must
hasten back; then the high tide sets in, and thou must be back on
shore." They then went to sleep. Giviok was sound asleep when he was
awakened by the roaring waters, and saw the daughter glide through the
house-passage. He hastened down to the shore; but when he arrived, the
women had already caught a number of halibut, which were lying high and
dry on the beach. He was only in time to finish off a few when the sound
of the rising waters was again heard, and the great waves came rolling
over him, so that he had a narrow escape to the coast. The harpooned
fish, on account of the bladders, kept floating on the surface, but
drove across to the opposite shore. Giviok, however, fetched them back
in his kayak, for which the women were very thankful to him; and he
remained with them for some time. After a while, the memory of his son
haunted him, and he said to himself, "My poor little son! what a pitiful
thing it was to hear him cry when I went away! Some day I must go and
see him." So he left the place, and travelled on and on, encountering
all the dangers he had met with on his departure from home, but once
more happily getting past them. At last he reached the opposite country,
and he heard people singing. He followed the song, and fell in with a
great many boats tugging a whale along, on which stood a vigorous man.
He did not recognise him; but this was his son, and he had been catching
the whale. The father left him a weeping child, and now beheld him a
great hunter, standing on a whale's back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-016.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_157">p. 157</span>

<span id="page_157_note_1"></span>[1](#page_157_fr_1.md) The letter G,
used, as in this instance, to begin a word, is in the Greenlandish
language abnormal. It has been adopted from the original manuscripts,
but the name ought perhaps to have been called Kiviok.

<span id="footnotes_page_158">p. 158</span>

<span id="page_158_note_1"></span>[1](#page_158_fr_1.md) The Eskimo in
Greenland and the greater part of their territories have always been
buried under heaps of stones.

<span id="footnotes_page_159">p. 159</span>

<span id="page_159_note_1"></span>[1](#page_159_fr_1.md) A place used for
drying provisions, and therefore without moss.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
